The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Inn of Dreams, by Olive Custance

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Inn of Dreams

Author: Olive Custance

Release Date: September 23, 2007 [EBook #22736]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INN OF DREAMS ***




Produced by Ruth Hart






THE INN OF DREAMS

BY

OLIVE CUSTANCE
(LADY AFRED DOUGLAS)



LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD
NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY, MCMXI

WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES





DEDICATION

J'ÉCRIS POUR QUE LE JOUR OÙ JE NE SERAI PLUS

J'écris pour que le jour où je ne serai plus
On sache comme l'air et le plaisir m'ont plu,
Et que mon livre porte à la foule future
Comme j'aimais la vie et l'heureuse nature.

Attentive aux travaux des champs et des maisons
J'ai marqué chaque jour la forme des saisons,
Parce que l'eau, la terre et la montante flamme
En nul endroit ne sont si belles qu'en mon âme.

J'ai dit ce que j'ai vu et ce que j'ai senti,
D'un coeur pour qui le vrai ne fut point trop hardi,
Et j'ai eu cette ardeur, par l'amour intimée,
Pour être après la mort parfois encore aimée,

Et qu'un jeune homme alors lisant ce que j'écris,
Sentant par moi son coeur, ému, troublé, surpris,
Ayant tout oublié des épouses réelles,
M'accueille dans son âme et me préfère à elles.

          COMTESSE MATHIEU DE NOAILLES



CONTENTS

Dedication (Comtesse de Noailles) . . .  v
The Inn of Dreams . . .  3
The Kingdom of Heaven . . .  5
A Dream . . . 6
The Autumn Day . . . 8
Angels . . . 10
The Changeling . . . 11
A Song Against Care . . . 14
"Quelque part une Enfance très douce et mourir" . . . 16
Candle-Light . . . 18
In the South . . . 20
Spring in the South . . . 22
"I am Weary, let me Sleep" . . . 24
Grief . . . 26
Daffodil Dawn . . . 28
Beauty . . . 29
The Vision . . . 31
The Dance . . . 33
The Prisoner of God . . . 36
The Storm . . . 38
St. Anthony . . . 41
Black Butterflies . . . 43
In Praise of Youth . . . 45
Opal Song . . . 47
Gifts . . . 48
Primrose Hill . . . 50
A Morning Song . . . 52
The Wings of Fortune . . . 53
Shadow-Nets . . . 55
Peacocks. A Mood . . . 56
Hyacinthus . . . 58
Hylas . . . 61
Blue Flowers . . . 63
Madrigal . . . 64
Endymion . . . 65
Dance Song . . . 66
A Memory . . . 67
The Photograph . . . 69
St. Sebastian . . . 71
The Magic Mirrors . . . 73





The Inn of Dreams

          Sweet Laughter! Sweet Delight!
My heart is like a lighted Inn that waits
Your swift approach . . . and at the open gates
White Beauty stands and listens like a flower.
She has been dreaming of you in the night,
O fairy Princes; and her eyes are bright.
Spur your fleet horses, this is Beauty's hour!
Even as when a golden flame up-curled
Quivers and flickers out in a dark place,
So is it with the flame of Beauty's face--
That torch! that rose! that wonder of the world!
And Love shall weep to see--when he rides by
Years hence (the time shall seem as a bird's flight)--
A lonely Inn beneath a winter sky.
Come now, sweet friends! before the summer die.
          Sweet Laughter! Sweet Delight!





The Kingdom of Heaven

O World that holds me by the wings,
     How shall my soul escape your snares?
So dear are your delightful things,
     So difficult your toils and cares:
That, every way my soul is held
     By bonds of love, and bonds of hate;
With all its heavenly ardours quelled,
     And all its angels desolate . . .

Yet in the heart of every child,
God and the world are reconciled! . . .





A Dream

I dreamed we walked together, you and I,
Along a white and lonely road, that went
I know not where . . . and we were well content.
Our laughter was untroubled as the sky,
And all our talk was delicate and shy,
Though in that cage of words wild thoughts were pent
Like prisoned birds that some sweet accident
Might yet release to sing again, and fly.
We passed between long lines of poplar trees . . .
Where, summer comrades gay and debonair,
The south wind and the sunlight danced . . . you smiled,
With great glad eyes, as bright as summer seas,
To feel their twinkling fingers in your hair . .
And then you kissed me, quickly, like a child!





The Autumn Day

How delicately steps the autumn day
In azure cloak and gown of ashen grey
Over the level country that I love!

With glittering veils of light about her head
And skirts of wide horizons round her spread
White as the white wing-feathers of a dove.

Her feet, a flash of silver on the sea,
Chase silver sails that fly untiringly
Towards the enchanted Islands of the West.

Beautiful Islands, gardens of delight!
That flower at dawn with roses red and white . . .
And flame at sunset gold and amethyst . . .

How delicately steps the autumn day
In azure cloak and gown of ashen grey
Over the level country that I love . . .

And how my heart that all sweet things beguile
Goes laughing with her for a little while . . .
And then turns homeward like a weary dove.





Angels

When life is difficult, I dream
Of how the angels dance in heaven!
Of how the angels dance and sing
In gardens of eternal spring,
Because their sins have been forgiven . . .
And never more for them shall be
The terrors of mortality!
When life is difficult, I dream
Of how the angels dance in heaven . . .





The Changeling

My father was a golden king,
     My mother was a shining queen;
I heard the magic blue-bird sing . . .
     They wrapped me in a mantle green.

They led their winged white horses out,
     We rode and rode till dawn was grey;
We rode with many a song and shout,
     "Over the hills and far away."

They stole the crying human child,
     And left me laughing by the fire;
And that is why my heart is wild,
     And all my life a long desire . . .

The old enchantments hold me still . . .
     And sometimes in a waking trance
I seek again the Fairy Hill,
     The midnight feast, the glittering dance!

The wizard harpers play for me,
     I wear a crown upon my head,
A princess in eternity,
     I dance and revel with the dead . . .

"Vain lies!" I hear the people cry,
     I listen to their weary truth;
Then turn again to fantasy,
     And the untroubled Land of Youth.

I hear the laughter of the kings,
     I see their jewelled flagons gleam . . .
O wine of Life! . . . immortal things
     Move in the splendour of my dream . . .

My spirit is a homing dove . . .
     I drain a crystal cup, and fall
Softly into the arms of Love . . .
     And then the darkness covers all.





A Song Against Care

               O Care!
Thou art a cloak too heavy to be borne,
Glittering with tears, and gay with painted lies
(For seldom--seldom art thou stained and torn,
Showing a tattered lining, and the bare
Bruised body of thy wearer); thou art fair
To look at, O thou garment of our pride!
A net of colours, thou dost catch the wise;
He lays aside his wisdom for thy sake . . .
And Beauty hides her loveliness in thee . . .
And after . . . when men know the agony
Of thy great weight of splendour, and would shake
Thee swiftly from their shoulders, cast aside
The burden of thy jewelled bands that break
Their very hearts . . . often it is too late.
They fear the world will mock them and deride
When they are stripped of all their golden state.
But some are brave . . . but some among us dare
Cry out against thy torment and be free!
And I would rather a gay beggar be,
And go in rags for all eternity,
Than that thy clanking pomp should cover me,
               O Care! . . .





"Quelque part une Enfance très douce doit mourir"
               Albert Samian

Alas! I do not know on what sad day
My childhood went away . . .
It may have left me softly in the night
     When I was sleeping--dreaming--who can tell?
Perhaps it whispered "wings were made for flight!"
     I only know it never said "farewell" . . .

And so I cannot tell when youth will go
Although I love it so . . .
But like a little amorous girl that clings
     To some fair boy, my spirit all afraid,
While yet she holds youth back by the bright wings,
     Knows he must leave her for some other maid!





Candle-Light

Frail golden flowers that perish at a breath,
Flickering points of honey-coloured flame,
From sunset gardens of the moon you came,
Pale flowers of passion . . . delicate flowers of death . . .

Blossoms of opal fire that raised on high
Upon a hundred silver stems are seen
Above the brilliant dance, or set between
The brimming wine-cups . . . flowers of revelry!

Roses with amber petals that arise
Out of the purple darkness of the night
To deck the darkened house of Love, to light
The laughing lips, the beautiful glad eyes.

Lilies with violet-coloured hearts that break
In shining clusters round the silent dead,
A diadem of stars at feet and head,
The glory dazzles . . . but they do not wake . . .

O golden flowers the moon goes gathering
In magic gardens of her fairy-land,
While splendid angels of the sunset stand
Watching in flaming circles wing to wing . . .

Frail golden flowers that perish at a breath,
That wither in the hands of light, and die
When bright dawn wakens in a silver sky.
Pale flowers of passion . . . delicate flowers of death.





In the South

I was pale and sad in the South like the olive-trees
That droop their silver heads by the dusty roads,
And are grave and cold and grey in spite of the sun . . .
In the veils of rose and blue that the bright dawn spun
Day wrapped me round in vain!
I longed for the lovers and friends I had left behind,
I longed for the North again.

I was deaf to song, and even to beauty blind,
Blind to the magic woof that summer weaves,
While roses beat their pearl and ruby leaves
Against my window pane . . .
And orange flowers so passionately white,
So richly perfumed, pined for my delight:
Only my faint heart sighed,
In pity when the glory waned and died,
For all that lovely life unsatisfied!

I was pale and sad in the South like the olive-trees
That droop their silver heads by the dusty roads . . .





Spring in the South

Beautiful as some rich embroidery
The valley lies in verdant amplitude,
Great mountains--like old merchants--o'er it brood--
And as a lovely woman languidly
Trailing her long blue robes, so comes the sea
To touch it softly in a wistful mood . . .
The sky forgets her starry multitude,
Seeing how fair mere earthly flowers can be!

Glad country where the wayward feet of Spring,
Moving in mystic dances, bring desire,
New miracles of beauty every day . . .
Where Love and sweet Delight fly wing to wing
Forgetful as in dreams, that bright as fire
So burn the hours of joy as swift away!





"I am Weary, let me Sleep"

I am weary, let me sleep
In some great embroidered bed,
With soft pillows for my head.
I am weary, let me sleep . . .
Petals of sweet roses shed
All around a perfumed heap
White as pearls, and ruby red;
Curtains closely drawn to keep
Wings of darkness o'er me spread . . .
I am weary, let me sleep
In some great embroidered bed.
Let me dream that I am dead,
Nevermore to wake and weep
In the future that I dread . . .
For the ways of life are steep . . .
I am weary, let me sleep . . .





Grief

I, that was once so eager for the light,
The vehement pomp and passion of the day,
Am tired at last, and glad to steal away
Across the dusky borders of the night.
The purple darkness now is my delight,
And with great stars my lonely sorrows play,
As still, some proud and tragic princess may
With diamonds make her desolation bright.

Night has become a temple for my tears . . .
The moon a silver shroud for my despair,
And all the golden forests of the spheres
Have showered their splendours on me leaf by leaf
Till men that meet me in the sunlight, stare
To see the shining garment of my grief!





Daffodil Dawn

While I slept, and dreamed of you,
Morning, like a princess, came,
All in robe of palest blue:
Stooped and gathered in that hour
From the east a golden flower,
Great and shining flower of flame . . .
Then she hastened on her way
Singing over plain and hill--
While I slept and dreamed of you
Dreams that never can come true . .
Morning at the gates of Day,
Gathered Dawn, the daffodil!





Beauty

I saw the face of Beauty--a pale rose
In the gold dusk of her abundant hair . . .
A silken web of dreams and joys--a snare . .
A net of pleasures in a world of woes,
A bright temptation for gay youth that goes
Laughing upon his way without a care!
A shield of light for conquering Love to bear
Stronger than all the swords of all his foes.

O face of Beauty--O white dawn enshrined
In sunrise veils of splendid hair--O star!
Shine on those weary men who sadly wise
But guess thy glory faintly from afar--
Missing the marvel of thy smile--and blind
To the imperial passion in thine eyes!





The Vision

I come from lonely downs and silent woods,
With winter in my heart, a withered world,
A heavy weight of dark and sorrowful things,
And all my dreams spread out their rainbow wings,
And turn again to those bright solitudes
Where Beauty met me in a thousand moods,
And all her shining banners were unfurled . . .
And where I snatched from the sweet hands of Spring
A crystal cup and drank a mystic wine,
And walked alone a secret perfumed way,
And saw the glittering Angels at their play.
And heard the golden birds of Heaven sing,
And woke . . . to find white lilies clustering
And all the emerald wood an empty shrine,
Fragrant with myrrh and frankincense and spice,
And echoing yet the flutes of Paradise . . .





The Dance

Do you remember that day I danced in the woods,
     Under the dancing leaves?
Do you remember the delicate blue of the sky
     And the gold-dust in the air?
And the tawny harvest fields, and the heavy sheaves?
Summer was surely in one of her bravest moods . . .
     And oh, the rare
Swift joy that lifted life to an ecstasy,
That shining day I danced for you, dear, in the woods!

The purple twilight came, and the amber moon . . .
     And the fairies danced with me . . .
And the shy fauns crept from the tangled thicket near,
     And the startled dryads bent,
White and starry-eyed, each from her secret tree,
To watch that mystical dance, to share that heavenly swoon
     That mad, bright banishment. . . .
For we were free in the perfect country, dear,
When purple twilight came and the amber moon . . .

Some day I shall dance again that mystical dance . . .
     I know not when or where!
But the angels shall dance with me, and I shall not be afraid.
     I shall look in their deep eyes . . .
And feel their arms about me, and their kisses in my hair,
And know that time is over, and the desperate ways of chance. . . .
     I shall be very wise,
And glad at last, and the walls of the world shall fade . . .
The day when I dance again that mystical dance.





The Prisoner of God

Once long and long ago I knew delight.
God gave my spirit wings and a glad voice.
I was a bird that sang at dawn and noon,
That sang at starry evening time and night;
Sang at the sun's great golden doors, and furled
Brave wings in the white gardens of the moon;
That sang and soared beyond the dusty world.

Once long and long ago I did rejoice,
But now I am a stone that falls and falls.
A prisoner, cursing the blank prison walls,
Helpless and dumb, with desperate eyes, that see
The terrible beauty of those simple things
My soul disdained when she was proud and free.
And I can only pray: God pity me,
God pity me and give me back my voice!
God pity me and give me back my wings!





The Storm

What do they hunt to-night, the hounds of the wind?
I think it is joy they hunt, for joy has fled from my heart.
I only remember the hours when I sorrowed or sinned,
I only remember the hours when I stood apart
Lonely and tired, in difficult dreams entranced,
And I forget the days when I loved, and laughed, and danced.

Grey hounds of the wind, I hear your wistful cry,
The cry of unsatisfied hearts hungry for happiness
The house is full of whispering ghosts as you hurry by,
And my soul is heavy and dark with a great distress,
For heaven is far away, and hope is dead;
And the night is a tomb of tears, and despair, and dread.

O hunt no more wild hounds of the wind and rain,
For my soul is afraid of the sound of your hurrying feet,
And surely under the stars a beautiful joy is slain?
Fly! black wings of sorrow . . . wet wings of the night that beat
At the shuttered windows, swiftly fly away,
Before God stoops to gather the golden flower of day.





St. Anthony

THE ENGRAVING BY DÜRER

Dürer has drawn him resting by the way . . .
Has he returned from some far pilgrimage?
Or just come out into the light of day
From a dark hermit's cell? We cannot know . . .
With stooping shoulders, and with head bent low
Over his book--and pointed hood drawn down.
His eager eyes devour the printed page . . .
Regardless of the little lovely town
Rising behind him, with its clustered towers . . .
O Saint, look up! and see how gay and fair
The earth is in its summer-time of flowers,
Look up, and see the world, for God is there . . .
Old dreaming Saint, how many are like you,
Intent upon the dusty book of fate:
Slow to discern the false things from the true!
Yet weary of world clamour and world hate,
And hungering for eternal certainties . . .
Not knowing how close about them heaven lies!





Black Butterflies

O words of all my songs . . . black butterflies!
Wild words of all the wayward songs I sing . . .
Called from the tomb of some enchanted past
By that strange sphinx, my soul, they slowly rise
And settle on white pages wing to wing . . .
White pages like flower-petals fluttering
Held spellbound there till some blind hour shall bring
The perfect voice that, delicate and wise,
Shall set them free in fairyland at last!
That garden of all dreams and ecstasies
Where my soul sings through an eternal spring,
Watching alone with enigmatic eyes,
Dark wings on pale flower-petals quivering . . .
O words of all my songs . . . black butterflies!





In Praise of Youth

O delicate youth, thy praises shall be sung
While yet my heart is young . . .
While Life and I, in search of lovely things,
Go out with dancing feet and dreaming eyes,
And find wild Folly, with her rainbow wings,
Sweeter than all the wisdom of the wise.

O delicate Youth, thy praises shall be sung
While yet my heart is young . . .
Thy whiteness, and thy brightness, and the sweet
Flushed softness of thy little restless feet . . .
The tossed and sunny tangle of thy hair,
Thy swiftness, slimness, shyness, simpleness,
That set the old folk sighing for the rare
Red rose of Joy thy careless days possess.

. . . And when at last, with sad, indifferent face,
I walk in narrow pathways patiently;
Forgetful of thy beauty, and thy truth,
Thy ringing laughter, thy rebellious grace . . .
When fair Love turns his face away from me . . .
Then, let me die, O delicate sweet Youth!





Opal Song

Shy and wild . . . shy and wild
To my lovers I have been.
Frank and wayward as a child,
Strange and secret as a queen;
Fain of love, and love beguiled,
Yet afraid of love, I ween!

False and true . . . false and true
Is the woman's heart in me . . .
Fair lost faces that I rue,
Golden friends I laugh to see,
Changing, I come back to you,
Never doubt my loyalty!





Gifts

Come near! you are my friend and I will wear
Gems for your sake, and flowers in my hair;
Garments of silver gauze, and cloth of gold . . .
And I will give you power to have and hold,
And passion, and delight and ecstasy.
What will you give to me?

And I will give you, if you will but stay,
The magic mirror of the dawn, where day
Waking, beholds the wonder of her face--
If you will keep me yet in your embrace,
And let me dream of Love's eternity.
What will you give to me?

Yes! I will give you the gold veils of light,
And the dark spangled curtains of the night . . .
And I will give you as a flower unfurled,
The proud and marvellous beauty of the world,
And all the wild, white horses of the sea.
What will you give to me? . . .





Primrose Hill

Wild heart in me that frets and grieves,
Imprisoned here against your will . . .
Sad heart that dreams of rainbow wings
See! I have found some golden things!
The poplar trees on Primrose Hill
With all their shining play of leaves . . .
And London like a silver bride,
That will not put her veil aside!

Proud London like a painted Queen,
Whose crown is heavy on her head . . .
City of sorrow and desire,
Under a sky of opal fire,
Amber and amethyst and red . . .
And how divine the day has been!
For every dawn God builds again
This world of beauty and of pain . . .

Wild heart that hungers for delight,
Imprisoned here against your will;
Sad heart, so eager to be gay!
Loving earth's lovely things . . . the play
Of wind and leaves on Primrose Hill . . .
Or London dreaming of the night . . .
Adventurous heart, on beauty bent,
That only Heaven could quite content!





A Morning Song

You saw my window open wide,
     And woke me early, sister day!
You came in all your lovely pride,
With laughing looks that I adore,
     With wings of blue and grey . . .
With sunshine skirts that swept the floor,
With songs to drive night's dreams away,
     You called me out to play.
And so I took you by the hand,
And found the way to fairyland . . .
With such impatient feet I climb
     The ladders of delight!
For well I know that ruthless time
     Turns morning moods to tears and night.





The Wings of Fortune

Fair fortune you are wild and coy,
Fickle, mysterious, and shy . . .
And so we lost you, Love and I!
And now, at last, because we find
Your golden footprints, Love the boy,
Dreams you are near . . . but Love is blind!
Yet, surely Sorrow's arms unwind
From this tired heart, and dark distress
Fades softly . . . softly from the world:
And in Hope's silver sky unfurled,
I see the banners of delight!
And the grey heaven of life grows bright
With the red dawn of happiness . . .
As with a laughing look Love flings
His heavy crown of thorns away . . .
Fair fortune, you are wild and coy,
And ah! I fear you will not stay.
But Love has caught you by the wings
And radiant as Eurydice
By her brave poet's song set free,
I rush into the arms of joy!





Shadow-Nets

When I was wandering on the Downs to-day
I saw the pine-woods sleeping in the sun . . .
For they were tired of weaving shadow-nets--
Weaving all day in vain . . . in vain . . . in vain . . .
Pale phantom nets to snare the golden sun!
And then I thought of how the poets weave
With shadowy words their cunning nets of song,
Hoping to catch, at last, a shining dream!





Peacocks. A Mood

In Gorgeous plumage, azure, gold and green,
They trample the pale flowers, and their shrill cry
Troubles the garden's bright tranquillity!
Proud birds of Beauty, splendid and serene,
Spreading their brilliant fans, screen after screen
Of burnished sapphire, gemmed with mimic suns--
Strange magic eyes, that, so the legend runs,
Will bring misfortune to this fair demesne . . .

And my gay youth, that, vain and debonair,
Sits in the sunshine--tired at last of play
(A child, that finds the morning all too long),
Tempts with its beauty that disastrous day
When in the gathering darkness of despair
Death shall strike dumb the laughing mouth of song.





Hyacinthus

Fair boy, how gay the morning must have seemed
Before the fatal game that murdered thee!
Of such a dawn my wistful heart has dreamed:
Surely I too have lived in Arcady
When Spring, lap-full of roses, ran to meet
White Aphrodite risen from the sea . . .

Perchance I saw thee then, so glad and fleet;
Hasten to greet Apollo, stoop to bind
The gold and jewelled sandals on his feet,
While he so radiant, so divinely kind,
Lured thee with honeyed words to be his friend,
All heedless of thy fate, for Love is blind.

For Love is blind and cruel, and the end
Of every joy is sorrow and distress.
And when immortal creatures lightly bend
To kiss the lips of simple loveliness,
Swords are unsheathed in silence, and clouds rise,
Some God is jealous of the mute caress . . .

But who shall mourn thy death--ah, not the wise?
Better to perish in thy happiest hour,
To close in sight of beauty thy dark eyes,
And, dying so, be changed into a flower,
Than that the stealthy and relentless years
Should steal that grace which was thy only dower.

And bring thee in return dull cares and tears,
And difficult days and sickness and despair . . .
O, not for thee the griefs and sordid fears
That, like a burden, trembling age must bear;
Slain in thy youth, by the sweet hands of Love,
Thou shalt remain for ever young and fair . . .





Hylas

Dark boy, how radiantly you went to meet
Your mystic doom . . . what colours in the sky!
As though that cup of beauty the gods hold
Brimmed over on a world in ecstasy . . .
What silver flutes charmed all the forest ways . . .
How the green shimmered, jewelled thick with flowers,
And how the sun was like a globe of gold . . .
Yet you but thought to chase the perfect hours
Down that white road of wonder and delight,
The highway of your dreams, and heedlessly
You crushed the violets with your slim brown feet,
And whistled low, and sang a careless song . . .
Because your life was full of lovely days,
Because your life was delicate and sweet . . .
O youth and dawn . . . you dreamed not of the night . . .
O life and laughter . . . but the night is long . . .





Blue Flowers

I go to gather in the woods for you
The wild flowers that are blue . . .
Petals to match the colour of your eyes!

None but blue blossoms will I take, yet see
How sweetly tempting me
The fruit trees swing their scented treasuries.

And how the buttercups and daisies dance
To meet my dazzled glance!
But gold and silver, Sweet, are naught to you.

And so let others rob God's gardens . . . shake
The stars down for your sake--
I bring you but the wild flowers that are blue!





Madrigal

Rare garden where my heart goes gathering
Many a lovely and delightful thing,
Pale roses of your body and the fair
Unrivalled yellow blossoms of your hair!

Tall lilies of your gay and careless grace,
And O the wistful flower of your face!
And all the soft and starry mysteries
Of those divine forget-me-nots, your eyes . . .

O come, fair Love, before the flowers fade,
And bless this garden that the gods have made . . .
Rare garden where my heart goes gathering
Many a lovely and delightful thing . . .





Endymion

Your hair was like a honey-coloured flame
Seen through a veil of silver when you came
And took me in your arms that winter night . . .
The moonlight, amorous of your golden hair,
Toyed with it softly, as a woman might
With some bright treasure, delicate and rare.

O, young Endymion, risen from the dead,
Born once again to beauty, O bright head!
The moon stoops low to kiss you, as of old;
Stoops graciously from her great throne of pearl,
With outstretched arms mysterious and cold . . .
But you have left her for a mortal girl.





Dance Song

O hide your passion from the moon.
When young and slender she appears
In shining gown and silver shoon . . .
And, all her path with stars impearled,
She dances round the darkened world.

O hide your sorrows from the sun . . .
The sun should never see your tears!
Weep, if you will, when day is done . . .
But laugh and sing and clap your hands
While yet the sun in heaven stands.





A Memory

O how I loved you when we met
For that one moment of the day!
Yes, loved you desperately, and yet
Could scarcely find a word to say--
No wonder that you looked and smiled
As though upon some timid child.
You never guessed, how could you guess
That I adored your loveliness!

You never saw the prisoned soul
Behind the windows of my eyes,
Frantic to break from fate's control
And charm you with her flatteries . . .
And show you, your cold heart to move,
The shining treasure of her love,
And worship in a long embrace,
The reckless beauty of your face!

You never knew . . . and the dream died
A broken rose beneath your feet . . .
You went your way . . . the world is wide
And I forgot, for youth is sweet . . .
Yet when at night I lie awake,
My heart is sad for a dream's sake,
And I remember and regret . . .
O how I loved you when we met!





The Photograph

O Beauty, what is this?
A shadow of your face . . .
Where is the wild flower grace
That Love is wont to kiss?

Where is the bird that brings
To your untroubled eyes
The blue of fairy skies,
The flash of fairy wings? . . .

O wild bird of delight,
That no white hand may hold,
Or fairest cage of gold . . .
For who would stay its flight?

The song-bird of your voice
Whose magic song Love hears,
Trembling behind your tears,
Trilling when you rejoice . . .

O Beauty, what is this?
The shadow of a rose . . .
A little ghost that goes
Oblivious of Love's kiss.

Only a shadow . . . yet
It may, in some dark hour
Recall the living flower . . .
If haply Love forget.





St. Sebastian

So beautiful in all thine agony!
So radiant in thine infinite despair . . .
Oh, delicate mouth, brave eyes, and curled bright hair . . .
Oh, lovely body lashed to the rough tree:
What brutal fools were those that gave to thee
Red roses of thine outraged blood to wear,
Laughed at thy bitter pain and loathed the fair
Bruised flower of thy victorious purity?

Marvellous Beauty . . . target of the world,
How all Love's arrows seek thy joy, Oh Sweet!
And wound the white perfection of thy youth!
How all the poisoned spears of hate are hurled
Against thy sorrow when thou darest to meet
With martyrdom men's mockery of the truth!





The Magic Mirrors

In the dim mirrors of imagination,
I watch the silent dancing of my soul . . .
I watch her as she dances with my dreams . . .
See how she takes innumerable disguises,
And hides her beauty behind many masks,
And how, sometimes, she seems to laugh and sing,
. . . And weep . . . and call upon the unknown Gods . . .
But not one mirror has betrayed her voice,
Or shown to me the secret of her face . . .
O silent dance of sorrow and delight,
My heart grown tired with watching, turns away,
To make perhaps a little passionate song
Out of the shadows of immortal things . . .








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Inn of Dreams, by Olive Custance

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INN OF DREAMS ***

***** This file should be named 22736-8.txt or 22736-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/3/22736/

Produced by Ruth Hart

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



UC-NRLF 

" IMIIlJllllPIJIIIlii 




B 3 fl3M 7DQ 



C 



o 



h^1 



OPALS 



OPALS 



BY 

OLIVE CUSTANCE 



JOHN LANE, THE BODLfiY HEAD, 
LONDON AND NEW YORK 

1897 



(,007 

0(o 



Contents 



Love's Firstfruits • - i 

The Song Spinner * 3 

Twilight - - 5 

Ideal •-..•. ..^^ 

The Blue Mist • 8 

Widi a Book of Faiiy Tales 9 

«xDelight II 

Glamour of Gold .......i^ 

Villanelle ----...-.15 

Sunshine - 16 

Virelay: Regret •-.•.•.19 
A Lament for the Leaves- - • • • . 21 
Autumn Night --•.-..23 

Spirit Speech -•--.---25 
June ----•---.-27 
Harvest Noon ---••-..29 

A Sleep Song -- 31 

Fantasy --- ^^ 

V 



Contents 



In a Boat- 


• ♦ » 




PAGE 

■ 35 


Comforted 






• 37 


Dream Tryst - 






■ 38 


The Poet's Picture - 






' 39 


An Impression - 






. 42 


A Dream - 






• 43 


Bereft - - *- 






• 45 


A Madrigal 






• 47 


Rain Music 






' 49 


Doubts 






51 


The Spring is Hefe - 






54 


A Mood . - 






■ 56 


A Pause - 






■ 58 


Sunset and Sunrise • 






60 


Flirtation - 






61 


The Song Bird - 






62 


An April Mood 






65 


The White Statue 






67 


Blind Love 


. 




■ 69 


A Lilt of Tears 


. 




71 


The Music of Dvordl 


c - - 


- ^ . , 


' 73 



Love's Firstfruits 

'' %/ls tbe snviet'OppU bimhes oh the end of bougk^ tkt 
*vtry gnd of the bough^ tuhich tbe gatherers overlooked^ 
may overlooked not, but could not reach," — Sappho. 

I BRING to thee the fruitage of first love ! 

The flower but faintly touched with passion's 

pink 
Pushed forth, untended, tVas a fragile thing 
To fight alone with all the fears of life ! 
And yet it grew expanding day by day. 
Each petal pure as sun-soft summer air 
Pressed forward to the perfeft Fane of Love 
That fronted it. For Love was king and light — 
The only king that fair faint blossom knew ! 

I B 



Love's Firstfruits 

And so it flourished — till at last it iFell 

And the fruit framed in girlhood's life of leaves 

Hung warm and sweet, flushed crimson from 

the sun 
Of girlhood's Summer, so the Autumn came 
And with it came a Gatherer strong and bold 
Who raised a longing hand to reach it down. 
That little fruit of love — but it out-soared 
That long lithe arm, and so the Gatherer shook 
The slender green-girt stem until at last 

Loosed from its hold Love's firstfruit dropped 

to him. 
... So my heart's harvest has been yielded up 
A rapturous, speechless sacrifice to thee ! 



The Song Spinner 

Safe in my golden room of thought, 
I hear outside the rush and sweep 

Of travel wearied wings of sin : 

I hear the tears of those that weep . - . 

My musings are with visions fraught : 

To catch Love's voice my soul stands mute, 
Around me speechless memories £ute 

Vague threads of music to weave in 

The songs of life I sit and spin. 

I sit and spin the songs of life • . . 
About my knees proud flowers press, 

3 B— 2 



The Song Spinner 

Their leaves fold round me like soft wings, 
Their colours soothe as the caress 

Of cool slim hands, and, like a knife 

Too sharp to hurt, their keen fresh scent 
Stabs through my senses to the pent 

And passionate soul beyond that sings 

Of mortal and immortal things • • • 

Frail mystic perfume men call ^* praise " ! 

Star-sandaled memories moving slow • . , 
Angels of hope with shimmerous hair . • . 

Pale dreams that waver to and fro : 
By such as these are aureoled days 

Of song encompassed from rose-dawn 

To languorous drift of light out-worn . . 
The while I strive with fervid care . , . 
Slow spinning the poem fabric fair ! 



Twilight 

^ Mother of the dennsy dark eyelnsked TiviKgAt ! 
LoW'Udded T^Mlight o'tr the *uaUeys brim,'*'' 

Meredith. 

Spirit of Twilight, through your folded wings 

I catch a glimpse of your averted face, 

And rapturous on a sudden, my soul sings 

'' Is not this common earth a holy place ? " 

Spirit of Twilight, you are like a song 
That sleeps and waits a singer, like a hymn 
That God finds lovely and keeps near him long 
Till it is choired by aureoled cherubim. 

Spirit of Twilight, in the golden gloom 

Of dreamland dim, I sought for you and found 

5 



Twilight 

A woman weeping in a silent room 

Full of white flowers that moved and made no 
sound. 

These white flowers were the thoughts men 
never tell, 

And the room's name is mystery, where you 
weep. 

Woman, whom we call Twilight when Day's 

spell 
Of toil is broken, and you bring back sleep ! • . , 



Ideal 

We are not sundered for we^ever met. 

We only passed each other in the throng, 

We moved together but not long . . . not 
long . • • 

You were indifiFerent . . . and I may forget 
Your profound eyes, your heavy hair, your voice 
So clear, yet deep and low with tenderness. 
That lingered on my ears like a caress 
And roused my heart to make a futile choice. 
. f . • . • 

O ! Poet that passed me carelessly in the 
throng — 

O ! Soul that clamoured unto God in song ! 
How should I lose you thus and lack regret ? 
7 



The Blue Mist 

Twilight . . . the musical Earth mute • . . 

One yellow star above the rose-stained west . . . 

Whose worshippers in woody imdergrowths 

Pale primrose stars of Spring waft scentfiil gusts 

Of wild flower prayer to her . . . The purple 
dusk 

Folds nearer and the faded far-ofiF fields 

Are lost to sight, and through the leafless trees 

Creeps a soft sapphire mist, till every twig 

Is blotted out, and every branch is veiled . . . 

And pine and fir loom mystical and strange 

And the great cedar wavers like a dream 

Beneath the cloudless sky that darkens still 

Slung here and there each moment with more 
stars. 

8 



With a Book of Fairy Tales 

O ! the white rose of friendship *twixt us twain 
Spreading out scentfiil ; O ! the fr^il, fresh 
leaves 

Of fervid youth, that fights and fears and grieves 

And laughs and loves and hopes through all its 
pain ! 

O ! friend I am but poor for all my praise 

And love of you, 'tis but a book I bring, 

About that Land, where our dreams, wing to 
wing. 

Drift seeking shelter from earth's sordid days. 
9 



With a Book of Fairy Tales 

O ! friend whose soul is swift to understand 
If life is difficult and cold and sad — 
Some are together still . • . and some are glad 
And ... to these few, God gives His 
feiry-land ! 



10 



Delight 

You butterfly! 

You singing bird ! 
You dainty sweet 

Sweet woman with the dancing feet ! 
At sight of you, I know not why. 
Strange wistful memories are stirred 
In my soul's depths, when you flash by. 
I love you at each swift heart beat, 
Yet sit and never say a word. 
So many thoughts thrill thus unheard, 

O ! little throat, 
So slim and white ! 
iz 



Delight 

Dear voice as deep 

Restful and wonderful as sleep • • . 
Our whole souls ache at each fidl note, 
Fall faint with rapture, swoon to flight 
And follow where your love songs float, 
And, following forget to weep . . . 
Alas ! that silence should up-sweep 
Such songs into the void of night 1 . . 



12 



Glamour of Gold 

The white hands of my lady's maid 
Move deftly through the shining hair ! 
How my heart falters half afraid 
Lest they should hurt a thing so fair 

As my sweet lady's head ! 
And how I wish that I stood there 

Twisting the strands instead ! 

Fortunate fingers those, that hold 
The handles of the steels that fret 
And dent each heavy tress of gold . • 
Till all the golden mass is set 

With waves bewildering, 
Where fire and dusk together met 

Rival dgy*s sunsetting ! 
13 



Glamour of Gold 

Or so at least it seems to me 
While gazing on my lady's face ! 
And when with leaping heart I see 
Her soft shy breathing 'neath the lace 

That falls even to her feet . . . 
The curves of her slim body trace — 

See her supremely sweet — 

Ah ! then love swoons too satisfied 
Too passionate for words of praise 
With but one prayer, to abide 
Safely at her sweet side always ! 

Even as that maiden there 
That staid and silent still delays 

Winding the long gold hair ! • . 



H 



Villanelle 

If Summer has her blossom land • . . 
And all her pulsing press of green — 
Winter brings Spring to sunset strand 

Where mystic colours band on band 
Commingle in a wildering screen ! 
If Summer has her blossom land- 
So thickly close no flowers could stand 
As these frail hues out-trailed serene ! . . 
If Summer has l)er blossom land — 
White snow brings Spring to sunset strand ! 



15 



Sunshine 

Oh, Sunshine Spirit, I have seen 
Your gold wings spread aslant the greenj 
Have watched their splendours trail along 
The woodland ways where wild flowers throng. 
And seen your slim feet slip between ; 

Looked on your limbs so shimmerous white, 
Flushed in a lucent mist of light; 
Seen your child face peer wildly fair 
Through parted strands of shining hair. 
And wist not if I saw aright ! 
i6 



Sunshine 

In gardens where tired feet can wade 
Through flowers set thick in slumbrous shade — 
Across wide languorous lawns sun-swept. 
Your fleeting fairy form has crept 
Between the shadows unafraid. « . , 

Because your subtle smile had caught 
My soul in tangled trance of thought — 
Your sweet hushed speech I strove to hear, 
You seemed to sway so strangely near . • • 
Sun-Vision, was it I you sought ? 

A mortal maid, whose heart is yet 
Too full of all the world's vain fret — 
The mournful music of this Star — 
That you who have been born afar 
Hear only faintly — and forget. . . • 

17 C 



Sunshine 

Stay, Sweet ! beneath these sighing trees, 
Whose lace-like shadow broideries 
Dapple your dainty loveliness. . . . 
Are you a dream ? I cannot guess . . 
God's earth is full of mysteries. * . . 



i8 



Virelay: Regret 

" Play low to-night 

And do not sing ! " 
My thoughts take flight 
And wing — ^and wing 
To sorrowful wan skies, and white 
Curved flower-cups scented through with Spring I 

" Play low and do not sing." . . . 

. • . There ... in the rain 

I see one stand . . . 
The leaves look fain 
To kiss his hand . . . 
Beyond him slopes the furrowed lane, . . . 
The sunlight breaks across the land ! 

I dream^ I see him stand . . . 

19 c — 2 



Virelay : Regret 

** Yes ! quite awake ! 

Sing something dear ! '* 
Did my voice break — 
Was that a tear — 
Shed softly for a memory's sake ? 
Ah I sobbing heart ! he must not hear, 

^ Sing soinething to me, dear!'* 



20 



A Lament for the Leaves 

The trees look sad — sad — I long for the leaves, 

Green leaves that shimmer — ^and shelter the nests 
that the song-birds make. 

The earth is glad — glad — but my spirit grieves. 

Break forth from your buds and awake 

! leaves ! 

I remember the woods last year and the thick 

fresh leaves 
How they fluttered and flickered and sighed, 

rustled and quivered all day. . • . 

I almost fancy I hear their song to the breeze, 

The fickle breeze that faltered and wavered, but 
would not stay. 

1 long for the leaves ! 

21 



A Lament for the Leaves 

I remember the sun-laced grass, where their 

shadows were flung 
In a tangled web as they trembled — trembled 

a-tilt on the bough, 

Now ! they are fallen, alas I from the trees 
where they hung, 

Withered, wind-wafted away. ♦ . . O ! where 
are they now, 

The leaves ? 



22 



Autumn Night 

Against the earth's hot brow the night has pressed 
Cool dusky lips to kiss her care away ; 

The moon a bow of silver in the west 

Holds all the brooding dragon -clouds at bay : 

A luminous mist is drawn across the park, 

The trees, with leaves new-fallen about their 
roots. 

Loom strange and sullen in the shimmering dark. 

The hedges glimmer vaguely with wild fruits. 

But far more fair than any world without. 
This golden room fire-glinted glooms and glows, 

^3 



Autumn Night 

Where, silken robed, you sit with pensive pout, 
And pluck forth scentful petals from a rose ! 

You, with your languid face and lily hands. 

And loosened hair low tumbled in your neck — 

Where, freed from ruffled coil rust-coloured 
strands 

Cunningly curled, your skin's fine fairness 
fleck! 

How pale your cheek beside that pink rose pressed 

Pettishly where your own blood roses sleep — 

So faintly flushed your lips curl back caressed 

By tongues of orange light that towards you 
leap. . • . 



spirit Speech 

How green that cedar grows against the west. 
The gray west fiill of rain : 
The flickering firelight here within the room 
Frays all the gloom. 

The twilight comes storm laden o'er the plain : 
Great drops like blood beat down on earth's 
rough breast. 

The room is full of flowers — ^near my hand 
Are violets mauve and white. 
And lilies' fragrant breath each corner fills 
And slender daffodils 

Touch the dusk spaces with a tender light, 
^And all have speech for those who understand. 
25 



Spirit Speech 

Ah ! rain like tears, Ah ! twilight talk of flowers 

That mingle and are one ! 

Our souls can only guess at all you mean, 

When hushed they lean 

O'er dreamland bars at golden set of sun ; 

Or slumber shut in visions through dark hours. 



26 



June 

The Summer Spirit has brought back again 
Her bright-hued butterflies and humming bees. 
While blossoms fed with sun and silver rain 

Lift up their buoyant heads beneath the trees 
Whose boughs are swaying in the scented wind, 
And sudden simshine laps the laughing leas 

In lucent glory by dusk leafage lined 

Of woodland, where blithe bird songs thrill the 

air, 
Dear red-lipped daisies in the grass enshrined. 

How glad we are to see you gleaming there ! 

Jime's amorous breaths, flower fragrant round 
you flow. . . . 

The gracious golden king-cups deem you fair ! 



June 

• . . In shadow of bent branches, let us go 
Down to the river side where rocks our boat 
Beneath the whispering willows. I will row 

And you shall steer . . . nay! rather let 

us float 
Tide-taken past the patient marigolds 
Whose dew filled cups to Phoebus' self remote 

Are lifted up at Dawn. See ! day imfolds 

Her sunset robes refulgent in the West, 

Night's heavy lids that Light's strong hand up- 
holds 

Droop low and hide the spl^dour. . . . Let 
us rest ! 



28 



Harvest Noon 

It is the harvest ; on the fields 
Hovers a tremulous haze of heat • • • 
The sharpened scythe each labourer wields 
Gleams silver in the golden wheat. 

The level landscape spreads away — 
The sky folds over like a flower, 
Whose petal tips of purple grey 
Flush flame-like at the sim^et hour. 

The swallows flash above our heads 

In imdulating curves of flight. 

A delicate dance the south wind treads 

Between the shadows and the lightt « • • 

a9 



Harvest Noon 

And poplar trees on either hand 
Lilt out leaf music as we pass. . 
Only the aureoled daisies stand 
And stir not, in the tangled grass. 



30 



A Sleep Song 

How cool 'neath apple^bough embroideries 

The lush grass here ! 
Lie down, and I will sit beside you, dear, 
And tdce your tired head upon my knees. 

River-like roimd us noontide sun-flames fold, 

And find our hair 

Falling between the listless leaves up there — 

Your short crisp curls seem carved of shining 
gold. 

Behind the troubled pallor of your face 

What cruel thoughts throng ? 

Your curved lids, fringed with lashes thick and 
long. 

Droop heavily — sleep, dream, a brief hour's 
space. 

31 



A Sleep Song 

Sleep, and forget how bitter is your grief, 

How hard to bear ! 
And sorrow shall slip from you unaware, 
Soft as a shed rose-petal, or blown leaf. , 

Stir not, O sun-drowsed earth, stay thus awhile- 

So languorous sweet ; 
Sleep on, dear heart, in the hushed, fervid heat. 
Is dreamland full of peace ? I see you smile* 



32 



Fantasy 

Faded fields and a faded sky, 
And pointed poplar trees that sigh, 
Sway and sigh as the wind sweeps by. 

In the gray west a faint gold stain . . 
Dusk and the darkness, sisters twain, 
Kiss through a silver veil of rain i 

Dusk, with wonderful bows of hair 

Either side of her face, and fair 

Golden eyes like the sunset there • • . 

Night, whose eyes are the eyes of love, 
Flying low like a soft slow dove. 
Mists beneath her, and clouds above : • . 
33 D 



Fantasy 

. . . Ol twilight trance, O deep sweet 
swoon . . . 

Vague visions vanishing too soon ! . • • 

• . • Stars grow thick round the amber 
moon. 



34 



In a Boat 

Look yonder ! where the sun a fiery shield 

Glows red as blood, . • • slung low in a 
clear sky ! 

Day droops with languid limbs and calm lips 
sealed 

Slumber-ward in the west; and Night leans 
nigh. 

The boat that bears us to the rock-girt shore 

Seems scarce to move, she sails so listlessly : 

The sunset paves a golden path before, 
Behind, — the purple pinions of the night 
Winnow the wide sea's emerald tinted floor. 
35 i>— 2 



In a Boat 

A dusky flock of starlings in their flight 
Stand out against the rose-stained heaven, they 
are 

Like leaves uplifted cast athwart the light. 

Flushes of lingering colour, from afar 

Refleft themselves in the roimd silver moon, 

And in the blue burns flower-like one white 
star . p . 

Our Summer day has sped so soon ... so 
soon ! . . . 

Still, you are near me Dearest, and there lies 

AH its lost sunshine in your splendid eyes ! 



36 



Comforted 

Welcome fruit-ripening, flower-enfolding days, 
Girt round about and aureoled with light ; 
Sun-glorified, you shine so strangely bright, 
I cannot choose but stay to sing your praise. 
Though she hath come through dark and bitter 

ways 
My weary soul, and sorrow's lampless night 
Hath shut all helpful solace from her sight. 
And jarred with sudden tears her tuneful lays ! 

But she hath seen the singing spring-tide swoon 
Into full fragrant summer flushed with heat 1 
And, seeing, could no longer silent stand. 
Now, in her sky Hope sets a silver moon 
And melody binds up her bleeding feet, 
And loveliness walks with her hand in hand ! 

37 



Dreamed Tryst 

Beloved one ! when the shy Dawn flower-sweet, 
In her white sleeping gown of mist and pearl, 
Sees the great Sun, and from her cloud-hung bed 
Slips softly, flushing like a startled girl 
And stands upright on fair rose-coloured feet 
While all the golden light is round her shed . . , 
*Tis then that yearning severed souls may 



meet. 



• • • 



Slowly the glory widens in the sky , • . 

And in the meadows thick with folded flowers 

' The daisies stir already in their sleep . . ♦ 

My soul lay waiting all the long night hours, 

But now thy promised presence hovers nigh 

In this still room I seem to hear the sweep 

Of thy soul's wings . . . O ! whither shall 
we fly ? 

38 



The Poet's Picture 

The pent-up passion of her soul 
Deepens the pallor of her face, 
Against her throbbing heart the whole 
Wide sorrow of the world finds place, 
And deep compassion and love's grace. 

The brow half hid by curling hair, 
Is like a child's — so pure and white — 
Sweet words have made the rose-lips fair- 
And in the wistful eyes a flight 
Of fluftuant dreams pass, day and night. 

Frail girl in whom God's glories meet ! 
Why was she so divinely made ? 
Surely the angels, when complete 
39 



The Poet's Picture 

Her radiant spirit stood arrayed 
In such fair flesh, felt half afraid ! 

The dust of earthly days and years 
Scarce dims her delicate loveliness — 
Only the eyelids, tired of tears, 
Droop low their flower-like pallidness 
Bruised faintly by pain's bitterness. 

Only her hands like ivory 

Are stained a little by the sun, 

And roughed with constant use — for she 

Is careless of their beauty won 

From dawn of life so easily. 

Alas ! that her slim feet should tread 
The world's uneven stony ways ! 
That she should know dull cares and dread 
40 



The Poet's Picture 

Long lonely nights and sordid days, 
Being so &shioned for love's praise. 

Lest she should sin or feint from fear, 
Let one swift angel heed my prayer, 
And straight descending to this sphere 
Spread wide wings o'er her everywhere,- 
Lest she should fall who is so dear I 



41 



An Impression 

Sky like smoked mother-o'-pearl. 

Dim background for bare trees 

That lift against it stained twig traceries : 

Smoke wreaths that curl 

Upward from carved stone chimneys silently — 

Twilight time . . . nigh ! 

Westward wide scarlet bars 

Belting day's silvery waist — 

And Eastward sable clouds interlaced . . • 

So — night lifts nearer luminous with stars . . , 



42 



A Dream 

I WAS a child with all a child's wild prayers^ 
That followed Love yet ever saw him flee, 
His splendid feet on-speeding silently ; 

His wings gold tinftured spread athwart life's 

stairs 
Ascending ever, and yet unawares 
Oft turning his fair face and suddenly 
Fixing his deep eyes smilingly on me ; 
So climbing girlhood caught at unguessed cares 

But one Spring day Love halted in his flight 
And straight let flash an arrow at my heart, 
43 



A Dream 

So that I swooned, who strove to reach his 

side . • . 
When I awoke, a sea of saffron light 
Stirred in the silver East and blood did st^t. 
From my pierced flesh, for lo! Love's wound 

was wide. ... 



44 



i 



Bereft 

Within my heart there stands a vacant throne; 
I set a King there not so long ago, 
The shadow of a man who did not know 
He was beloved — I sought it there alone, 
This silent image that was all my own • • • 
But one day someone whispered to me low 
"Behold! dear, he is dead whom you loved 

so . . • 
And now the speechless shadow too has flown : 

Within my heart there stands an Angel — dumb, 
With large eyes full of tears, that never close 
By day nor night, and "Memory " is her name. 
45 



Bereft 

She dreams of other days that may not come 

Again on earth • . . her face is a white rose — 

They droop, shut close, the wings on which she 
came. 



46 



A Madrigal 

Ah ! leave my soul like forest pool 

In shadow smiling unafraid — 

Let not thy laughter stir its cool 

Clear depths, sweet maid. 

Let not I pray thy sun-like hair 

Pierce to the thoughts that slumber there I 

My soul is still as summer noon — 

Its inmost shrines are full of sleep, 

But when the stars of dream-land swoon 

'Twill wal^ and weep. 

The dawn of Love that brings thy blue 

Bright eyes, will bring a sorrow too ! 

My soul is silent — trouble not 
Its secret reveries with thy songs ! 
47 



A Madrigal 

The rare red tint thy lips have got ! 
The whole world longs 
To kiss them — ^therefore speak not, dear, 
My soul must struggle should it hear I 

• ••••< 

I see thee ! and my soul is swung 
In golden trances of delight ! 
I hear thee ! and my tremulous tongue 
Hurls forth a flight 
Of bird-like songs saluting thee. 
O ! come and dwell and dream with me ! 



48 



Rain Music 

I LOVE the lilting patter of the rain . . . 
Through tangled traceries of budding boughs 
Falling, on frail pale spring growths all a-drowse 
In the warm, sun-soft stillness — where the stain 
Of tender green spreads slowly towards the lane, 

That haunt of black-birds, from whose ruffled 

throats 
Rise round and full the rapturous singing notes 
Repeated and repeated yet again. . . . 

The rain-drops on the leaves &int music make — 
A subtle fleeting sound, • • . while blithe 
and clear 

The chime of shrill bird-voices through it break. 
49 K 



Rain Music 

We catch stray scents from sweet drenched 
. primrose stars — 

. • . And then the shower is over and rose- 
bars 
Bridge the sun's western garden and gold lake. 



SO 



Doubts 

A WEB of gold is the western sty ! 

Golden strands of the sun's bright hair 
Caught in the grey clouds everywhere ! 

Or the'tangled skeins of day's broidery ? 

i • • And now it is that the twilight sings ; 
Twilight • • • whose voice is full of tears^ 
Trailing athwart our hopes and fears 

The drooping bows of her dusky wings ! 

In the fading light we dream of death 
And closer cling in a long embrace. 
O ! pure pale girl with the passionate face 

Life strips us naked . . • but leaves us breath. 

51 E — 2 



Doubts 

But when our bodies lie strange and still 
They will bury us swiftly out of sight. 
Shut us away from the warm sunlight • . . 

How dark the darkness will be and chill ! 

But ah ! I forgot, we shall not feel 
Folded safe in our last deep sleep 
Never again to kiss and weep — 

While our lips* rose colour the roses steal. 

Dear, never again to know regret. 

With its iron hand laid on the leaping heart 
Its fingers thrust where the wide wounds 
smart, 

The wounds of memory bleeding yet. . . . 

Ah ! but the kisses^-^^the tears — the fleet 

Delights — slow sorrows, ^e /j/Js-ri^ v^in 



Doubts 



To praise white peace when the wine of pain, 
Fate*s purple wine, is so fiery sweet ! 

Think you we should be glad to die 

Now . . . when the stars are coming soon 
And the daylight pales, and the primrose 
moon 

Is a stemless flower in a silver sky. • • • 



S3 



" ! 'vanished loveliness ofjlonvers andfaces^ 
treasure of hair ^ and great immortal eyes, 
Jire therefor these no safe and secret places f 
t/ind is it true that beauty ne<ver dies ? " 

Richard Le Galliennb, 

The Spring is here, but she is gone from me* 
How shall I bear the bitter banishment ? 
I miss her eyes • . . her golden hair ... I see 
No beauty in the day, since her soul went . 
Alone into the strange dim lands of deaths . . • 

Flowers with uplifted laughing faces stand 

In silent scentful clusters, birds are heard 

Trilling among the leaves. ... I lift my 
hand 

And press it to my forehead . . , not a word 

I^scapes my lips ... I struggle with my breath. 



54 



In dreams I meet my loved one, but a change 
Has touched her semblance, she is ivory pale, 

And in her great blue eyes shines something 

strange — 
Is it the light of God ? — that like a veil 
Divides us when our souls touch lips in sleep . « . 

I wrote a book in praise of her last year, 

She holds it still. Her hair is like a flame. . • • 

Her plaintive mouth pleads mutely • • . but I 
hear 

That clear voice never . . . though I call her 
name 

Each night, all night • . . and then I wake and 
weep. 



55 



A Mood 

The sun aslant the carpet, and the rain 
Blown sobbingly against the window glass. 
While I sit silent with a voiceless pain, 
Pressing my heart between its cruel hands. 

The slow hours pass. . . . 
Between the dawn lands and the sunset lands 
My soul walks wearily with aching eyes. 
The whole world grey about her where she 

stands ! 
Sorrow and she are tired of the long noon, 

The sullen skies . . . 
My friend at work hums softly an old tune. 
And in the grate, new lit, a fluftuant fire 

Puts forth pale pointed flame flowers that full 
soon 

Fret all the rough black coals to fairy gold 
S6 



A Mood 

Of tower and spire ! 
Sunlight and firelight, but the world feels cold — 
The wet trees toss their weight of tumbled green ; 
And shreds of torn cloud banners manifold 
Drift up the dome of heaven, while slips the light 

Pearl hued, between . . . 

. . . I wonder shall I meet you in the night. 

In that dear house of Dreams, Sleep's dwellings 
place ? 

O Prince ! O Lord of life ! O heart's delight ! 
O Lover ! never this side of the stars 
Seen face to face ! • . . 
In vain my winged songs beat against the bars 
Of bitter life, then falling mute and tired, 

Like leaves that the sharp hoar frost sheds and 

scars. 
Lie dead beneath the heaven they desired. 

57 



A Pause 

O ! do you hear the rain 

Beat on the glass in vain ? 

So my tears beat against fate's feet 

In vain ... in vain ... in vain . • • 

O ! do you see the skies 

As gray as your grave eyes ? 

O ! do you hear the wind, my dear, 

That sighs and sighs and sighs . . , 

• ^ . Tired as this twilight seems 

My soul droops sad with dreams • . . 

You cannot know where we two go 

In dreams ... in dreams ... in dreams. 

58 



A Pause 

You only watch the light. 
Sinking away from night . . . 
In silver mail all shadowy pale, 
The moon shines white, so white 

. . . O ! if we two were wise 

Your eyes would leave the skies 

And look into my eyes ! 

And I who wistful stand, • . 

One foot in fairy land. 

Would catch Love by the hand. 



S9 



Sunset and Sunrise 

Torn clouds shot through with sunset fire . . 
Wide fields and wastes of desert sky 
Flooded with colour. Dawn*s desire 
Dies hard ; what wounds the west reveals ! 
Hot gaping rents ; the red sun reels 
To other risings, sullenly . . . 

Pallor of dawn hung round the rose-robed sun, 
And all the grass sweet-scented and pearl-set 
With folded daisies snared in spun 
Shreds of torn night mists, woven through 
With star-light splendours. In her blue 
Bed-chamber, Morning loiters yet I • . • 

60 



Flirtation 

Say ! are you merely mine to-day — to-morrow, 

Mine for one rapturous June ? 

Now, in your splendid eyes I see no sign of 
sorrow, 

Yet , . , you m^fy sorrow soon I 

Say ! do you dream of days that will divide us ? 
When sometimes ypu sit mute 

Here in the garden where gold sun-flowers tower 
beside us, 
Here, where bird voices flute ? 

Say ! do you dream or only droop from pleasure 

Your delicate flower-like head ? 

Even so a proud pale rose hangs languidly at 
leisure 

Its beauty perftdlipd ! . . , 

6| 



The Song Bird 

Thbre is a garden in my soul, 
A garden full of singing birds, 
Their wings have never known control 
Ip any cage of words. 

They come from feiry lands afar, 
From lands of Dawn and lands of Night, 
The mystic birds of fate they are : 
God only marks their flight. 

Their wings beat round my house of Dreams, 
Beneath the eaves they build and sing • . • 
And always each one's coming seems 
A strange and sudden thing ! 
62 



The Song Bird 

And yesterday, ah ! . . . yesterday 
I flung a golden net of thought 
Across the tangled world that lay 
About me, and I caught 

A song-bird with a shining crest . . . 
And plumage coloured like a flame — 
A stranger, different from the rest . . . 
I knew from whence he came • • • 

From that grey city feir indeed 
To some . . • but foul to those, too wise 
Who pass her Sphinx-like smile, to read 
The secret in her eyes . . . 

And this bird sang a song that set 
My heart a-thrill with hope and power. 
Earth's frxiitless feverish care and fret 
Fell from me in that hour. 

63 



The Song Bird 

" O ! come again ! my soul is stirred- 
The praise and perfume of the Spring 
Is in thy voice, O ! passionate bird 
Come back to me and sing ! " 



64 



An April Mood 

The south wind walked abroad and flung 

A silver net of sudden rain, 
Aflame with flowers the green woods hung . 

A mist of leaves, above the plain . . . 
O, April rain . . . O, April rain. 

The dart and flutter of small birds. 
Who seemed to jargon of their hopes 

In fitful flutings, hushed our words. 

Our eyes strayed over sun-flushed slopes . 
O, April hopes . . . O, April hopes. 

I looked into your languorous eyes, 

And laughed to hear your vehement vows ; 
65 F 



An April Mood 

In love's vain lore my heart was wise . . . 

We stooped between the tangled boughs . 

O, April vows . . . O, April vows. 

I have forgotten what you said 

To win a kiss that afternoon ; 
But, O, your lips were warm and red. 

And when you went, you went too soon 
That showery April afternoon. 



66 



The White Statue 

I LOVE you, silent statue ! for your sake 

My songs in prayer upreach 

Frail hands of flame-like speech 

That some mauve-silver twilight you may wake ! 

I love you more than swallows love the south, 

As sunflowers turn and turn 

Towards the sun, I yearn 

To press warm lips against your cold white mouth ! 

I love you more than scarlet skirted dawn, 
At sight of whose spread wings 
The great world wakes and sings ; 
Forgetful of the long, vague dark withdrawn, 

67 



The White Statue 

I love you most at purple sunsetting : 
When night with feverish eyes 
Comes up the fading skies, 
I love you with a passion past forgetting. 



68 



Blind Love 

A LONG wet day : and now, the twilight hour 
Fine, but not golden, delicately gray . • . 
We pace the garden path 
Talking : and feint between the words we say 
Fall troubled silences of pleasant sound • . • 
I speak of love, and laugh ! 

The flowers stand drenched and bruised on either 
hand. 

Only the leaves shine softly and seem glad • . . 

And so the light grows less . . . 

We turn : I take your hand . . . your 
look sad. 

As though the rain had also hurt the flower 

Of your mouth's loveliness . . . 

69 



Blind Love 

Full of rain crystals, the asparagus 

A jewelled tangle seems of strange green hair ! 

You stand against it, Sweet, 

A pagan creature passionately fair, 

With your great eyes and wonderful white throat, 

Long limbs and small light feet I 

You are so beautiful, so sorrowful ! 

Wherefore, Beloved, none knows, not even I, 

'' To you the world is kind " 

We say, and smile, when you desire to die : 

" Love will come soon and lead you to the light." 

You answer, " Love is blind ! " 



70 



A Lilt of Tears 

Sing me a song^ my Sweet! 

Not too sad' — ^not too gay— 
Smg how glad hours fly fleet 

Like yesterday. • . . 

Play me a tune, my dear, 
Not too soft — ^not too loud — 

Life's discords hover near . . 
Love's head is bowed. . . , 

Dance me a dance to-night I 

Not too swift — ^not too slow- 
Dance in the mystic light. 
The fire's red glow . . . 

71 



A Lilt of Tears 

Comfort mc with a kiss . • 
Lips to lips clinging long , 

This is the end I wis 
Of danc^ and^ong. 



7^ 



The Music of Dvordk 

Beneath a golden dome, an emerald floor, 
Crowded with dancing girls . . . the flash 
of feet, 

The flutter of loose robes, the rhythmic beat 
Of drums . . . The singing of sad violins, 
The clash of cymbals ... So the music wins 
To fullest melody . . . and through it rings 
The silver clink of anklets and the sweet 
Tinkling sound of little shaken bells ! 

Lightly each coryphee her sister swings. 

Mad with the mystic measure of the dance. 

Then suddenly they pause^ as if by chance. 

Motionless • • . as the flutes and viols are 
stilled. 

73 o 



The Music of Dvorak 

Each slender sinuous body, spell- bound, thrilled 
With triumph in its last, most perfect pose . . . 
Each lovely head thrown back, as in a trance 
Immovable they stand in glittering rows. 



Silence and darkness ! . . . was it then a dream ? 

Entangled in the passionate mystery 

And magic of your music, which to me 

Is ever as the shadow of soft wings 

Shutting away all sense of sordid things, 

All sight of that inscrutable Sphinx called "Life" 

... So weary souls drift vision-ward, and see. 

Looking between the heavy lids of sleep. 

Reflections of themselves as they might be ! 



74 



PI M "J «. 



t#f JOHN LANE J^l 




THE ja. 
BODLEY £ 
HEADJg. ^ 
VIGD S* E 

"BODLEIAM t 
LONDOM 



CATALOCUEe^PUB UCATIONS 
i^BELLES LETTRES^^El^?^^ 



List of Books 

IN 

BELLES LETTRES 

(Including some Transfers) 

Published by John Lane 

Vigo Street, London, W. 



ADAMS {FRANCIS). 

Essays in Modernity. Cr. 8vo. 55. net. [Shortly. 
A Child of the Age. {See Keynotes Series.) 

A. E. 

Homeward Songs by the Way. Sq. i6mo., wrappers. 
is, 6dnet, [Second EdUion, 

Transferred to the present Publisher, 
The Earth Breath and other Poems. [Inpreparatim, 

ALDRICH (T, B,). 

Later Lyrics. Small Fcap. 8vo. 2s, 6d, net. 

ALLEN {GRANT). 

The Lower Slopes : A Volume of Verse. With title-page 
and cover design by J. Illingworth Kay. Cr. 8vo. 
Ss. net. 
The Woman Who Did. (See Keynotes Series.) 
The British Barbarians. {See Keynotes Series.) 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANS 



ARCADY LIBRARY (THE). 

A Series of Open- Air Books. Edited by J. S. Fletcher. 

With cover designs by Patten Wilson. Each 

volume cr. 8vo. $s. net. 
VoL I. Round About a Brighton Coach Office^ 

By Maude Egerton King. With over 30 illustra- 
tions by Lucy Kemp- Welch. 
Vol. 2. Scholar Gipsies. By John Buchan. With 

seven full-page etchings by D. Y. Cameron. 
Vol. 3. Life in Arcadia. By J. S. Fletcher. With 

20 illustrations by Patten Wilson. 
Vol. 4. A Garden of Peace. By Helen Crofton. 

With 24 illustrations by Edmund H. New. 
Vol. 5. The Happy Exile. By H. D. Lowry. With 

six etchings by E. Philip Pimlott. [In preparation, 

BEECHING {R, H. C). 

In a Garden : Poems. With title-page and cover design 

by Roger Fry. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net, 
St. Augustine at Ostia. Crown 8vo, wrappers, is, net, 

BEERBOHM (MAX). 

The Works of Max Beerbohm. With a Bibliography 
by John Lane. Sq. i6mo. 4^. 6d, net, 

BENSON {ARTHUR CHRISTOPHER), 
Lyrics. Fcap. 8vo., buckram, 5^. net. 
Lord Vyet and other Poems. Fcap. 8vo. 35 6d, net, 

BODLEY HEAD ANTHOLOGIES (THE), 

Edited by Robert H. Case. With title-page and cover 
designs by Walter West. Each volume cr. 8vo. 
5^. net. 

Vol. I. English Epithalamies. By Robert H. Case. 

Vol. 2. MusA Piscatrix. By John Buchan. With 
six etchings by E. Philip Pimlott. 

Vol. 3. English Elegies. By John C. Bailey. 

Vol. 4. English Satires. By Charles Hill Dick. 

BRIDGES {ROBERT), 

Suppressed Chapters and other Bookishness. Cr. 
8vo. y.6d,net, [Second Edition, 



THE PUBLICATIONS OP JOHN LANE 



BROTHERTON (MART). 

Rosemary for Remembrance. With title-page and cover 
design by Walter West. Fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6d. ngf. 

CRACKANTHORPE [HUBERT), 

Vignettes. A Miniature Journal of Whim and Senti- 
ment. Fcap. 8vo., boards. 2s, 6d, net. 

CRANE (fTALTER), 

Toy Books. Re-issue. Each with new cover design and 

end papers. 
This Little Pig*s Picture Book, containing : 

I. This Little Pig. 

II. The Fairy Ship. 

III. King Luckieboy's Party. 

The three bound in one volume, with a decorative cloth 
cover, end papers, and a newly written and designed preface 
and title-page. 3^. 6d. net. Separately, gd, net, each. 
Mother Hub?ard*s Picture Book, containing : 
I. Mother Hubbard. 
II. The Three Bears. 
III. The Absurd A. B. C. 
The three bound in one volume, with a decorative cloth 
cover, end papers, and a newly written and designed preface 
and title-page. 35. 6d, net. Separately 9^. net each. 

CUSTANCE iOLWE), 

Opals : Poems. Fcap. 8vo. 3J. 6d, net. 

DALMON{C, fV,), 

Song Favours. With title-page designed by J. P. Donne. 
Sq. i6mo. 3^. 6d. net, 

DAVIDSON (JOHN), 

Plays: An Unhistorical Pastoral; A Romantic Farce; 
Bruce, a Chronicle Play; Smith, a Tragic Farce; 
Scaramouch in Naxos, a Pantomime. With a frontis- 
piece and cover design by Aubrey Beardsley. 
Sm. 4to. 7^. 6d. net. 

Fleet Street Eclogues. Fcap. 8vo., buckram. 4s.6d.net, 

[Third Edition. 

Fleet Street Eclogues. Second Series. Fcip. 8vo., 
buckram. 4s.6d.net* [Second Editim% 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANS 



DAVIDSON (JOHN)'-cmtinued. 

A Random Itinerary and a Ballad. With a frontis- 
piece and title-page by Laurence Housman. Fcap 
8vo., Irish Linen. 5^. net. 

Ballads and Songs. With title-page designed by Walter 
West. Fcap. 8vo., buckram. 5^. net, [Fourth Edition. 

New Ballads. Fcap. 8vo., buckram. 4^. 6d, net. 

DE TABLET {LORD). 

Poems, Dramatic and Lyrical. By John Leicester 
Warren (Lord De Tabley). Illustrations and cover 
design by C. S. Ricketts. Cr. 8vo. 7^. 6d, net. 

[Third Edition. 

Poems, Dramatic and Lyrical. 2nd series, uniform 

in binding with the former volume. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net, 

DUER (CAROLINE &* ALICE). 
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. 3J. 6d. net. 

EGERTON (GEORGE). 

Keynotes. {See Keynotes Series.) 
Discords. {See Keynotes Series.) 
Young Ofeg*s Ditties. A translation from the Swedish 
of Ola Hansson. With title-page and cover design 
by Aubrey Beardsley. Cr. 8vo. 3^. 6d, net. 
Symphonies. [In preparation. 

EGLINTON (JOHN). 

Two Essays on the Remnant. Post 8vo., wrappers. 
is, 6d. net, [Second Edition, 

Transferred to the present Publisher. 

EVES LIBRARY, 

Each volume cr. 8vo. 3^. 6^. net. 

Vol. I. Modern Women : an English Rendering of 
Laura Marholm Hansson's 'Das Buch der 
Frauen.' By Hermione Ramsden. (Subjects: — 
Sonia Kovalevsky ; George Egerton ; Eleonora Duse ; 
Amalie Skram; Marie BashkirtsefF; A. Ch. Edgren- 
Leffler. 

Vol. 2. The Ascent of Woman. By Roy Devereux. 

Vol 3. Marriage Questions in Modern Fiction, 
By Elizabeth Rachel Chapman. 



THE PUBLICATIONS OP JOHN LANE 



FEA (ALLAN). 

The Flight op the King : a full, true, and particular 
account of the escape of His Most Sacred Majesty King 
Charles II. after the Battle of Worcester, with Sixteen 
Portraits in Photogravure and nearly lOO other Illus- 
trations. Demy 8vo. 2is, mi. 

FIELD (EUGENE). 

The Love Affairs of a Biblioiianiac. Post 8vo. 
3J. 6d. net. 

FLETCHER {J. S.). 

The Wonderful Wapentake. By "A Son of the 
Soil." With i8 full-page illustrations by J. A. 
Symington. Cr. 8vo. 5^. 6d, net. 
Life in Arcadia. {See Arcady Library.) 
God's Failures. {See Keynotes Series.) 
Ballads of Revolt. Sq. 32mo. 2s. 6d. net. 

FOUR AND SIX^PENNY NOVELS. 

Each Volume with title-page and cover design by PatTBN 

Wilson. Cr. 8vo. 4J. 6d. net. 
Galloping Dick. By H. B. Marriott Watson. 
The Wood of the Brambles. By Frank Mathew. 
The Sacrifice of Fools. By R. Manifold Craig. 
A Lawyer's Wife. By Sir Nevill Geary, Bart. 
Weighed in the Balance. By Harry Lander. 
Glamour. By Meta Orred. 
Patience Sparhawk and Her Times. By Gertrude 

Atherton. 
The Wise and the Wayward. By G. S. Street. 

The following are in preparation. 
Middle Greyness. By A. J. Dawson. 
The Martyr's Bible. By George Fifth. 
A Celibate's Wife. By Herbert Flowerdsw. 
Max. By Julian Croskby. 
Derelicts. By W. J, Locke. 
The Making of a Prig. By Evelyn Sharp. 
The Tree of Life. By Netta Syrett. 
Cecilia. By Stanley V. Makower, 



THE PUBLICATIONS OP JOHN LANE 



FORD {JAMES L.\ 

The Literary Shop and Other Tales. Fcap. 8vo., 
3J. 6d, net. 

FULLER (H, B,). 

The Puppet Booth. Twelve Plays. Cr. 8vo. 4^. 6d, net, 

GALE (NORMAN). 

Orchard Songs. With title-page and cover design by 
J. Illingworth Kay. Fcap. 8vo. Irish Linen. 
Ss, net. 

Also a special edition, limited in number, on hand-made 
paper, bound in English vellum. £i, is. net, 

GARNETT {RICHARD). 

Poems. With title-page by J. Illingworth Kay. 

Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 
Dante, Petrarch, Camoens. CXXIV Sonnets ren- 
dered in English. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 

GIBSON (CHARLES DANA). 

Drawings. Eighty-five Large Cartoons. Oblong folio. 

iSs. net. 
Pictures of People, Eighty-five Large Cartoons, Ob- 
long folio. ' 15^. net. 

GOSSE {EDMUND). 

The Letters of Thomas Lovell Beddoes. Now 
first edited. Pott 8vo. 5j. net. 
Also 25 copies large paper. 12s, 6d, net. 

GRAHAME {KENNETH). 

Pagan Papers : A Volume of Essays. With title-page 
by Aubrey Beardsley. Fcap. 8vo. 5^. net. 

[Out of print at present. 

The Golden Age. With cover designs by Charles 

Robinson. Cr. 8vo. 3J. dd. net. [Fifth Edition, 

GREENE (G. A.) 

Italian Lyrists of To-Day. Translations in the origi- 
nal metres from about 35 living Italian poets ; with bibli- 
ographical and biographical notes. Cr. 8vo. 5j. net. 

GREENfFOOD (FREDERICK). 

Imagination in Dreams. Cr. 8vo. 55. net^ 



& tAt l»UBtlCATlOKS OP JOHN LANE 

HAKE (r. GORDON). 

A Selection from his Poems. Edited by Mrs. Mey- 
NELL, with a portrait after D. G. RossETTi, and a 
cover design by Gleeson White. Cr. 8vo. $s. net, 

HAYES {ALFRED), 

The Vale of Arden, and Other Poems. With a 
title-page and cover design by E. H. New. Fcap. 8vo. 
y.6d, net. 
Also 25 copies large paper. 15J. net, 

HAZLITT (friLLIAM). 

Liber Amoris ; or, The New Pygmalion. Edited, 
with an Introduction, by Richard Le Gallienne. 
To which is added an exact transcript of the original 
MS., Mrs. Hazlitt's diaiy in Scotland, and letters never 
before published. Portrait after Bewick, and fsicsimile 
letters. 400 copies only. 4to., 364 pp., buckram. 
2is, net, 

HEINEMANN {fTILLIAM), 

The First Step: A Dramatic Moment. Sm. 4to. 
5x. 6ci, net, 

HOPPER (NORA). 

Ballads in Prose. With a title-page and cover by 

Walter West. Sq. i6mo. 5^. net. 
Under Quicken Boughs. With title-page designed by 

Patten Wilson, and Cover designed by Elizabeth 

Naylor. Crown 8vo. 5j. net. 

HOUSMAN (CLEMENCE). 

The Were Wolf. With six ftiU-page illustrations, title- 
page and cover design by Laurence Housman. 
Sq. i6mo* y, 6d, net, 

HOUSMAN {LAURENCE). 

Green Arras : Poems. With 6 illustrations, title-page, 

and cover design by the Author. Cr. 8vo. 55. net. 
Gods and their Makers. Crown 8vo. p. 6d. net. 

\ In preparation. 
IRFING {LAURENCE). 

Godefroi and Yolande : A Play. Sm. 4to. 35. 6d. 
net, [In preparation • 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE 



JAMES (fr. P.). 

Romantic Professions: A Volume of Essays. With 
title-page designed by J. Illingworth Kay. Cr. 8vo. 
Ss.net, 

JOHNSON (LIONEL). 

The Art of Thomas Hardy. Six Essays, with an 
etdbed portrait by Wm. Strang, and Bibliography by 
John Lane. Cr. 8vo. Buckram. 5^. 6d. t%et, 

\Second Edition. 
Also 150 copies, large paper, with proofs of the 
portrait. £\, is, net, 

JOHNSON {PAULINE). 

The White Wampum : Poems. With title-page and 
cover designs by E. H. New. Cr. 8vo. 5j. ntt. 

JOHNSTONE (C E.). 

Ballads of Boy and Beak. With a title-page designed 
by F. H. Townsend. Sq. 32mo. 2s. net. 

KEMBLE {E. IT.). 

Kemble's Coons, Thirty reproductions in sepia of Negro 
Children and Southern Scenes. 4to. 51. na. 

KEYNOTES SERIES. 

Each volume with specially-designed title-page by Aubrey 

Beardsley. Cr. 8vo. doth. 35. td. net. 
Vol. I. Keynotes. By George Egerton. 

[Seventh Edition. 
Vol, II. The Dancing Faun. By Florence Fare. 
Vol. III. Poor Folk. Translated from the Russian of 
F. Dostoievsky by Lena Milman, with a 
preface by George Moore. 
Vol. IV. A Child of the Age. By Francis Adams. 
Vol. V. The Great God Pan and the Inmost 
Light. By Arthur Machen. 

[Second Edition. 
Vol. VI. Discords. By George Egerton. 

[Fourth Edition. 
Vol. VII. Prince Zaleski. By M. P. Shiel. 
Vol. VIII. The Woman who Did. By Grant Allen. 

[Twenty first Edition. 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANK 



KEYNOTES SERIES, -continued. 

Vol. IX. Women's Tragedies. By H. D. Lowry. 

Vol. X. Grey Roses. By Henry Harland. 

Vol. XL At the First Corner, and Other Stories* 
By H. B. Marriott Watson. 

Vol. XII. Monochromes. By Ella D*Arcy. 

Vol. XIII. At the Relton Arms. By Evelyn Sharp. 

Vol. XIV. The Girl from the Farm. By Gertrude- 
Dix. {Second Edition. 

Vol. XV. The Mirror of Music. By Stanley V^ 
Makower. 

Vol. XVI. Yellow and White. By W. Carlton 
Dawe. 

Vol. XVII. The Mountain Lovers. By Fiona Mac- 
Leod. 

Vol. XVIII. The Woman Who Didn't. By Victoria. 
Crosse. [ Third Edition. 

Vol. XIX. The Three Impostors. By Arthur 
Machen. 

Vol. XX. Nobody's Fault. By Netta Syrett. 

Vol. XXL The British Barbarians. By Grant 
Allen. [Second Edition. 

Vol. XXII. In Homespun. By E. Nesbit. 

Vol. xxiiL Platonic Affections. By John Smith. 

Vol. XXIV. Nets for the Wind. By Una Taylor. 

Vol. XXV. Where the Atlantic Meets the Land. 
By Caldwell Lipsett. 

Vol. xxvx. In Scarlet and Grey. By the Hon. 
Mrs. Arthur Henniker. (With a story, 
"The Spectre of the Real," written in 
collaboration with Thomas Hardy). 

Yol. XXVII. Maris Stella. By Marie Clothildb 
Balfour. 

Vol. xxviii. Day Books. By Mabel E. Wotton. 

Vol. XXIX. Shapes in the Fire. By M. P. Shiel. 

Vol. XXX. Ugly Idol. By Claud Nicholson. 

Vol. XXXI. Kakemonos. By W. Carlton Dawe, 

Vol. xxxii. God's Failures. By J. S. Fletcher. 

Vol. xxxiii. Mere Sentiment. By A. J. Dawson. 

Vol. xxxiv. A Deliverance. By Allan Monkhouse. 

[/w preparation. 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE II 

LANE'S LIBRARY, 

Each volume cr. 8vo. 3J. 6d, net, 
I. March Hares. By George Forth. 
II. The Sentimental Sex. By Gertrude War- 
den. 

III. Gold. By Annie Linden. 

(The following are in preparation). 

IV. Broken Away. By Beatrice Grimshaw. 

V. A Man from the North. By E. A, Bennett, 
VI. The Duke of Linden. By Joseph F. Charles 
LEATHER (R, K,). 

Verses. 250 copies, fcap. 8vo. 3J. net. 

Transferred by the Author to the present Publisher, 
LEFROr {EDWARD CRACROFT). 

Poems. With a Memoir by Wilfred A. Gill, and a re- 
print of J. A. Symonds* Critical Essay on ** Echoes 
from Theocritus." Cr. 8vo. Photogravure Portrait. 
Ss. net. 

LE GALLIENNE {RICHARD). 

Prose Fancies, with a portrait of the Author by Wilson 

Steer. Cr. 8vo., purple cloth. 5^. net. [Fourth Edition. 

Also a liihited large paper edition. 12s. 6d. net. 

The Book Bills of Narcissus. An account rendered 

by Richard le Galuenne. With a new chapter 

and a frontispiece, cr. 8vo., purple cloth. 3^. 6d. net, 

[Third Edition. 
Also 50 copies on large paper. Svo. los. 6d, net. 
English Poems. Revised. Cr. 8vo., purple cloth. 4jr. 6d, 
net, [Fourth Edition. 

George Meredith : Some Characteristics ; with a Biblio- 
graphy (much enlarged) by TOHN Lane, portrait, &c. 
Cr. 8vo., purple doth. 5^. od, net, \Fourth Edition, 
The Religion of a Literary Man. Cr. 8vo., purple 
cloth, y, 6d. net. {.Fifth Edition. 

Also a special rubricated edition on hand-made paper. 
8vo. loj. 6^. net. 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE 



LE GALLIENNE (RICHARD)— continued, 

Robert Louis Stevenson : An Elegy, and Other Poems, 
mainly personal. With etched title-page by D. Y. 
Cameron. Cr. 8vo., purple cloth. 41. 6d. net. 
Also 75 copies on large paper. 8vo. I2J. ^. neU 
Retrospective Reviews: A Dterary Log, iS9i-i895. 

2 vols., cr. 8vo., purple cloth. 9;. net. 
Prose Fancies. Second Series. Cr. 8vo., purple cloth. 

5j. net. 
The Quest of the Golden Girl. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net, 

{Third Edition. 
See also Hazlitt, Walton and Cotton. 

LOIVRY (H, D.) 

Make Believe. Illustrated by Charles Robinson. 

Cr. 8vo., gilt edges or uncut^ 5^. net. 
Women's Tragedies. {See Keynotes Series). 
The Happy Exile. (See Arcady Library). 

LUCAS (WINIFRED). 

Units : Poems. Fcap. 8vo. 4?. 6d, net, 
LYNCH (HANNAH). 

The Great Galeoto, and Folly or Saintliness. 
Two Plays, from the Spanish of Jos 6 £chbgaray» 
with an Introduction. Sm. 4to. 5^. 6d, net. 

MARZIALS (THEO.). 

The Gallery of Pigeons, and Other Poems. Post 8vo. 
4J. 6d, net. {Very few remain* 

Transferred by the Author to the present Publisher. 

7HE MAYFAIR SET. 

Each volume fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6d. net. 
VoL I. The Autob[ography of a Boy. Passages 
selected by his friend G. S. Street. With a 
title-page designed by C. W. Fursb. 

iFifth Edition. 

Vol. II. The Joneses and the Asterisks : a Story in 

Monologue by Gerald Campbell. With 

title-page and six illustrations by F. H. 

Townsend. [Second Edition. 



THB PtrfiLICATlONS OP JOHN LANE I3 

THE MAYFAIR SN'-cMinued. 

Vol. III. Select Conversations with an Uncle, now 

Extinct by H. G. Wells. With title-page 

by F. H. Townsend. 
VoL IV. For Plain Women Only. By George Fleming* 

With title-page by Patten Wilson. 
VoL V. The Feasts op Autolycus: the Diary op 

A Greedy Woman. Edited by Elizabeth 

Robins Pennell. With title-page t^ 

Patten Wilson. 
Vol. VL Mrs. Albert Grundy: Observations in 

Philistia. By Harold Frederic. With 

title-page by Patten Wilson. 

[Second EdiiioH. 
MEREDITH (GEORGE). 

The First Published Portrait op this Author, 
engraved on the wood by W. Biscombe Gardner, 
after the painting by G. F. Watts. Proof copies on 
Japanese vellum, signed by painter and engraver. 
£1, IX. net, 

MEYNELL (MRS.). 

Poems. Fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6d. net. [Fifth Edition, 

The Rhythm op Lipe, and Other Essays. Fcap. 8vo 

3x. 6d. net. [Fifth Edition. 

The Colour op Lipe, and other Essays. Fcap. 8vo. 

3x. 6d. net. [Fifth Edition. 

The Children, with title-page and cover design by 

Charles Robinson. Fcap. 8vo. 3^. ^. net. 

[Second Edition. 
Su also Hake. 

MILLER (yOA^IN). 

The Building of the City Beautipul. Fcap. 8vo. 
With a decorated cover. $s. net. 

MONEY'COmrs (F. B.) 

Poems. With title-page designed by Patten Wilson. 
Cr. 8vo. jf • 6d. net. 



14 THB PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE 

MONKHOUSE (ALLAN). 

Books and Plays : a Volume of Essays on Meredith, 

Borrow, Ibsen, and others. Cr. 8vo. Ss. net, 
A Deliverance. {See Keynotes Series). 

NESBIT (£.). 

A Pomander of Verse. With a title-page and cover 
designed by Laurence Housman. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 

In Homespun (See Keynotes Series). 

NBTTLESHIP (J. T.). 

Robert Browning. Essays and Thoi^hts. With a 
portrait. Cr. 8vo. $s. 6d^ net. {Third Editum. 

NOBLE (JAS. ASHCROFT). 

The Sonnet in England, and Other Essays, Title- 
page and cover design by Austin Young. Cr. 8vo. 
5s. net. 
Also 50 copies on large paper. 8vo. izs. bd, net, 

OPPENHEIM (M.). 

A History of the Administration of the Royal 
Navy, and of Merchant Shipping in relation to the 
Navy from MDIX to MDCLX, with an Introduction 
treating of the earlier period. With Illustrations. 
Demy 8vo. i$s. net. 

O'SHAUGHNESSr (ARTHUR). 

His Life and His Work. With selections from his 
Poems. By Louise Chandler Moulton. Portrait 
and cover design. Fcap. 8vo. 5^. net. 

OXFORD CHARACTERS. 

A series of 24 lithographed Portraits by Will Rothen- 
STEIN, with text by F. York Powell and others. 
200 copies only, foUo, buckram, £^. $s. net. 

25 special large paper copies containing proof impressions 
of the portraits signed by the artist. £6. 6s. net. 



THB PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANS l5 

PErERS {fFM. THEODORE). 

PosiBS OUT OF Rings. With title-page by Patten Wil- 
son. Demy i6mo. 2s, 6d, net. 

PIERROTS LIBRARY. 

Each volume with title-page, cover, and end papers de- 
signed by Aubrey Beardslby. Sq. i6mo. 2j. net. 
Vol. I. Pierrot. By H. db Verb Stacpoolb. 

Vol. II. My Little Lady Anne. By Mrs. Egbrton 

Castle. 
Vol. ni. Simplicity. By A. T. G. Price. 
Vol. IV. My Brother. By Vincent Brown. 

The following are in preparation. 
Vol. V. Death, the Knight and the Lady. By H. 

DE Vere Stacpoolb. 
Vol. VI. Mr. Passingham. By Thomas Cobb. 
Vol. VII. Two IN Captivity. By Vincent Brown. 

PLARR {riCTOR). 

In the Dorian Mood : Poems. With title-page designed 
by Patten Wilson. Cr. 8vo. 5j. net. 

POSTERS IN MINIATURE. 

250 reproductions of English, French, and American 
Examples, edited by Edward Pbnfibld. Large 
cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 

RADFORD (POLLIE). 

Songs, and Other Verses. With title-page designed 
by Patten Wilson. Fcap. 8vo. 4^. 6d. net. 

RHYS (ERNEST). 

A London Rose and Other Rhymes. With title-page 
designed by Selwyn Image. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 

ROBERTSON (JOHN M.). 

Essays towards a Critical Method (New Series). 
Cr.Svo. ^s. net. [In preparation. 



l6 THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE 

ST. CTRES (LORD). 

The Little Flowers of St. Francis. A new ren- 
dering into English of the FiORETTi Dl San 
Francesco. Cr. 8vo. 5j. w/. [In preparation, 

SEAMAN {OfFEN). 

The Battle of the Bays. Fcap. 8vo. sj. 6d, net. 

[Second Ediium. 
SEDGWICK {JANE MIN07). 

Songs from the Greek. Fcap. 8vo. 3x. 6d. net. 

SETOUN (GABRIEL). 

The Child World : Poems. With over 200 illustrations, 
and a cover design by Charles Robinson. Cr. Svo., 
gilt edges or uncut. 5^. net, [Second Edition. 

SHARP {EFELYN). 

Wymps: Fairy Tales. With eight coloured illustrations 
by Mrs. Percy Dearmer. Small 4to., decorated 
cover. 4J. 6d. net. 
At the Relton Arms. {See Keynotes Series). 
The Making of a Prig. [See Four and Six-penny 
Novels). 
SHORE {LOUISA). 

Poems. With an appreciation |by Frederic Harrison, 
a Memoir, and a Portrait. Cr. Svo. 5^. net. 

SHORT STORIES SERIES. 

Each Volume Post 8vo. Coloured edges. 2s. 6d. net. 

I. Some Whims of Fate. By MfeNiE Muriel 

Dowie. 

II. The Sentimental Vikings. By R. V. Risley. 
in. Shadows of Life. By Mrs. Murray Hickson. 

STEVENSON {ROBERT LOUIS). 

Prince Otto: A Rendering in French by Egerton 
Castle. With frontispiece, title-page, and cover 
design by D. Y. Cameron. Cr. 8vo. js, 6d. net. 
Also 100 copies on large paper, uniform in size with the 
Edinburgh Edition of the works. 
A Child's Garden of Verses. With over 150 illus- 
trations by Charles Robinson. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 

{Second Edition, 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE 17 

sriMSON {F. 7.). 

King Noanett : A Romance of Devonshire Settlers in 
New England. Illustrated. Cr. 8vo. 5^ . net, 

S70DDARr (THOMAS TOD). 

The Death Wake. With an introduction by Andrew 
Lang. Fcap. 8vo. 5^. net, 

STREET (G. S.). 

Miniatures and Moods. Fcap. 8vo. 3^. net. 
Episodes. Cr. 8vo. 35. net. 
The two volumes above transferred to the present Publisher, 

QUALES Ego : A few Remarks, in particular and at lazge. 

Fcap. 8vo. 35. dd, net. 
The Autobiography of a Boy. {See Mayfair Set). 

The Wise and the Waywrard. (See Four and Six- 
penny Novels). 

SWETTENHAM (F. A.). 

Malay Sketches. With title and cover designs by 
Patten Wilson. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. [Second Edition. 

TABS {JOHN B.), 

Poems. Sq. 32mo. 4s, 6d. net, 

TENNYSON {FREDERICK). 

Poems of the Day and Year. With a title-page by 
Patten Wilson. Cr. 8vo. 5*. net* 

THIMM {CARL A,). 

A Complete Bibliography of Fencing and Duelling, 
as practised by all European Nations from the Middle 
Ages to the Present Day. With a Classified Index, 
arranged chronologically according to Languages. Illus- 
trated with numerous portraits of Ancient and Modem 
Masters of the Art. Title-pages and frontispieces of 
some of the earliest works. Portrait of the Author by 
Wilson Steer, and title-page designed by Patten 
Wilson* 4to. 21s, net. 



l8 THB PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE 

THOMPSON {FRANCIS). 

Poems. With frontispiece, title-page, and cover design 
by Laurence Housman. Pott 4to. 5j. net, 

[^Fourth EdUim, 

Sister-Songs : An Offering to Two Sisters. With frontis- 
piece, title-page, and cover design by Laurence 
Housman. Pott 4to, buckram. 55. net. 

THOREAU {HENRY DAVID). 

Poems of Nature. Selected and edited by Henry S. 
Salt and Frank B. Sanborn. With a title-page 
designed by Patten Wilson. Fcap. 8vo. ^,M,na. 

TRAILL {H D.). 

The Barbarous Britishers. A Tip-top Novel. With 
title and cover design by Aubrey Beardsley. Cr. 8vo. 
Wrapper, is. net. 

From Cairo to the Soudan Frontier. Wi\ih cover 
design by Patten Wilson. Cr. 8vo. 5*. net, 

TYNAN HINKSON {KATHARINE). 

Cuckoo Songs. With title-page and .cover design by 
Laurence Housman. Fcap. 8vo. $s, net. 

Miracle Plays: Our Lord's Coming and Childhood. 
With six illustrations, title-page and cover design by 
Patten Wilson. Fcap. 8vo. 4j. 6d, net. 

WALTON AND COTTON. 

The Compleat Angler. Edited by Richard Lb 
Gallienne. With nearly 250 illustrations 1^ Edmund 
H. New. Fcap. 4to., decorated cover, 15J. net, or 
in 13 parts. Each is, net, 

WATSON {ROSAMUND MARRIOTT). 

Vespertilia, and Other Poems. With title-page de- 
signed by R. Anning Bell. Fcap. 8vo. 4*. 6d, net, 

A Summer Night and other Poems. New Edition. 
With a decorative title-page. Fcap. 8vo. 31. net. 



THE PUBLICATIONS OF JOHN LANE I9 

WArSON {WILLIAM). 

The Father of the Forest, and Other Poems. With 
new photogravure portrait of the Author. Fcap. 8vo. 
3J. 6d. net. [Fifth Thousand. 

Odes, and Other Poems. Fcap. 8vo. 4r. 6^. net. 

[Fourth Edition. 
The Eloping Angels : a Caprice. Sq. i6mo, buckram. 
3^. 6d. net, [Second Edition, 

Excursions in Criticism :' being some Prose Recrea- 
tions OF A Rhymer. Cr. 8vo. 5^. net. 

[Second Edition. 

The Prince's Quest, and Other Poems. With a 

bibliographical note added. Fcap. 8vo. 4^. 6d, net. 

[Third Edition. 

The Purple East: A Series of Sonnets on England's 

Desertion of Armenia. With a frontispiece by G. Yi 

Watts, R.A. Wrapper, is, net. [Fourth Edition. 

The Year of Shame. With an Introduction by the 

Bishop of Hereford. Fcap. 8vo., 2s. 6d. net. 

[Second Edition, 

WATT (FRANCIS). 

The Law's Lumber Room. Fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6d. net. 

^Second Edition. 

WATTS-DUSrON (THEODORE). 

Poems. Cr. 8vo. Ss. net. [In preparation. 

There will also be an Edition de Luxe of this volume printed 
at the Kelmscott Press. 

WENZELL {A. B.). 

In Vanity Fair. Seventy half-tone reproductions of 
Mr. Wenzell's Society Cartoons. Oblong folio. 
15J. net. 

WHARTON (H. r.). 

Sappho. Memoir, text, selected renderings, and a literal 
translation by Henry Thornton Wharton. With 
three illustrations in photogravure and a cover design 
by Aubrey Beardslby. Fcap. 8vo. 7^. 6d. net. 

[Third Edition, 



20 THB PUBLICATIONS OP JOHN LANS 

The Yellow Book, 

An Ittusirated Quarterly. PoU 4io^ 5^ . net. 
Volume t. April 1894, 272 pp., 15 Illustrations. [Outofprini, 
Volume IL July 1894, 364 pp.> 23 Qlustrations/ 
Volume IIL October 1894, 280 pp., 15 Illnstratioiis.] 
Volume tv. January 1895, ^5 PP*> i^ Illustrations. 
Volume V. April 1895, 3^7 PP«> '4 Illustrations. 
Vofumq VI. July 1895, 335 PP'» ^^ Illustrations. 
Volume VII. October, 1895, 3^ PP*i ^ Illustrations. 
Volumervin. January 1896, 406 pp., 26 Illustrations. 
Voluihe If. April 1896, 256 pp., 17 Illustrations. 
'Volume ^ X. July 1896. 340 pp., 13 Illustrations. 
Volume XI. October 1896, 342 pp., 12 Illustrations. 
Volume XII.. January 1897, 350 pp., 14 Illustrations. 




THE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SANTA CRUZ 



This book Is due on the lost DATE skimped below. 



eam-e/ST (Hsszssa )3bts 



I 



*Dr 




liimTiiiii 

3 2106 00197 9860 





6/^ 



c^ 



o 



