The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems, by 
William Morris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems

Author: William Morris

Release Date: September 17, 2007 [EBook #22650]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Stephen Blundell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                    THE

            DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE

               AND OTHER POEMS

                     BY

               WILLIAM MORRIS

 REPRINTED FROM THE KELMSCOTT PRESS EDITION
          AS REVISED BY THE AUTHOR


          LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
         39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
       NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA
                    1908

            All rights reserved




    _First Edition, BELL & DALDY, 1858
    Reprinted, 1875, for ELLIS & WHITE, and
    Subsequently for REEVES & TURNER
    Kelmscott Press Edition (revised by the Author), 1892
    Transferred to LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO., 1896
    New Edition corrected by Kelmscott Press Edition, May 1900
    Reprinted January 1908_




CONTENTS


                                            PAGE
 _The Defence of Guenevere_                    1

 _King Arthur's Tomb_                         19

 _Sir Galahad, a Christmas Mystery_           43

 _The Chapel in Lyoness_                      57

 _Sir Peter Harpdon's End_                    65

 _Rapunzel_                                  111

 _Concerning Geffray Teste Noire_            135

 _A Good Knight in Prison_                   148

 _Old Love_                                  155

 _The Gilliflower of Gold_                   159

 _Shameful Death_                            163

 _The Eve of Crecy_                          166

 _The Judgment of God_                       169

 _The Little Tower_                          174

 _The Sailing of the Sword_                  178

 _Spell-Bound_                               182

 _The Wind_                                  187

 _The Blue Closet_                           194

 _The Tune of Seven Towers_                  199

 _Golden Wings_                              202

 _The Haystack in the Floods_                215

 _Two Red Roses across the Moon_             223

 _Welland River_                             226

 _Riding Together_                           231

 _Father John's War-Song_                    234

 _Sir Giles' War-Song_                       237

 _Near Avalon_                               239

 _Praise of My Lady_                         241

 _Summer Dawn_                               246

 _In Prison_                                 247




THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE


    But, knowing now that they would have her speak,
    She threw her wet hair backward from her brow,
    Her hand close to her mouth touching her cheek,

    As though she had had there a shameful blow,
    And feeling it shameful to feel ought but shame
    All through her heart, yet felt her cheek burned so,

    She must a little touch it; like one lame
    She walked away from Gauwaine, with her head
    Still lifted up; and on her cheek of flame

    The tears dried quick; she stopped at last and said:
    O knights and lords, it seems but little skill
    To talk of well-known things past now and dead.

    God wot I ought to say, I have done ill,
    And pray you all forgiveness heartily!
    Because you must be right, such great lords; still

    Listen, suppose your time were come to die,
    And you were quite alone and very weak;
    Yea, laid a dying while very mightily

    The wind was ruffling up the narrow streak
    Of river through your broad lands running well:
    Suppose a hush should come, then some one speak:

    'One of these cloths is heaven, and one is hell,
    Now choose one cloth for ever; which they be,
    I will not tell you, you must somehow tell

    Of your own strength and mightiness; here, see!'
    Yea, yea, my lord, and you to ope your eyes,
    At foot of your familiar bed to see

    A great God's angel standing, with such dyes,
    Not known on earth, on his great wings, and hands,
    Held out two ways, light from the inner skies

    Showing him well, and making his commands
    Seem to be God's commands, moreover, too,
    Holding within his hands the cloths on wands;

    And one of these strange choosing cloths was blue,
    Wavy and long, and one cut short and red;
    No man could tell the better of the two.

    After a shivering half-hour you said:
    'God help! heaven's colour, the blue;' and he said, 'hell.'
    Perhaps you then would roll upon your bed,

    And cry to all good men that loved you well,
    'Ah Christ! if only I had known, known, known;'
    Launcelot went away, then I could tell,

    Like wisest man how all things would be, moan,
    And roll and hurt myself, and long to die,
    And yet fear much to die for what was sown.

    Nevertheless you, O Sir Gauwaine, lie,
    Whatever may have happened through these years,
    God knows I speak truth, saying that you lie.

    Her voice was low at first, being full of tears,
    But as it cleared, it grew full loud and shrill,
    Growing a windy shriek in all men's ears,

    A ringing in their startled brains, until
    She said that Gauwaine lied, then her voice sunk,
    And her great eyes began again to fill,

    Though still she stood right up, and never shrunk,
    But spoke on bravely, glorious lady fair!
    Whatever tears her full lips may have drunk,

    She stood, and seemed to think, and wrung her hair,
    Spoke out at last with no more trace of shame,
    With passionate twisting of her body there:

    It chanced upon a day that Launcelot came
    To dwell at Arthur's court: at Christmas-time
    This happened; when the heralds sung his name,

    Son of King Ban of Benwick, seemed to chime
    Along with all the bells that rang that day,
    O'er the white roofs, with little change of rhyme.

    Christmas and whitened winter passed away,
    And over me the April sunshine came,
    Made very awful with black hail-clouds, yea

    And in the Summer I grew white with flame,
    And bowed my head down: Autumn, and the sick
    Sure knowledge things would never be the same,

    However often Spring might be most thick
    Of blossoms and buds, smote on me, and I grew
    Careless of most things, let the clock tick, tick,

    To my unhappy pulse, that beat right through
    My eager body; while I laughed out loud,
    And let my lips curl up at false or true,

    Seemed cold and shallow without any cloud.
    Behold my judges, then the cloths were brought;
    While I was dizzied thus, old thoughts would crowd,

    Belonging to the time ere I was bought
    By Arthur's great name and his little love;
    Must I give up for ever then, I thought,

    That which I deemed would ever round me move
    Glorifying all things; for a little word,
    Scarce ever meant at all, must I now prove

    Stone-cold for ever? Pray you, does the Lord
    Will that all folks should be quite happy and good?
    I love God now a little, if this cord

    Were broken, once for all what striving could
    Make me love anything in earth or heaven?
    So day by day it grew, as if one should

    Slip slowly down some path worn smooth and even,
    Down to a cool sea on a summer day;
    Yet still in slipping there was some small leaven

    Of stretched hands catching small stones by the way,
    Until one surely reached the sea at last,
    And felt strange new joy as the worn head lay

    Back, with the hair like sea-weed; yea all past
    Sweat of the forehead, dryness of the lips,
    Washed utterly out by the dear waves o'ercast,

    In the lone sea, far off from any ships!
    Do I not know now of a day in Spring?
    No minute of that wild day ever slips

    From out my memory; I hear thrushes sing,
    And wheresoever I may be, straightway
    Thoughts of it all come up with most fresh sting:

    I was half mad with beauty on that day,
    And went without my ladies all alone,
    In a quiet garden walled round every way;

    I was right joyful of that wall of stone,
    That shut the flowers and trees up with the sky,
    And trebled all the beauty: to the bone,

    Yea right through to my heart, grown very shy
    With weary thoughts, it pierced, and made me glad;
    Exceedingly glad, and I knew verily,

    A little thing just then had made me mad;
    I dared not think, as I was wont to do,
    Sometimes, upon my beauty; If I had

    Held out my long hand up against the blue,
    And, looking on the tenderly darken'd fingers,
    Thought that by rights one ought to see quite through,

    There, see you, where the soft still light yet lingers,
    Round by the edges; what should I have done,
    If this had joined with yellow spotted singers,

    And startling green drawn upward by the sun?
    But shouting, loosed out, see now! all my hair,
    And trancedly stood watching the west wind run

    With faintest half-heard breathing sound; why there
    I lose my head e'en now in doing this;
    But shortly listen: In that garden fair

    Came Launcelot walking; this is true, the kiss
    Wherewith we kissed in meeting that spring day,
    I scarce dare talk of the remember'd bliss,

    When both our mouths went wandering in one way,
    And aching sorely, met among the leaves;
    Our hands being left behind strained far away.

    Never within a yard of my bright sleeves
    Had Launcelot come before: and now, so nigh!
    After that day why is it Guenevere grieves?

    Nevertheless you, O Sir Gauwaine, lie,
    Whatever happened on through all those years,
    God knows I speak truth, saying that you lie.

    Being such a lady could I weep these tears
    If this were true? A great queen such as I
    Having sinn'd this way, straight her conscience sears;

    And afterwards she liveth hatefully,
    Slaying and poisoning, certes never weeps:
    Gauwaine be friends now, speak me lovingly.

    Do I not see how God's dear pity creeps
    All through your frame, and trembles in your mouth?
    Remember in what grave your mother sleeps,

    Buried in some place far down in the south,
    Men are forgetting as I speak to you;
    By her head sever'd in that awful drouth

    Of pity that drew Agravaine's fell blow,
    I pray your pity! let me not scream out
    For ever after, when the shrill winds blow

    Through half your castle-locks! let me not shout
    For ever after in the winter night
    When you ride out alone! in battle-rout

    Let not my rusting tears make your sword light!
    Ah! God of mercy, how he turns away!
    So, ever must I dress me to the fight,

    So: let God's justice work! Gauwaine, I say,
    See me hew down your proofs: yea all men know
    Even as you said how Mellyagraunce one day,

    One bitter day in _la Fausse Garde_, for so
    All good knights held it after, saw:
    Yea, sirs, by cursed unknightly outrage; though

    You, Gauwaine, held his word without a flaw,
    This Mellyagraunce saw blood upon my bed:
    Whose blood then pray you? is there any law

    To make a queen say why some spots of red
    Lie on her coverlet? or will you say:
    Your hands are white, lady, as when you wed,

    Where did you bleed? and must I stammer out, Nay,
    I blush indeed, fair lord, only to rend
    My sleeve up to my shoulder, where there lay

    A knife-point last night: so must I defend
    The honour of the Lady Guenevere?
    Not so, fair lords, even if the world should end

    This very day, and you were judges here
    Instead of God. Did you see Mellyagraunce
    When Launcelot stood by him? what white fear

    Curdled his blood, and how his teeth did dance,
    His side sink in? as my knight cried and said:
    Slayer of unarm'd men, here is a chance!

    Setter of traps, I pray you guard your head,
    By God I am so glad to fight with you,
    Stripper of ladies, that my hand feels lead

    For driving weight; hurrah now! draw and do,
    For all my wounds are moving in my breast,
    And I am getting mad with waiting so.

    He struck his hands together o'er the beast,
    Who fell down flat, and grovell'd at his feet,
    And groan'd at being slain so young: At least,

    My knight said, rise you, sir, who are so fleet
    At catching ladies, half-arm'd will I fight,
    My left side all uncovered! then I weet,

    Up sprang Sir Mellyagraunce with great delight
    Upon his knave's face; not until just then
    Did I quite hate him, as I saw my knight

    Along the lists look to my stake and pen
    With such a joyous smile, it made me sigh
    From agony beneath my waist-chain, when

    The fight began, and to me they drew nigh;
    Ever Sir Launcelot kept him on the right,
    And traversed warily, and ever high

    And fast leapt caitiff's sword, until my knight
    Sudden threw up his sword to his left hand,
    Caught it, and swung it; that was all the fight,

    Except a spout of blood on the hot land;
    For it was hottest summer; and I know
    I wonder'd how the fire, while I should stand,

    And burn, against the heat, would quiver so,
    Yards above my head; thus these matters went;
    Which things were only warnings of the woe

    That fell on me. Yet Mellyagraunce was shent,
    For Mellyagraunce had fought against the Lord;
    Therefore, my lords, take heed lest you be blent

    With all this wickedness; say no rash word
    Against me, being so beautiful; my eyes,
    Wept all away to grey, may bring some sword

    To drown you in your blood; see my breast rise,
    Like waves of purple sea, as here I stand;
    And how my arms are moved in wonderful wise,

    Yea also at my full heart's strong command,
    See through my long throat how the words go up
    In ripples to my mouth; how in my hand

    The shadow lies like wine within a cup
    Of marvellously colour'd gold; yea now
    This little wind is rising, look you up,

    And wonder how the light is falling so
    Within my moving tresses: will you dare,
    When you have looked a little on my brow,

    To say this thing is vile? or will you care
    For any plausible lies of cunning woof,
    When you can see my face with no lie there

    For ever? am I not a gracious proof:
    But in your chamber Launcelot was found:
    Is there a good knight then would stand aloof,

    When a queen says with gentle queenly sound:
    O true as steel come now and talk with me,
    I love to see your step upon the ground

    Unwavering, also well I love to see
    That gracious smile light up your face, and hear
    Your wonderful words, that all mean verily

    The thing they seem to mean: good friend, so dear
    To me in everything, come here to-night,
    Or else the hours will pass most dull and drear;

    If you come not, I fear this time I might
    Get thinking over much of times gone by,
    When I was young, and green hope was in sight:

    For no man cares now to know why I sigh;
    And no man comes to sing me pleasant songs,
    Nor any brings me the sweet flowers that lie

    So thick in the gardens; therefore one so longs
    To see you, Launcelot; that we may be
    Like children once again, free from all wrongs

    Just for one night. Did he not come to me?
    What thing could keep true Launcelot away
    If I said, Come? there was one less than three

    In my quiet room that night, and we were gay;
    Till sudden I rose up, weak, pale, and sick,
    Because a bawling broke our dream up, yea

    I looked at Launcelot's face and could not speak,
    For he looked helpless too, for a little while;
    Then I remember how I tried to shriek,

    And could not, but fell down; from tile to tile
    The stones they threw up rattled o'er my head
    And made me dizzier; till within a while

    My maids were all about me, and my head
    On Launcelot's breast was being soothed away
    From its white chattering, until Launcelot said:

    By God! I will not tell you more to-day,
    Judge any way you will: what matters it?
    You know quite well the story of that fray,

    How Launcelot still'd their bawling, the mad fit
    That caught up Gauwaine: all, all, verily,
    But just that which would save me; these things flit.

    Nevertheless you, O Sir Gauwaine, lie,
    Whatever may have happen'd these long years,
    God knows I speak truth, saying that you lie!

    All I have said is truth, by Christ's dear tears.
    She would not speak another word, but stood
    Turn'd sideways; listening, like a man who hears

    His brother's trumpet sounding through the wood
    Of his foes' lances. She lean'd eagerly,
    And gave a slight spring sometimes, as she could

    At last hear something really; joyfully
    Her cheek grew crimson, as the headlong speed
    Of the roan charger drew all men to see,
    The knight who came was Launcelot at good need.




KING ARTHUR'S TOMB




KING ARTHUR'S TOMB


    Hot August noon: already on that day
      Since sunrise through the Wiltshire downs, most sad
    Of mouth and eye, he had gone leagues of way;
      Ay and by night, till whether good or bad

    He was, he knew not, though he knew perchance
      That he was Launcelot, the bravest knight
    Of all who since the world was, have borne lance,
      Or swung their swords in wrong cause or in right.

    Nay, he knew nothing now, except that where
      The Glastonbury gilded towers shine,
    A lady dwelt, whose name was Guenevere;
      This he knew also; that some fingers twine,

    Not only in a man's hair, even his heart,
      (Making him good or bad I mean,) but in his life,
    Skies, earth, men's looks and deeds, all that has part,
      Not being ourselves, in that half-sleep, half-strife,

    (Strange sleep, strange strife,) that men call living; so
      Was Launcelot most glad when the moon rose,
    Because it brought new memories of her. "Lo,
      Between the trees a large moon, the wind lows

    Not loud, but as a cow begins to low,
      Wishing for strength to make the herdsman hear:
    The ripe corn gathereth dew; yea, long ago,
      In the old garden life, my Guenevere

    Loved to sit still among the flowers, till night
      Had quite come on, hair loosen'd, for she said,
    Smiling like heaven, that its fairness might
      Draw up the wind sooner to cool her head.

    Now while I ride how quick the moon gets small,
      As it did then: I tell myself a tale
    That will not last beyond the whitewashed wall,
      Thoughts of some joust must help me through the vale,

    Keep this till after: How Sir Gareth ran
      A good course that day under my Queen's eyes,
    And how she sway'd laughing at Dinadan.
      No. Back again, the other thoughts will rise,

    And yet I think so fast 'twill end right soon:
      Verily then I think, that Guenevere,
    Made sad by dew and wind, and tree-barred moon,
      Did love me more than ever, was more dear

    To me than ever, she would let me lie
      And kiss her feet, or, if I sat behind,
    Would drop her hand and arm most tenderly,
      And touch my mouth. And she would let me wind

    Her hair around my neck, so that it fell
      Upon my red robe, strange in the twilight
    With many unnamed colours, till the bell
      Of her mouth on my cheek sent a delight

    Through all my ways of being; like the stroke
      Wherewith God threw all men upon the face
    When he took Enoch, and when Enoch woke
      With a changed body in the happy place.

    Once, I remember, as I sat beside,
      She turn'd a little, and laid back her head,
    And slept upon my breast; I almost died
      In those night-watches with my love and dread.

    There lily-like she bow'd her head and slept,
      And I breathed low, and did not dare to move,
    But sat and quiver'd inwardly, thoughts crept,
      And frighten'd me with pulses of my Love.

    The stars shone out above the doubtful green
      Of her bodice, in the green sky overhead;
    Pale in the green sky were the stars I ween,
      Because the moon shone like a star she shed

    When she dwelt up in heaven a while ago,
      And ruled all things but God: the night went on,
    The wind grew cold, and the white moon grew low,
      One hand had fallen down, and now lay on

    My cold stiff palm; there were no colours then
      For near an hour, and I fell asleep
    In spite of all my striving, even when
      I held her whose name-letters make me leap.

    I did not sleep long, feeling that in sleep
      I did some loved one wrong, so that the sun
    Had only just arisen from the deep
      Still land of colours, when before me one

    Stood whom I knew, but scarcely dared to touch,
      She seemed to have changed so in the night;
    Moreover she held scarlet lilies, such
      As Maiden Margaret bears upon the light

    Of the great church walls, natheless did I walk
      Through the fresh wet woods, and the wheat that morn,
    Touching her hair and hand and mouth, and talk
      Of love we held, nigh hid among the corn.

    Back to the palace, ere the sun grew high,
      We went, and in a cool green room all day
    I gazed upon the arras giddily,
      Where the wind set the silken kings a-sway.

    I could not hold her hand, or see her face;
      For which may God forgive me! but I think,
    Howsoever, that she was not in that place.
      These memories Launcelot was quick to drink;

    And when these fell, some paces past the wall,
      There rose yet others, but they wearied more,
    And tasted not so sweet; they did not fall
      So soon, but vaguely wrenched his strained heart sore

    In shadowy slipping from his grasp: these gone,
      A longing followed; if he might but touch
    That Guenevere at once! Still night, the lone
      Grey horse's head before him vex'd him much,

    In steady nodding over the grey road:
      Still night, and night, and night, and emptied heart
    Of any stories; what a dismal load
      Time grew at last, yea, when the night did part,

    And let the sun flame over all, still there
      The horse's grey ears turn'd this way and that,
    And still he watch'd them twitching in the glare
      Of the morning sun, behind them still he sat,

    Quite wearied out with all the wretched night,
      Until about the dustiest of the day,
    On the last down's brow he drew his rein in sight
      Of the Glastonbury roofs that choke the way.

    And he was now quite giddy as before,
      When she slept by him, tired out, and her hair
    Was mingled with the rushes on the floor,
      And he, being tired too, was scarce aware

    Of her presence; yet as he sat and gazed,
      A shiver ran throughout him, and his breath
    Came slower, he seem'd suddenly amazed,
      As though he had not heard of Arthur's death.

    This for a moment only, presently
      He rode on giddy still, until he reach'd
    A place of apple-trees, by the thorn-tree
      Wherefrom St. Joseph in the days past preached.

    Dazed there he laid his head upon a tomb,
      Not knowing it was Arthur's, at which sight
    One of her maidens told her, 'He is come,'
      And she went forth to meet him; yet a blight

    Had settled on her, all her robes were black,
      With a long white veil only; she went slow,
    As one walks to be slain, her eyes did lack
      Half her old glory, yea, alas! the glow

    Had left her face and hands; this was because
      As she lay last night on her purple bed,
    Wishing for morning, grudging every pause
      Of the palace clocks, until that Launcelot's head

    Should lie on her breast, with all her golden hair
      Each side: when suddenly the thing grew drear,
    In morning twilight, when the grey downs bare
      Grew into lumps of sin to Guenevere.

    At first she said no word, but lay quite still,
      Only her mouth was open, and her eyes
    Gazed wretchedly about from hill to hill;
      As though she asked, not with so much surprise

    As tired disgust, what made them stand up there
      So cold and grey. After, a spasm took
    Her face, and all her frame, she caught her hair,
      All her hair, in both hands, terribly she shook,

    And rose till she was sitting in the bed,
      Set her teeth hard, and shut her eyes and seem'd
    As though she would have torn it from her head,
      Natheless she dropp'd it, lay down, as she deem'd

    It matter'd not whatever she might do:
      O Lord Christ! pity on her ghastly face!
    Those dismal hours while the cloudless blue
      Drew the sun higher: He did give her grace;

    Because at last she rose up from her bed,
      And put her raiment on, and knelt before
    The blessed rood, and with her dry lips said,
      Muttering the words against the marble floor:

    'Unless you pardon, what shall I do, Lord,
      But go to hell? and there see day by day
    Foul deed on deed, hear foulest word on word,
      For ever and ever, such as on the way

    To Camelot I heard once from a churl,
      That curled me up upon my jennet's neck
    With bitter shame; how then, Lord, should I curl
      For ages and for ages? dost thou reck

    That I am beautiful, Lord, even as you
      And your dear mother? why did I forget
    You were so beautiful, and good, and true,
      That you loved me so, Guenevere? O yet

    If even I go to hell, I cannot choose
      But love you, Christ, yea, though I cannot keep
    From loving Launcelot; O Christ! must I lose
      My own heart's love? see, though I cannot weep,

    Yet am I very sorry for my sin;
      Moreover, Christ, I cannot bear that hell,
    I am most fain to love you, and to win
      A place in heaven some time: I cannot tell:

    Speak to me, Christ! I kiss, kiss, kiss your feet;
      Ah! now I weep!' The maid said, 'By the tomb
    He waiteth for you, lady,' coming fleet,
      Not knowing what woe filled up all the room.

    So Guenevere rose and went to meet him there,
      He did not hear her coming, as he lay
    On Arthur's head, till some of her long hair
      Brush'd on the new-cut stone: 'Well done! to pray

    For Arthur, my dear Lord, the greatest king
      That ever lived.' 'Guenevere! Guenevere!
    Do you not know me, are you gone mad? fling
      Your arms and hair about me, lest I fear

    You are not Guenevere, but some other thing.'
      'Pray you forgive me, fair lord Launcelot!
    I am not mad, but I am sick; they cling,
      God's curses, unto such as I am; not

    Ever again shall we twine arms and lips.'
      'Yea, she is mad: thy heavy law, O Lord,
    Is very tight about her now, and grips
      Her poor heart, so that no right word

    Can reach her mouth; so, Lord, forgive her now,
      That she not knowing what she does, being mad,
    Kills me in this way; Guenevere, bend low
      And kiss me once! for God's love kiss me! sad

    Though your face is, you look much kinder now;
      Yea once, once for the last time kiss me, lest I die.'
    'Christ! my hot lips are very near his brow,
      Help me to save his soul! Yea, verily,

    Across my husband's head, fair Launcelot!
      Fair serpent mark'd with V upon the head!
    This thing we did while yet he was alive,
      Why not, O twisting knight, now he is dead?

    Yea, shake! shake now and shiver! if you can
      Remember anything for agony,
    Pray you remember how when the wind ran
      One cool spring evening through fair aspen-tree,

    And elm and oak about the palace there,
      The king came back from battle, and I stood
    To meet him, with my ladies, on the stair,
      My face made beautiful with my young blood.'

    'Will she lie now, Lord God?' 'Remember too,
      Wrung heart, how first before the knights there came
    A royal bier, hung round with green and blue,
      About it shone great tapers with sick flame.

    And thereupon Lucius, the Emperor,
      Lay royal-robed, but stone-cold now and dead,
    Not able to hold sword or sceptre more,
      But not quite grim; because his cloven head

    Bore no marks now of Launcelot's bitter sword,
      Being by embalmers deftly solder'd up;
    So still it seem'd the face of a great lord,
      Being mended as a craftsman mends a cup.

    Also the heralds sung rejoicingly
      To their long trumpets; Fallen under shield,
    Here lieth Lucius, King of Italy,
      Slain by Lord Launcelot in open field.

    Thereat the people shouted: Launcelot!
      And through the spears I saw you drawing nigh,
    You and Lord Arthur: nay, I saw you not,
      But rather Arthur, God would not let die,

    I hoped, these many years; he should grow great,
      And in his great arms still encircle me,
    Kissing my face, half blinded with the heat
      Of king's love for the queen I used to be.

    Launcelot, Launcelot, why did he take your hand,
      When he had kissed me in his kingly way?
    Saying: This is the knight whom all the land
      Calls Arthur's banner, sword, and shield to-day;

    Cherish him, love. Why did your long lips cleave
      In such strange way unto my fingers then?
    So eagerly glad to kiss, so loath to leave
      When you rose up? Why among helmed men

    Could I always tell you by your long strong arms,
      And sway like an angel's in your saddle there?
    Why sicken'd I so often with alarms
      Over the tilt-yard? Why were you more fair

    Than aspens in the autumn at their best?
      Why did you fill all lands with your great fame,
    So that Breuse even, as he rode, fear'd lest
      At turning of the way your shield should flame?

    Was it nought then, my agony and strife?
      When as day passed by day, year after year,
    I found I could not live a righteous life!
      Didst ever think queens held their truth for dear?

    O, but your lips say: Yea, but she was cold
      Sometimes, always uncertain as the spring;
    When I was sad she would be overbold,
      Longing for kisses. When war-bells did ring,

    The back-toll'd bells of noisy Camelot.
      'Now, Lord God, listen! listen, Guenevere,
    Though I am weak just now, I think there's not
      A man who dares to say: You hated her,

    And left her moaning while you fought your fill
      In the daisied meadows! lo you her thin hand,
    That on the carven stone can not keep still,
      Because she loves me against God's command,

    Has often been quite wet with tear on tear,
      Tears Launcelot keeps somewhere, surely not
    In his own heart, perhaps in Heaven, where
      He will not be these ages.' 'Launcelot!

    Loud lips, wrung heart! I say when the bells rang,
      The noisy back-toll'd bells of Camelot,
    There were two spots on earth, the thrushes sang
      In the lonely gardens where my love was not,

    Where I was almost weeping; I dared not
      Weep quite in those days, lest one maid should say,
    In tittering whispers: Where is Launcelot
      To wipe with some kerchief those tears away?

    Another answer sharply with brows knit,
      And warning hand up, scarcely lower though:
    You speak too loud, see you, she heareth it,
      This tigress fair has claws, as I well know,

    As Launcelot knows too, the poor knight! well-a-day!
      Why met he not with Iseult from the West,
    Or better still, Iseult of Brittany?
      Perchance indeed quite ladyless were best.

    Alas, my maids, you loved not overmuch
      Queen Guenevere, uncertain as sunshine
    In March; forgive me! for my sin being such,
      About my whole life, all my deeds did twine,

    Made me quite wicked; as I found out then,
      I think; in the lonely palace where each morn
    We went, my maids and I, to say prayers when
      They sang mass in the chapel on the lawn.

    And every morn I scarce could pray at all,
      For Launcelot's red-golden hair would play,
    Instead of sunlight, on the painted wall,
      Mingled with dreams of what the priest did say;

    Grim curses out of Peter and of Paul;
      Judging of strange sins in Leviticus;
    Another sort of writing on the wall,
      Scored deep across the painted heads of us.

    Christ sitting with the woman at the well,
      And Mary Magdalen repenting there,
    Her dimmed eyes scorch'd and red at sight of hell
      So hardly 'scaped, no gold light on her hair.

    And if the priest said anything that seemed
      To touch upon the sin they said we did,
    (This in their teeth) they looked as if they deem'd
      That I was spying what thoughts might be hid

    Under green-cover'd bosoms, heaving quick
      Beneath quick thoughts; while they grew red with shame,
    And gazed down at their feet: while I felt sick,
      And almost shriek'd if one should call my name.

    The thrushes sang in the lone garden there:
      But where you were the birds were scared I trow:
    Clanging of arms about pavilions fair,
      Mixed with the knights' laughs; there, as I well know,

    Rode Launcelot, the king of all the band,
      And scowling Gauwaine, like the night in day,
    And handsome Gareth, with his great white hand
      Curl'd round the helm-crest, ere he join'd the fray;

    And merry Dinadan with sharp dark face,
      All true knights loved to see; and in the fight
    Great Tristram, and though helmed you could trace
      In all his bearing the frank noble knight;

    And by him Palomydes, helmet off,
      He fought, his face brush'd by his hair,
    Red heavy swinging hair; he fear'd a scoff
      So overmuch, though what true knight would dare

    To mock that face, fretted with useless care,
      And bitter useless striving after love?
    O Palomydes, with much honour bear
      Beast Glatysaunt upon your shield, above

    Your helm that hides the swinging of your hair,
      And think of Iseult, as your sword drives through
    Much mail and plate: O God, let me be there
      A little time, as I was long ago!

    Because stout Gareth lets his spear fall low,
      Gauwaine and Launcelot, and Dinadan
    Are helm'd and waiting; let the trumpets go!
      Bend over, ladies, to see all you can!

    Clench teeth, dames, yea, clasp hands, for Gareth's spear
      Throws Kay from out his saddle, like a stone
    From a castle-window when the foe draws near:
      Iseult! Sir Dinadan rolleth overthrown.

    Iseult! again: the pieces of each spear
      Fly fathoms up, and both the great steeds reel;
    Tristram for Iseult! Iseult! and Guenevere!
      The ladies' names bite verily like steel.

    They bite: bite me, Lord God! I shall go mad,
      Or else die kissing him, he is so pale,
    He thinks me mad already, O bad! bad!
      Let me lie down a little while and wail.'

    'No longer so, rise up, I pray you, love,
      And slay me really, then we shall be heal'd,
    Perchance, in the aftertime by God above.'
      'Banner of Arthur, with black-bended shield

    Sinister-wise across the fair gold ground!
      Here let me tell you what a knight you are,
    O sword and shield of Arthur! you are found
      A crooked sword, I think, that leaves a scar

    On the bearer's arm, so be he thinks it straight,
      Twisted Malay's crease beautiful blue-grey,
    Poison'd with sweet fruit; as he found too late,
      My husband Arthur, on some bitter day!

    O sickle cutting hemlock the day long!
      That the husbandman across his shoulder hangs,
    And, going homeward about evensong,
      Dies the next morning, struck through by the fangs!

    Banner, and sword, and shield, you dare not die,
      Lest you meet Arthur in the other world,
    And, knowing who you are, he pass you by,
      Taking short turns that he may watch you curl'd,

    Body and face and limbs in agony,
      Lest he weep presently and go away,
    Saying: I loved him once, with a sad sigh,
      Now I have slain him, Lord, let me go too, I pray.
                                      [Launcelot _falls_.

    Alas! alas! I know not what to do,
      If I run fast it is perchance that I
    May fall and stun myself, much better so,
      Never, never again! not even when I die.'

              LAUNCELOT, _on awaking_.

    'I stretch'd my hands towards her and fell down,
      How long I lay in swoon I cannot tell:
    My head and hands were bleeding from the stone,
      When I rose up, also I heard a bell.'




SIR GALAHAD, A CHRISTMAS MYSTERY




SIR GALAHAD, A CHRISTMAS MYSTERY


    It is the longest night in all the year,
      Near on the day when the Lord Christ was born;
    Six hours ago I came and sat down here,
      And ponder'd sadly, wearied and forlorn.

    The winter wind that pass'd the chapel door,
      Sang out a moody tune, that went right well
    With mine own thoughts: I look'd down on the floor,
      Between my feet, until I heard a bell

    Sound a long way off through the forest deep,
      And toll on steadily; a drowsiness
    Came on me, so that I fell half asleep,
      As I sat there not moving: less and less

    I saw the melted snow that hung in beads
      Upon my steel-shoes; less and less I saw
    Between the tiles the bunches of small weeds:
      Heartless and stupid, with no touch of awe

    Upon me, half-shut eyes upon the ground,
      I thought: O Galahad! the days go by,
    Stop and cast up now that which you have found,
      So sorely you have wrought and painfully.

    Night after night your horse treads down alone
      The sere damp fern, night after night you sit
    Holding the bridle like a man of stone,
      Dismal, unfriended: what thing comes of it?

    And what if Palomydes also ride,
      And over many a mountain and bare heath
    Follow the questing beast with none beside?
      Is he not able still to hold his breath

    With thoughts of Iseult? doth he not grow pale
      With weary striving, to seem best of all
    To her, 'as she is best,' he saith? to fail
      Is nothing to him, he can never fall.

    For unto such a man love-sorrow is
      So dear a thing unto his constant heart,
    That even if he never win one kiss,
      Or touch from Iseult, it will never part.

    And he will never know her to be worse
      Than in his happiest dreams he thinks she is:
    Good knight, and faithful, you have 'scaped the curse
      In wonderful-wise; you have great store of bliss.

    Yea, what if Father Launcelot ride out,
      Can he not think of Guenevere's arms, round
    Warm and lithe, about his neck, and shout
      Till all the place grows joyful with the sound?

    And when he lists can often see her face,
      And think, 'Next month I kiss you, or next week,
    And still you think of me': therefore the place
      Grows very pleasant, whatsoever he seek.

    But me, who ride alone, some carle shall find
      Dead in my arms in the half-melted snow,
    When all unkindly with the shifting wind,
      The thaw comes on at Candlemas: I know

    Indeed that they will say: 'This Galahad
      If he had lived had been a right good knight;
    Ah! poor chaste body!' but they will be glad,
      Not most alone, but all, when in their sight

    That very evening in their scarlet sleeves
      The gay-dress'd minstrels sing; no maid will talk
    Of sitting on my tomb, until the leaves,
      Grown big upon the bushes of the walk,

    East of the Palace-pleasaunce, make it hard
      To see the minster therefrom: well-a-day!
    Before the trees by autumn were well bared,
      I saw a damozel with gentle play,

    Within that very walk say last farewell
      To her dear knight, just riding out to find
    (Why should I choke to say it?) the Sangreal,
      And their last kisses sunk into my mind,

    Yea, for she stood lean'd forward on his breast,
      Rather, scarce stood; the back of one dear hand,
    That it might well be kiss'd, she held and press'd
      Against his lips; long time they stood there, fann'd

    By gentle gusts of quiet frosty wind,
      Till Mador de la porte a-going by,
    And my own horsehoofs roused them; they untwined,
      And parted like a dream. In this way I,

    With sleepy face bent to the chapel floor,
      Kept musing half asleep, till suddenly
    A sharp bell rang from close beside the door,
      And I leapt up when something pass'd me by,

    Shrill ringing going with it, still half blind
      I stagger'd after, a great sense of awe
    At every step kept gathering on my mind,
      Thereat I have no marvel, for I saw

    One sitting on the altar as a throne,
      Whose face no man could say he did not know,
    And though the bell still rang, he sat alone,
      With raiment half blood-red, half white as snow.

    Right so I fell upon the floor and knelt,
      Not as one kneels in church when mass is said,
    But in a heap, quite nerveless, for I felt
      The first time what a thing was perfect dread.

    But mightily the gentle voice came down:
      'Rise up, and look and listen, Galahad,
    Good knight of God, for you will see no frown
      Upon my face; I come to make you glad.

    For that you say that you are all alone,
      I will be with you always, and fear not
    You are uncared for, though no maiden moan
      Above your empty tomb; for Launcelot,

    He in good time shall be my servant too,
      Meantime, take note whose sword first made him knight,
    And who has loved him alway, yea, and who
      Still trusts him alway, though in all men's sight,

    He is just what you know, O Galahad,
      This love is happy even as you say,
    But would you for a little time be glad,
      To make ME sorry long, day after day?

    Her warm arms round his neck half throttle ME,
      The hot love-tears burn deep like spots of lead,
    Yea, and the years pass quick: right dismally
      Will Launcelot at one time hang his head;

    Yea, old and shrivell'd he shall win my love.
      Poor Palomydes fretting out his soul!
    Not always is he able, son, to move
      His love, and do it honour: needs must roll

    The proudest destrier sometimes in the dust,
      And then 'tis weary work; he strives beside
    Seem better than he is, so that his trust
      Is always on what chances may betide;

    And so he wears away, my servant, too,
      When all these things are gone, and wretchedly
    He sits and longs to moan for Iseult, who
      Is no care now to Palomydes: see,

    O good son Galahad, upon this day,
      Now even, all these things are on your side,
    But these you fight not for; look up, I say,
      And see how I can love you, for no pride

    Closes your eyes, no vain lust keeps them down.
      See now you have ME always; following
    That holy vision, Galahad, go on,
      Until at last you come to ME to sing

    In Heaven always, and to walk around
      The garden where I am.' He ceased, my face
    And wretched body fell upon the ground;
      And when I look'd again, the holy place

    Was empty; but right so the bell again
      Came to the chapel-door, there entered
    Two angels first, in white, without a stain,
      And scarlet wings, then, after them, a bed

    Four ladies bore, and set it down beneath
      The very altar-step, and while for fear
    I scarcely dared to move or draw my breath,
      Those holy ladies gently came a-near,

    And quite unarm'd me, saying: 'Galahad,
      Rest here awhile and sleep, and take no thought
    Of any other thing than being glad;
      Hither the Sangreal will be shortly brought,

    Yet must you sleep the while it stayeth here.'
      Right so they went away, and I, being weary,
    Slept long and dream'd of Heaven: the bell comes near,
      I doubt it grows to morning. Miserere!

 _Enter Two Angels in white, with scarlet wings; also, Four Ladies in
     gowns of red and green; also an Angel, bearing in his hands a
     surcoat of white, with a red cross._

              AN ANGEL.

    O servant of the high God, Galahad!
      Rise and be arm'd: the Sangreal is gone forth
    Through the great forest, and you must be had
      Unto the sea that lieth on the north:

    There shall you find the wondrous ship wherein
      The spindles of King Solomon are laid,
    And the sword that no man draweth without sin,
      But if he be most pure: and there is stay'd,

    Hard by, Sir Launcelot, whom you will meet
      In some short space upon that ship: first, though,
    Will come here presently that lady sweet,
      Sister of Percival, whom you well know,

    And with her Bors and Percival: stand now,
      These ladies will to arm you.

              FIRST LADY, _putting on the hauberk_.

                                    Galahad,
    That I may stand so close beneath your brow,
      I, Margaret of Antioch, am glad.

              SECOND LADY, _girding him with the sword_.

    That I may stand and touch you with my hand,
      O Galahad, I, Cecily, am glad.

              THIRD LADY, _buckling on the spurs_.

    That I may kneel while up above you stand,
      And gaze at me, O holy Galahad,

    I, Lucy, am most glad.

              FOURTH LADY, _putting on the basnet_.

                            O gentle knight,
      That you bow down to us in reverence,
    We are most glad, I, Katherine, with delight
      Must needs fall trembling.

              ANGEL, _putting on the crossed surcoat_.

                                Galahad, we go hence,

    For here, amid the straying of the snow,
      Come Percival's sister, Bors, and Percival.
                      [_The Four Ladies carry out the bed,
                            and all go but_ Galahad.

              GALAHAD.

    How still and quiet everything seems now:
      They come, too, for I hear the horsehoofs fall.

              _Enter_ Sir Bors, Sir Percival, _and_ his Sister.

    Fair friends and gentle lady, God you save!
      A many marvels have been here to-night;
    Tell me what news of Launcelot you have,
      And has God's body ever been in sight?

              SIR BORS.

    Why, as for seeing that same holy thing,
      As we were riding slowly side by side,
    An hour ago, we heard a sweet voice sing,
      And through the bare twigs saw a great light glide,

    With many-colour'd raiment, but far off;
      And so pass'd quickly: from the court nought good;
    Poor merry Dinadan, that with jape and scoff
      Kept us all merry, in a little wood

    Was found all hack'd and dead: Sir Lionel
      And Gauwaine have come back from the great quest,
    Just merely shamed; and Lauvaine, who loved well
      Your father Launcelot, at the king's behest

    Went out to seek him, but was almost slain,
      Perhaps is dead now; everywhere
    The knights come foil'd from the great quest, in vain;
      In vain they struggle for the vision fair.




THE CHAPEL IN LYONESS




THE CHAPEL IN LYONESS


 SIR OZANA LE CURE HARDY. SIR GALAHAD. SIR BORS DE GANYS.

              SIR OZANA.

    All day long and every day,
    From Christmas-Eve to Whit-Sunday,
    Within that Chapel-aisle I lay,
      And no man came a-near.

    Naked to the waist was I,
    And deep within my breast did lie,
    Though no man any blood could spy,
      The truncheon of a spear.

    No meat did ever pass my lips
    Those days. Alas! the sunlight slips
    From off the gilded parclose, dips,
      And night comes on apace.

    My arms lay back behind my head;
    Over my raised-up knees was spread
    A samite cloth of white and red;
      A rose lay on my face.

    Many a time I tried to shout;
    But as in dream of battle-rout,
    My frozen speech would not well out;
      I could not even weep.

    With inward sigh I see the sun
    Fade off the pillars one by one,
    My heart faints when the day is done,
      Because I cannot sleep.

    Sometimes strange thoughts pass through my head;
    Not like a tomb is this my bed,
    Yet oft I think that I am dead;
      That round my tomb is writ,

    'Ozana of the hardy heart,
      Knight of the Table Round,
    Pray for his soul, lords, of your part;
      A true knight he was found.'
    Ah! me, I cannot fathom it.      [_He sleeps._

              SIR GALAHAD.

    All day long and every day,
    Till his madness pass'd away,
    I watch'd Ozana as he lay
      Within the gilded screen.

    All my singing moved him not;
    As I sung my heart grew hot,
    With the thought of Launcelot
      Far away, I ween.

    So I went a little space
    From out the chapel, bathed my face
    In the stream that runs apace
      By the churchyard wall.

    There I pluck'd a faint wild rose,
    Hard by where the linden grows,
    Sighing over silver rows
      Of the lilies tall.

    I laid the flower across his mouth;
    The sparkling drops seem'd good for drouth;
    He smiled, turn'd round towards the south.
      Held up a golden tress.

    The light smote on it from the west;
    He drew the covering from his breast,
    Against his heart that hair he prest;
      Death him soon will bless.

              SIR BORS.

    I enter'd by the western door;
      I saw a knight's helm lying there:
    I raised my eyes from off the floor,
      And caught the gleaming of his hair.

    I stept full softly up to him;
      I laid my chin upon his head;
    I felt him smile; my eyes did swim,
      I was so glad he was not dead.

    I heard Ozana murmur low,
      'There comes no sleep nor any love.'
    But Galahad stoop'd and kiss'd his brow:
      He shiver'd; I saw his pale lips move.

              SIR OZANA.

    There comes no sleep nor any love;
      Ah me! I shiver with delight.
    I am so weak I cannot move;
      God move me to thee, dear, to-night!
    Christ help! I have but little wit:
    My life went wrong; I see it writ,

    'Ozana of the hardy heart,
      Knight of the Table Round,
    Pray for his soul, lords, on your part;
      A good knight he was found.'

    Now I begin to fathom it.      [_He dies._

              SIR BORS.

    Galahad sits dreamily;
    What strange things may his eyes see,
    Great blue eyes fix'd full on me?
    On his soul, Lord, have mercy.

              SIR GALAHAD.

    Ozana, shall I pray for thee?
    Her cheek is laid to thine;
    No long time hence, also I see
      Thy wasted fingers twine

    Within the tresses of her hair
      That shineth gloriously,
    Thinly outspread in the clear air
      Against the jasper sea.




SIR PETER HARPDON'S END




SIR PETER HARPDON'S END


 _In an English Castle in Poictou._

 Sir Peter Harpdon, _a Gascon knight in the English service, and_ John
     Curzon, _his lieutenant_.

              JOHN CURZON.

    Of those three prisoners, that before you came
    We took down at St. John's hard by the mill,
    Two are good masons; we have tools enough,
    And you have skill to set them working.


              SIR PETER.

                                            So:
    What are their names?

              JOHN CURZON.

                          Why, Jacques Aquadent,
    And Peter Plombiere, but,

              SIR PETER.

                              What colour'd hair
    Has Peter now? has Jacques got bow legs?

              JOHN CURZON.

    Why, sir, you jest: what matters Jacques' hair,
    Or Peter's legs to us?

              SIR PETER.

                            O! John, John, John!
    Throw all your mason's tools down the deep well,
    Hang Peter up and Jacques; They're no good,
    We shall not build, man.

              JOHN CURZON (_going_).

                              Shall I call the guard
    To hang them, sir? and yet, sir, for the tools,
    We'd better keep them still; sir, fare you well.
                                      [_Muttering as he goes._
    What have I done that he should jape at me?
    And why not build? the walls are weak enough,
    And we've two masons and a heap of tools.
                                      [_Goes, still muttering._

              SIR PETER.

    To think a man should have a lump like that
    For his lieutenant! I must call him back,
    Or else, as surely as St. George is dead,
    He'll hang our friends the masons: here, John! John!

              JOHN CURZON.

    At your good service, sir.

              SIR PETER.

                                Come now, and talk
    This weighty matter out; there, we've no stone
    To mend our walls with, neither brick nor stone.

              JOHN CURZON.

    There is a quarry, sir, some ten miles off.

              SIR PETER.

    We are not strong enough to send ten men
    Ten miles to fetch us stone enough to build.
    In three hours' time they would be taken or slain,
    The cursed Frenchmen ride abroad so thick.

              JOHN CURZON.

    But we can send some villaynes to get stone.

              SIR PETER.

    Alas! John, that we cannot bring them back,
    They would go off to Clisson or Sanxere,
    And tell them we were weak in walls and men,
    Then down go we; for, look you, times are changed,
    And now no longer does the country shake
    At sound of English names; our captains fade
    From off our muster-rolls. At Lusac bridge
    I daresay you may even yet see the hole
    That Chandos beat in dying; far in Spain
    Pembroke is prisoner; Phelton prisoner here;
    Manny lies buried in the Charterhouse;
    Oliver Clisson turn'd these years agone;
    The Captal died in prison; and, over all,
    Edward the prince lies underneath the ground,
    Edward the king is dead, at Westminster
    The carvers smooth the curls of his long beard.
    Everything goes to rack--eh! and we too.
    Now, Curzon, listen; if they come, these French,
    Whom have I got to lean on here, but you?
    A man can die but once, will you die then,
    Your brave sword in your hand, thoughts in your heart
    Of all the deeds we have done here in France--
    And yet may do? So God will have your soul,
    Whoever has your body.

              JOHN CURZON.

                            Why, sir, I
    Will fight till the last moment, until then
    Will do whate'er you tell me. Now I see
    We must e'en leave the walls; well, well, perhaps
    They're stronger than I think for; pity, though!
    For some few tons of stone, if Guesclin comes.

              SIR PETER.

    Farewell, John, pray you watch the Gascons well,
    I doubt them.

              JOHN CURZON.

                  Truly, sir, I will watch well.      [_Goes._

              SIR PETER.

    Farewell, good lump! and yet, when all is said,
    'Tis a good lump. Why then, if Guesclin comes;
    Some dozen stones from his petrariae,
    And, under shelter of his crossbows, just
    An hour's steady work with pickaxes,
    Then a great noise--some dozen swords and glaives
    A-playing on my basnet all at once,
    And little more cross purposes on earth
    For me.
            Now this is hard: a month ago,
    And a few minutes' talk had set things right
    'Twixt me and Alice; if she had a doubt,
    As, may Heaven bless her! I scarce think she had,
    'Twas but their hammer, hammer in her ears,
    Of how Sir Peter fail'd at Lusac Bridge:
    And how he was grown moody of late days;
    And how Sir Lambert, think now! his dear friend,
    His sweet, dear cousin, could not but confess
    That Peter's talk tended towards the French,
    Which he, for instance Lambert, was glad of,
    Being, Lambert, you see, on the French side.
                                                  Well,
    If I could but have seen her on that day,
    Then, when they sent me off!
                                  I like to think,
    Although it hurts me, makes my head twist, what,
    If I had seen her, what I should have said,
    What she, my darling, would have said and done.
    As thus perchance.
                        To find her sitting there,
    In the window-seat, not looking well at all,
    Crying perhaps, and I say quietly:
    Alice! she looks up, chokes a sob, looks grave,
    Changes from pale to red, but, ere she speaks,
    Straightway I kneel down there on both my knees,
    And say: O lady, have I sinn'd, your knight?
    That still you ever let me walk alone
    In the rose garden, that you sing no songs
    When I am by, that ever in the dance
    You quietly walk away when I come near?
    Now that I have you, will you go, think you?

      Ere she could answer I would speak again,
    Still kneeling there.
                          What! they have frighted you,
    By hanging burs, and clumsily carven puppets,
    Round my good name; but afterwards, my love,
    I will say what this means; this moment, see!
    Do I kneel here, and can you doubt me? Yea:
    For she would put her hands upon my face:
    Yea, that is best, yea feel, love, am I changed?
    And she would say: Good knight, come, kiss my lips!
    And afterwards as I sat there would say:

    Please a poor silly girl by telling me
    What all those things they talk of really were,
    For it is true you did not help Chandos,
    And true, poor love! you could not come to me
    When I was in such peril.
                              I should say:
    I am like Balen, all things turn to blame.
    I did not come to you? At Bergerath
    The constable had held us close shut up,
    If from the barriers I had made three steps,
    I should have been but slain; at Lusac, too,
    We struggled in a marish half the day,
    And came too late at last: you know, my love,
    How heavy men and horses are all arm'd.
    All that Sir Lambert said was pure, unmix'd,
    Quite groundless lies; as you can think, sweet love.

    She, holding tight my hand as we sat there,
    Started a little at Sir Lambert's name,
    But otherwise she listen'd scarce at all
    To what I said. Then with moist, weeping eyes,
    And quivering lips, that scarcely let her speak,
    She said: I love you.
                          Other words were few,
    The remnant of that hour; her hand smooth'd down
    My foolish head; she kiss'd me all about
    My face, and through the tangles of my beard
    Her little fingers crept!

                              O God, my Alice,
    Not this good way: my lord but sent and said
    That Lambert's sayings were taken at their worth,
    Therefore that day I was to start, and keep
    This hold against the French; and I am here:
                                [_Looks out of the window._
    A sprawling lonely garde with rotten walls,
    And no one to bring aid if Guesclin comes,
    Or any other.
                  There's a pennon now!
    At last.
              But not the constable's: whose arms,
    I wonder, does it bear? Three golden rings
    On a red ground; my cousin's by the rood!
    Well, I should like to kill him, certainly,
    But to be kill'd by him:      [_A trumpet sounds._
                              That's for a herald;
    I doubt this does not mean assaulting yet.

              _Enter_ John Curzon.

    What says the herald of our cousin, sir?

              JOHN CURZON.

    So please you, sir, concerning your estate,
    He has good will to talk with you.

              SIR PETER.

                                        Outside,
    I'll talk with him, close by the gate St. Ives.
    Is he unarm'd?

              JOHN CURZON.

                    Yea, sir, in a long gown.

              SIR PETER.

    Then bid them bring me hither my furr'd gown
    With the long sleeves, and under it I'll wear,
    By Lambert's leave, a secret coat of mail;
    And will you lend me, John, your little axe?
    I mean the one with Paul wrought on the blade?
    And I will carry it inside my sleeve,
    Good to be ready always; you, John, go
    And bid them set up many suits of arms,
    Bows, archgays, lances, in the base-court, and
    Yourself, from the south postern setting out,
    With twenty men, be ready to break through
    Their unguarded rear when I cry out, St. George!

              JOHN CURZON.

    How, sir! will you attack him unawares,
    And slay him unarm'd?

              SIR PETER.

                          Trust me, John, I know
    The reason why he comes here with sleeved gown,
    Fit to hide axes up. So, let us go.      [_They go._


 _Outside the castle by the great gate;_ Sir Lambert _and_ Sir Peter
     _seated; guards attending each, the rest of_ Sir Lambert's _men
     drawn up about a furlong off._

              SIR PETER.

    And if I choose to take the losing side
    Still, does it hurt you?

              SIR LAMBERT.

                              O! no hurt to me;
    I see you sneering, Why take trouble then,
    Seeing you love me not? Look you, our house
    (Which, taken altogether, I love much)
    Had better be upon the right side now,
    If, once for all, it wishes to bear rule
    As such a house should: cousin, you're too wise
    To feed your hope up fat, that this fair France
    Will ever draw two ways again; this side
    The French, wrong-headed, all a-jar
    With envious longings; and the other side
    The order'd English, orderly led on
    By those two Edwards through all wrong and right,
    And muddling right and wrong to a thick broth
    With that long stick, their strength. This is all changed,
    The true French win, on either side you have
    Cool-headed men, good at a tilting match,
    And good at setting battles in array,
    And good at squeezing taxes at due time;
    Therefore by nature we French being here
    Upon our own big land:      [_Sir Peter laughs aloud._
                            Well, Peter! well!
    What makes you laugh?

              SIR PETER.

                          Hearing you sweat to prove
    All this I know so well; but you have read
    The siege of Troy?

              SIR LAMBERT.

                      O! yea, I know it well.

              SIR PETER.

    There! they were wrong, as wrong as men could be
    For, as I think, they found it such delight
    To see fair Helen going through their town;
    Yea, any little common thing she did
    (As stooping to pick a flower) seem'd so strange,
    So new in its great beauty, that they said:
    Here we will keep her living in this town,
    Till all burns up together. And so, fought,
    In a mad whirl of knowing they were wrong;
    Yea, they fought well, and ever, like a man
    That hangs legs off the ground by both his hands,
    Over some great height, did they struggle sore,
    Quite sure to slip at last; wherefore, take note
    How almost all men, reading that sad siege,
    Hold for the Trojans; as I did at least,
    Thought Hector the best knight a long way:
                                                Now
    Why should I not do this thing that I think;
    For even when I come to count the gains,
    I have them my side: men will talk, you know
    (We talk of Hector, dead so long agone,)
    When I am dead, of how this Peter clung
    To what he thought the right; of how he died,
    Perchance, at last, doing some desperate deed
    Few men would care do now, and this is gain
    To me, as ease and money is to you.
    Moreover, too, I like the straining game
    Of striving well to hold up things that fall;
    So one becomes great. See you! in good times
    All men live well together, and you, too,
    Live dull and happy: happy? not so quick,
    Suppose sharp thoughts begin to burn you up?
    Why then, but just to fight as I do now,
    A halter round my neck, would be great bliss.
    O! I am well off.                            [_Aside._
                      Talk, and talk, and talk,
    I know this man has come to murder me,
    And yet I talk still.

              SIR LAMBERT.

                          If your side were right,
    You might be, though you lost; but if I said,
    'You are a traitor, being, as you are,
    Born Frenchman.' What are Edwards unto you,
    Or Richards?

              SIR PETER.

                  Nay, hold there, my Lambert, hold!
    For fear your zeal should bring you to some harm,
    Don't call me traitor.

              SIR LAMBERT.

                            Furthermore, my knight,
    Men call you slippery on your losing side,
    When at Bordeaux I was ambassador,
    I heard them say so, and could scarce say: Nay.
                             [_He takes hold of something in
                                  his sleeve, and rises._

              SIR PETER, _rising_.

    They lied: and you lie, not for the first time.
    What have you got there, fumbling up your sleeve,
    A stolen purse?

              SIR LAMBERT.

                    Nay, liar in your teeth!
    Dead liar too; St. Denis and St. Lambert!
                      [_Strikes at_ Sir Peter _with a dagger_.

              SIR PETER, _striking him flatlings with his axe_.

    How thief! thief! thief! so there, fair thief, so there,
    St. George Guienne! glaives for the castellan!
    You French, you are but dead, unless you lay
    Your spears upon the earth. St. George Guienne!

    Well done, John Curzon, how he has them now.


 _In the Castle._

              JOHN CURZON.

    What shall we do with all these prisoners, sir?

              SIR PETER.

    Why, put them all to ransom, those that can
    Pay anything, but not too light though, John,
    Seeing we have them on the hip: for those
    That have no money, that being certified,
    Why, turn them out of doors before they spy;
    But bring Sir Lambert guarded unto me.

              JOHN CURZON.

    I will, fair sir.                           [_He goes._

              SIR PETER.

                      I do not wish to kill him,
    Although I think I ought; he shall go mark'd,
    By all the saints, though!
              _Enter_ Lambert _guarded_.
                                Now, Sir Lambert, now!
    What sort of death do you expect to get,
    Being taken this way?

              SIR LAMBERT.

                          Cousin! cousin! think!
    I am your own blood; may God pardon me!
    I am not fit to die; if you knew all,
    All I have done since I was young and good.
    O! you would give me yet another chance,
    As God would, that I might wash all clear out,
    By serving you and Him. Let me go now!
    And I will pay you down more golden crowns
    Of ransom than the king would!

              SIR PETER.

                                    Well, stand back,
    And do not touch me! No, you shall not die,
    Nor yet pay ransom. You, John Curzon, cause
    Some carpenters to build a scaffold, high,
    Outside the gate; when it is built, sound out
    To all good folks, 'Come, see a traitor punish'd!'
    Take me my knight, and set him up thereon,
    And let the hangman shave his head quite clean,
    And cut his ears off close up to the head;
    And cause the minstrels all the while to play
    Soft music, and good singing; for this day
    Is my high day of triumph; is it not,
    Sir Lambert?

              SIR LAMBERT.

                  Ah! on your own blood,
    Own name, you heap this foul disgrace? you dare,
    With hands and fame thus sullied, to go back
    And take the lady Alice?

              SIR PETER.

                              Say her name
    Again, and you are dead, slain here by me.
    Why should I talk with you? I'm master here,
    And do not want your schooling; is it not
    My mercy that you are not dangling dead
    There in the gateway with a broken neck?

              SIR LAMBERT.

    Such mercy! why not kill me then outright?
    To die is nothing; but to live that all
    May point their fingers! yea, I'd rather die.

              JOHN CURZON.

    Why, will it make you any uglier man
    To lose your ears? they're much too big for you,
    You ugly Judas!

              SIR PETER.

                    Hold, John!      [_To_ Lambert.
                                That's your choice,
    To die, mind! Then you shall die: Lambert mine,
    I thank you now for choosing this so well,
    It saves me much perplexity and doubt;
    Perchance an ill deed too, for half I count
    This sparing traitors is an ill deed.
                                          Well,
    Lambert, die bravely, and we're almost friends.

              SIR LAMBERT, _grovelling_.

    O God! this is a fiend and not a man;
    Will some one save me from him? help, help, help!
    I will not die.

              SIR PETER.

                    Why, what is this I see?
    A man who is a knight, and bandied words
    So well just now with me, is lying down,
    Gone mad for fear like this! So, so, you thought
    You knew the worst, and might say what you pleased.
    I should have guess'd this from a man like you.
    Eh! righteous Job would give up skin for skin,
    Yea, all a man can have for simple life,
    And we talk fine, yea, even a hound like this,
    Who needs must know that when he dies, deep hell
    Will hold him fast for ever, so fine we talk,
    'Would rather die,' all that. Now sir, get up!
    And choose again: shall it be head sans ears,
    Or trunk sans head?
                        John Curzon, pull him up!
    What, life then? go and build the scaffold, John.
      Lambert, I hope that never on this earth
    We meet again; that you'll turn out a monk,
    And mend the life I give you, so farewell,
    I'm sorry you're a rascal. John, despatch.


 _In the French camp before the Castle._

 Sir Peter _prisoner_, Guesclin, Clisson, Sir Lambert.

              SIR PETER.

    So now is come the ending of my life;
    If I could clear this sickening lump away
    That sticks in my dry throat, and say a word,
    Guesclin might listen.

              GUESCLIN.

                            Tell me, fair sir knight,
    If you have been clean liver before God,
    And then you need not fear much; as for me,
    I cannot say I hate you, yet my oath,
    And cousin Lambert's ears here clench the thing.

              SIR PETER.

    I knew you could not hate me, therefore I
    Am bold to pray for life; 'twill harm your cause
    To hang knights of good name, harms here in France
    I have small doubt, at any rate hereafter
    Men will remember you another way
    Than I should care to be remember'd, ah!
    Although hot lead runs through me for my blood,
    All this falls cold as though I said, Sweet lords,
    Give back my falcon!
                          See how young I am,
    Do you care altogether more for France,
    Say rather one French faction, than for all
    The state of Christendom? a gallant knight,
    As (yea, by God!) I have been, is more worth
    Than many castles; will you bring this death,
    For a mere act of justice, on my head?

      Think how it ends all, death! all other things
    Can somehow be retrieved, yea, send me forth
    Naked and maimed, rather than slay me here;
    Then somehow will I get me other clothes,
    And somehow will I get me some poor horse,
    And, somehow clad in poor old rusty arms,
    Will ride and smite among the serried glaives,
    Fear not death so; for I can tilt right well,
    Let me not say I could; I know all tricks,
    That sway the sharp sword cunningly; ah you,
    You, my Lord Clisson, in the other days
    Have seen me learning these, yea, call to mind,
    How in the trodden corn by Chartres town,
    When you were nearly swooning from the back
    Of your black horse, those three blades slid at once
    From off my sword's edge; pray for me, my lord!

              CLISSON.

    Nay, this is pitiful, to see him die.
    My Lord the Constable, I pray you note
    That you are losing some few thousand crowns
    By slaying this man; also think: his lands
    Along the Garonne river lie for leagues,
    And are right rich, a many mills he has,
    Three abbeys of grey monks do hold of him:
    Though wishing well for Clement, as we do,
    I know the next heir, his old uncle, well,
    Who does not care two deniers for the knight
    As things go now, but slay him, and then see,
    How he will bristle up like any perch,
    With curves of spears. What! do not doubt, my lord,
    You'll get the money, this man saved my life,
    And I will buy him for two thousand crowns;
    Well, five then: eh! what! No again? well then,
    Ten thousand crowns?

              GUESCLIN.

                          My sweet lord, much I grieve
    I cannot please you, yea, good sooth, I grieve
    This knight must die, as verily he must;
    For I have sworn it, so men take him out,
    Use him not roughly.

              SIR LAMBERT, _coming forward_.

                          Music, do you know,
    Music will suit you well, I think, because
    You look so mild, like Laurence being grill'd;
    Or perhaps music soft and slow, because
    This is high day of triumph unto me,
    Is it not, Peter?
                      You are frighten'd, though,
    Eh! you are pale, because this hurts you much,
    Whose life was pleasant to you, not like mine,
    You ruin'd wretch! Men mock me in the streets,
    Only in whispers loud, because I am
    Friend of the constable; will this please you,
    Unhappy Peter? once a-going home,
    Without my servants, and a little drunk,
    At midnight through the lone dim lamp-lit streets.
    A whore came up and spat into my eyes,
    Rather to blind me than to make me see,
    But she was very drunk, and tottering back,
    Even in the middle of her laughter fell
    And cut her head against the pointed stones,
    While I lean'd on my staff, and look'd at her,
    And cried, being drunk.
                            Girls would not spit at you.
    You are so handsome, I think verily
    Most ladies would be glad to kiss your eyes,
    And yet you will be hung like a cur dog
    Five minutes hence, and grow black in the face,
    And curl your toes up. Therefore I am glad.

      Guess why I stand and talk this nonsense now,
    With Guesclin getting ready to play chess,
    And Clisson doing something with his sword,
    I can't see what, talking to Guesclin though,
    I don't know what about, perhaps of you.
    But, cousin Peter, while I stroke your beard,
    Let me say this, I'd like to tell you now
    That your life hung upon a game of chess,
    That if, say, my squire Robert here should beat,
    Why you should live, but hang if I beat him;
    Then guess, clever Peter, what I should do then:
    Well, give it up? why, Peter, I should let
    My squire Robert beat me, then you would think
    That you were safe, you know; Eh? not at all,
    But I should keep you three days in some hold,
    Giving you salt to eat, which would be kind,
    Considering the tax there is on salt;
    And afterwards should let you go, perhaps?
    No I should not, but I should hang you, sir,
    With a red rope in lieu of mere grey rope.

    But I forgot, you have not told me yet
    If you can guess why I talk nonsense thus,
    Instead of drinking wine while you are hang'd?
    You are not quick at guessing, give it up.
    This is the reason; here I hold your hand,
    And watch you growing paler, see you writhe
    And this, my Peter, is a joy so dear,
    I cannot by all striving tell you how
    I love it, nor I think, good man, would you
    Quite understand my great delight therein;
    You, when you had me underneath you once,
    Spat as it were, and said, 'Go take him out,'
    That they might do that thing to me whereat,
    E'en now this long time off I could well shriek,
    And then you tried forget I ever lived,
    And sunk your hating into other things;
    While I: St. Denis! though, I think you'll faint,
    Your lips are grey so; yes, you will, unless
    You let it out and weep like a hurt child;
    Hurrah! you do now. Do not go just yet,
    For I am Alice, am right like her now,
    Will you not kiss me on the lips, my love?

              CLISSON.

    You filthy beast, stand back and let him go,
    Or by God's eyes I'll choke you!
                              [_Kneeling to_ Sir Peter.
                                      Fair sir knight
    I kneel upon my knees and pray to you
    That you would pardon me for this your death;
    God knows how much I wish you still alive,
    Also how heartily I strove to save
    Your life at this time; yea, he knows quite well,
    (I swear it, so forgive me!) how I would,
    If it were possible, give up my life
    Upon this grass for yours; fair knight, although,
    He knowing all things knows this thing too, well,
    Yet when you see his face some short time hence,
    Tell him I tried to save you.

              SIR PETER.

                                  O! my lord,
    I cannot say this is as good as life,
    But yet it makes me feel far happier now,
    And if at all, after a thousand years,
    I see God's face, I will speak loud and bold,
    And tell Him you were kind, and like Himself;
    Sir, may God bless you!
                            Did you note how I
    Fell weeping just now? pray you, do not think
    That Lambert's taunts did this, I hardly heard
    The base things that he said, being deep in thought
    Of all things that have happen'd since I was
    A little child; and so at last I thought
    Of my true lady: truly, sir, it seem'd
    No longer gone than yesterday, that this
    Was the sole reason God let me be born
    Twenty-five years ago, that I might love
    Her, my sweet lady, and be loved by her;
    This seem'd so yesterday, to-day death comes,
    And is so bitter strong, I cannot see
    Why I was born.
                    But as a last request,
    I pray you, O kind Clisson, send some man,
    Some good man, mind you, to say how I died,
    And take my last love to her: fare-you-well,
    And may God keep you; I must go now, lest
    I grow too sick with thinking on these things;
    Likewise my feet are wearied of the earth,
    From whence I shall be lifted upright soon.
                                           [_As he goes._
    Ah me! shamed too, I wept at fear of death;
    And yet not so, I only wept because
    There was no beautiful lady to kiss me
    Before I died, and sweetly wish good speed
    From her dear lips. O for some lady, though
    I saw her ne'er before; Alice, my love,
    I do not ask for; Clisson was right kind,
    If he had been a woman, I should die
    Without this sickness: but I am all wrong,
    So wrong, and hopelessly afraid to die.
    There, I will go.
                      My God! how sick I am,
    If only she could come and kiss me now.


 _The Hotel de la Barde, Bordeaux._

 _The_ Lady Alice de la Barde _looking out of a window into the street_.

    No news yet! surely, still he holds his own:
    That garde stands well; I mind me passing it
    Some months ago; God grant the walls are strong!
    I heard some knights say something yestereve,
    I tried hard to forget: words far apart
    Struck on my heart something like this; one said:
    What eh! a Gascon with an English name,
    Harpdon? then nought, but afterwards: Poictou.
    As one who answers to a question ask'd,
    Then carelessly regretful came: No, no.
    Whereto in answer loud and eagerly,
    One said: Impossible? Christ, what foul play!
    And went off angrily; and while thenceforth
    I hurried gaspingly afraid, I heard:
    Guesclin; Five thousand men-at-arms; Clisson.
    My heart misgives me it is all in vain
    I send these succours; and in good time there
    Their trumpet sounds: ah! here they are; good knights,
    God up in Heaven keep you.
                                If they come
    And find him prisoner, for I can't believe
    Guesclin will slay him, even though they storm.
    The last horse turns the corner.
                                      God in Heaven!
    What have I got to thinking of at last!
    That thief I will not name is with Guesclin,
    Who loves him for his lands. My love! my love!
    O, if I lose you after all the past,
    What shall I do?
                      I cannot bear the noise
    And light street out there, with this thought alive,
    Like any curling snake within my brain;
    Let me just hide my head within these soft
    Deep cushions, there to try and think it out.
                                [_Lying in the window-seat._
    I cannot hear much noise now, and I think
    That I shall go to sleep: it all sounds dim
    And faint, and I shall soon forget most things;
    Yea, almost that I am alive and here;
    It goes slow, comes slow, like a big mill-wheel
    On some broad stream, with long green weeds a-sway,
    And soft and slow it rises and it falls,
    Still going onward.
                        Lying so, one kiss,
    And I should be in Avalon asleep,
    Among the poppies, and the yellow flowers;
    And they should brush my cheek, my hair being spread
    Far out among the stems; soft mice and small
    Eating and creeping all about my feet,
    Red shod and tired; and the flies should come
    Creeping o'er my broad eyelids unafraid;
    And there should be a noise of water going,
    Clear blue fresh water breaking on the slates,
    Likewise the flies should creep: God's eyes! God help!
    A trumpet? I will run fast, leap adown
    The slippery sea-stairs, where the crabs fight.
                                                    Ah!
    I was half dreaming, but the trumpet's true;
    He stops here at our house. The Clisson arms?
    Ah, now for news. But I must hold my heart,
    And be quite gentle till he is gone out;
    And afterwards: but he is still alive,
    He must be still alive.

              _Enter a_ Squire _of_ Clisson's.

                            Good day, fair sir,
    I give you welcome, knowing whence you come.

              SQUIRE.

    My Lady Alice de la Barde, I come
    From Oliver Clisson, knight and mighty lord,
    Bringing you tidings: I make bold to hope
    You will not count me villain, even if
    They wring your heart, nor hold me still in hate;
    For I am but a mouthpiece after all,
    A mouthpiece, too, of one who wishes well
    To you and your's.

              ALICE.

                        Can you talk faster, sir,
    Get over all this quicker? fix your eyes
    On mine, I pray you, and whate'er you see,
    Still go on talking fast, unless I fall,
    Or bid you stop.

              SQUIRE.

                      I pray your pardon then,
    And, looking in your eyes, fair lady, say
    I am unhappy that your knight is dead.
    Take heart, and listen! let me tell you all.
    We were five thousand goodly men-at-arms,
    And scant five hundred had he in that hold:
    His rotten sand-stone walls were wet with rain,
    And fell in lumps wherever a stone hit;
    Yet for three days about the barrier there
    The deadly glaives were gather'd, laid across,
    And push'd and pull'd; the fourth our engines came;
    But still amid the crash of falling walls,
    And roar of lombards, rattle of hard bolts,
    The steady bow-strings flash'd, and still stream'd out
    St. George's banner, and the seven swords,
    And still they cried: St. George Guienne! until
    Their walls were flat as Jericho's of old,
    And our rush came, and cut them from the keep.

              ALICE.

    Stop, sir, and tell me if you slew him then,
    And where he died, if you can really mean
    That Peter Harpdon, the good knight, is dead?

              SQUIRE.

    Fair lady, in the base-court:

              ALICE.

                                  What base-court?
    What do you talk of? Nay, go on, go on;
    'Twas only something gone within my head:
    Do you not know, one turns one's head round quick,
    And something cracks there with sore pain? go on,
    And still look at my eyes.

              SQUIRE.

                                Almost alone,
    There in the base-court fought he with his sword,
    Using his left hand much, more than the wont
    Of most knights now-a-days; our men gave back,
    For wheresoever he hit a downright blow,
    Some one fell bleeding, for no plate could hold
    Against the sway of body and great arm;
    Till he grew tired, and some man (no! not I,
    I swear not I, fair lady, as I live!)
    Thrust at him with a glaive between the knees,
    And threw him; down he fell, sword undermost;
    Many fell on him, crying out their cries,
    Tore his sword from him, tore his helm off, and:

              ALICE.

    Yea, slew him: I am much too young to live,
    Fair God, so let me die!
                              You have done well,
    Done all your message gently, pray you go,
    Our knights will make you cheer; moreover, take
    This bag of franks for your expenses.
                                      [_The Squire kneels._
                                          But
    You do not go; still looking at my face,
    You kneel! what, squire, do you mock me then?
    You need not tell me who has set you on,
    But tell me only, 'tis a made-up tale.
    You are some lover may-be or his friend;
    Sir, if you loved me once, or your friend loved,
    Think, is it not enough that I kneel down
    And kiss your feet? your jest will be right good
    If you give in now; carry it too far,
    And 'twill be cruel: not yet? but you weep
    Almost, as though you loved me; love me then,
    And go to Heaven by telling all your sport,
    And I will kiss you then with all my heart,
    Upon the mouth: O! what can I do then
    To move you?

              SQUIRE.

                  Lady fair, forgive me still!
    You know I am so sorry, but my tale
    Is not yet finish'd:
                          So they bound his hands,
    And brought him tall and pale to Guesclin's tent,
    Who, seeing him, leant his head upon his hand,
    And ponder'd somewhile, afterwards, looking up:
    Fair dame, what shall I say?

              ALICE.

                                  Yea, I know now,
    Good squire, you may go now with my thanks.

              SQUIRE.

    Yet, lady, for your own sake I say this,
    Yea, for my own sake, too, and Clisson's sake.
    When Guesclin told him he must be hanged soon,
    Within a while he lifted up his head
    And spoke for his own life; not crouching, though,
    As abjectly afraid to die, nor yet
    Sullenly brave as many a thief will die,
    Nor yet as one that plays at japes with God:
    Few words he spoke; not so much what he said
    Moved us, I think, as, saying it, there played
    Strange tenderness from that big soldier there
    About his pleading; eagerness to live
    Because folk loved him, and he loved them back,
    And many gallant plans unfinish'd now
    For ever. Clisson's heart, which may God bless!
    Was moved to pray for him, but all in vain;
    Wherefore I bring this message:
                                    That he waits,
    Still loving you, within the little church
    Whose windows, with the one eye of the light
    Over the altar, every night behold
    The great dim broken walls he strove to keep!

    There my Lord Clisson did his burial well.
    Now, lady, I will go: God give you rest!

              ALICE.

    Thank Clisson from me, squire, and farewell!
    And now to keep myself from going mad.
    Christ! I have been a many times to church,
    And, ever since my mother taught me prayers,
    Have used them daily, but to-day I wish
    To pray another way; come face to face,
    O Christ, that I may clasp your knees and pray
    I know not what; at any rate come now
    From one of many places where you are,
    Either in Heaven amid thick angel wings,
    Or sitting on the altar strange with gems,
    Or high up in the duskness of the apse;
    Let us go, You and I, a long way off,
    To the little damp, dark, Poitevin church.
    While you sit on the coffin in the dark,
    Will I lie down, my face on the bare stone
    Between your feet, and chatter anything
    I have heard long ago. What matters it
    So I may keep you there, your solemn face
    And long hair even-flowing on each side,
    Until you love me well enough to speak,
    And give me comfort? yea, till o'er your chin,
    And cloven red beard the great tears roll down
    In pity for my misery, and I die,
    Kissed over by you.
                        Eh Guesclin! if I were
    Like Countess Mountfort now, that kiss'd the knight,
    Across the salt sea come to fight for her:
    Ah! just to go about with many knights,
    Wherever you went, and somehow on one day,
    In a thick wood to catch you off your guard,
    Let you find, you and your some fifty friends,
    Nothing but arrows wheresoe'er you turn'd,
    Yea, and red crosses, great spears over them;
    And so, between a lane of my true men,
    To walk up pale and stern and tall, and with
    My arms on my surcoat, and his therewith,
    And then to make you kneel, O knight Guesclin;
    And then: alas! alas! when all is said,
    What could I do but let you go again,
    Being pitiful woman? I get no revenge,
    Whatever happens; and I get no comfort:
    I am but weak, and cannot move my feet,
    But as men bid me.
                        Strange I do not die.
    Suppose this has not happen'd after all?
    I will lean out again and watch for news.

    I wonder how long I can still feel thus,
    As though I watch'd for news, feel as I did
    Just half-an-hour ago, before this news.
    How all the street is humming, some men sing,
    And some men talk; some look up at the house,
    Then lay their heads together and look grave:
    Their laughter pains me sorely in the heart;
    Their thoughtful talking makes my head turn round:
    Yea, some men sing, what is it then they sing?
    Eh? Launcelot, and love and fate and death:
    They ought to sing of him who was as wight
    As Launcelot or Wade, and yet avail'd
    Just nothing, but to fail and fail and fail,
    And so at last to die and leave me here,
    Alone and wretched; yea, perhaps they will,
    When many years are past, make songs of us:
    God help me, though, truly I never thought
    That I should make a story in this way,
    A story that his eyes can never see.

          [_One sings from outside._]

          _Therefore be it believed
          Whatsoever he grieved,
          When his horse was relieved,
              This Launcelot,_

          _Beat down on his knee,
          Right valiant was he
          God's body to see,
              Though he saw it not._

          _Right valiant to move,
          But for his sad love
          The high God above
              Stinted his praise._

          _Yet so he was glad
          That his son, Lord Galahad,
          That high joyaunce had
              All his life-days._

          _Sing we therefore then
          Launcelot's praise again,
          For he wan crownés ten,
              If he wan not twelve._

          _To his death from his birth
          He was mickle of worth,
          Lay him in the cold earth,
              A long grave ye may delve._

          _Omnes homines benedicite!
          This last fitte ye may see,
          All men pray for me
          Who made this history
          Cunning and fairly._




RAPUNZEL




RAPUNZEL


              THE PRINCE, _being in the wood near the tower, in the
                        evening_.

    I could not even think
      What made me weep that day,
    When out of the council-hall
      The courtiers pass'd away,--

              THE WITCH.

        Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
        Let down your hair!

              RAPUNZEL.

    Is it not true that every day
    She climbeth up the same strange way,
    Her scarlet cloak spread broad and gay,
        Over my golden hair?

              THE PRINCE.

    And left me there alone,
      To think on what they said:
    'Thou art a king's own son,
      'Tis fit that thou should'st wed.'

              THE WITCH.

        Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
        Let down your hair!

              RAPUNZEL.

    When I undo the knotted mass,
    Fathoms below the shadows pass
    Over my hair along the grass.
        O my golden hair!

              THE PRINCE.

    I put my armour on,
      Thinking on what they said:
    'Thou art a king's own son,
      'Tis fit that thou should'st wed.'

              THE WITCH.

        Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
        Let down your hair!

              RAPUNZEL.

    See on the marble parapet,
    I lean my brow, strive to forget
    That fathoms below my hair grows wet
        With the dew, my golden hair.

              THE PRINCE.

    I rode throughout the town,
      Men did not bow the head,
    Though I was the king's own son:
      He rides to dream, they said.

              THE WITCH.

        Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
        Wind up your hair!

              RAPUNZEL.

    See on the marble parapet,
    The faint red stains with tears are wet;
    The long years pass, no help comes yet
        To free my golden hair.

              THE PRINCE.

    For leagues and leagues I rode,
      Till hot my armour grew,
    Till underneath the leaves
      I felt the evening dew.

              THE WITCH.

        Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
        Weep through your hair!

              RAPUNZEL.

    And yet: but I am growing old,
    For want of love my heart is cold;
    Years pass, the while I loose and fold
        The fathoms of my hair.


              THE PRINCE, _in the morning_.

    I have heard tales of men, who in the night
      Saw paths of stars let down to earth from heaven,
    Who followed them until they reach'd the light
      Wherein they dwell, whose sins are all forgiven;

    But who went backward when they saw the gate
      Of diamond, nor dared to enter in;
    All their life long they were content to wait,
      Purging them patiently of every sin.

    I must have had a dream of some such thing,
      And now am just awaking from that dream;
    For even in grey dawn those strange words ring
      Through heart and brain, and still I see that gleam.

    For in my dream at sunset-time I lay
      Beneath these beeches, mail and helmet off,
    Right full of joy that I had come away
      From court; for I was patient of the scoff

    That met me always there from day to day,
      From any knave or coward of them all:
    I was content to live that wretched way;
      For truly till I left the council-hall,

    And rode forth arm'd beneath the burning sun,
      My gleams of happiness were faint and few,
    But then I saw my real life had begun,
      And that I should be strong quite well I knew.

    For I was riding out to look for love,
      Therefore the birds within the thickets sung,
    Even in hot noontide; as I pass'd, above
      The elms o'ersway'd with longing towards me hung.

    Now some few fathoms from the place where I
      Lay in the beech-wood, was a tower fair,
    The marble corners faint against the sky;
      And dreamily I wonder'd what lived there:

    Because it seem'd a dwelling for a queen,
      No belfry for the swinging of great bells.
    No bolt or stone had ever crush'd the green
      Shafts, amber and rose walls, no soot that tells

    Of the Norse torches burning up the roofs,
      On the flower-carven marble could I see;
    But rather on all sides I saw the proofs
      Of a great loneliness that sicken'd me;

    Making me feel a doubt that was not fear,
      Whether my whole life long had been a dream,
    And I should wake up soon in some place, where
      The piled-up arms of the fighting angels gleam;

    Not born as yet, but going to be born,
      No naked baby as I was at first,
    But an armed knight, whom fire, hate and scorn
      Could turn from nothing: my heart almost burst

    Beneath the beeches, as I lay a-dreaming,
      I tried so hard to read this riddle through,
    To catch some golden cord that I saw gleaming
      Like gossamer against the autumn blue.

    But while I ponder'd these things, from the wood
      There came a black-hair'd woman, tall and bold,
    Who strode straight up to where the tower stood,
      And cried out shrilly words, whereon behold--

              THE WITCH, _from the tower_.

                Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
                Let down your hair!

              THE PRINCE.

    Ah Christ! it was no dream then, but there stood
      (She comes again) a maiden passing fair,
    Against the roof, with face turn'd to the wood,
      Bearing within her arms waves of her yellow hair.

    I read my riddle when I saw her stand,
      Poor love! her face quite pale against her hair,
    Praying to all the leagues of empty land
      To save her from the woe she suffer'd there.

    To think! they trod upon her golden hair
      In the witches' sabbaths; it was a delight
    For these foul things, while she, with thin feet bare,
      Stood on the roof upon the winter night,

    To plait her dear hair into many plaits,
      And then, while God's eye look'd upon the thing,
    In the very likenesses of Devil's bats,
      Upon the ends of her long hair to swing.

    And now she stood above the parapet,
      And, spreading out her arms, let her hair flow,
    Beneath that veil her smooth white forehead set
      Upon the marble, more I do not know;

    Because before my eyes a film of gold
      Floated, as now it floats. O unknown love,
    Would that I could thy yellow stair behold,
      If still thou standest the lead roof above!

              THE WITCH, _as she passes_.

                Is there any who will dare
                To climb up the yellow stair,
                Glorious Rapunzel's golden hair?

              THE PRINCE.

    If it would please God make you sing again,
      I think that I might very sweetly die,
    My soul somehow reach heaven in joyous pain,
      My heavy body on the beech-nuts lie.

    Now I remember what a most strange year,
      Most strange and awful, in the beechen wood
    I have pass'd now; I still have a faint fear
      It is a kind of dream not understood.

    I have seen no one in this wood except
      The witch and her; have heard no human tones,
    But when the witches' revelry has crept
      Between the very jointing of my bones.

    Ah! I know now; I could not go away,
      But needs must stop to hear her sing that song
    She always sings at dawning of the day.
      I am not happy here, for I am strong,

    And every morning do I whet my sword,
      Yet Rapunzel still weeps within the tower,
    And still God ties me down to the green sward,
      Because I cannot see the gold stair floating lower.

              RAPUNZEL _sings from the tower_.

              My mother taught me prayers
              To say when I had need;
              I have so many cares,
              That I can take no heed
              Of many words in them;
              But I remember this:
              _Christ, bring me to thy bliss.
              Mary, maid withouten wem,
              Keep me!_ I am lone, I wis,
              Yet besides I have made this
              By myself: _Give me a kiss,
              Dear God dwelling up in heaven!_
              Also: _Send me a true knight,
              Lord Christ, with a steel sword, bright,
              Broad, and trenchant; yea, and seven
              Spans from hilt to point, O Lord!
              And let the handle of his sword
              Be gold on silver, Lord in heaven!
              Such a sword as I see gleam
              Sometimes, when they let me dream._

                Yea, besides, I have made this:
              _Lord, give Mary a dear kiss,
              And let gold Michael, who looked down,
              When I was there, on Rouen town
              From the spire, bring me that kiss
              On a lily! Lord do this!_

                These prayers on the dreadful nights,
              When the witches plait my hair,
              And the fearfullest of sights
              On the earth and in the air,
              Will not let me close my eyes,
              I murmur often, mix'd with sighs,
              That my weak heart will not hold
              At some things that I behold.
              Nay, not sighs, but quiet groans,
              That swell out the little bones
              Of my bosom; till a trance
              God sends in middle of that dance,
              And I behold the countenance
              Of Michael, and can feel no more
              The bitter east wind biting sore
              My naked feet; can see no more
              The crayfish on the leaden floor,
              That mock with feeler and grim claw.

                Yea, often in that happy trance,
              Beside the blessed countenance
              Of golden Michael, on the spire
              Glowing all crimson in the fire
              Of sunset, I behold a face,
              Which sometime, if God give me grace,
              May kiss me in this very place.


 _Evening in the tower._

              RAPUNZEL.

    It grows half way between the dark and light;
      Love, we have been six hours here alone:
    I fear that she will come before the night,
      And if she finds us thus we are undone.

              THE PRINCE.

    Nay, draw a little nearer, that your breath
      May touch my lips, let my cheek feel your arm;
    Now tell me, did you ever see a death,
      Or ever see a man take mortal harm?

              RAPUNZEL.

    Once came two knights and fought with swords below,
      And while they fought I scarce could look at all,
    My head swam so; after, a moaning low
      Drew my eyes down; I saw against the wall

    One knight lean dead, bleeding from head and breast,
      Yet seem'd it like a line of poppies red
    In the golden twilight, as he took his rest,
      In the dusky time he scarcely seemed dead.

    But the other, on his face, six paces off,
      Lay moaning, and the old familiar name
    He mutter'd through the grass, seem'd like a scoff
      Of some lost soul remembering his past fame.

    His helm all dinted lay beside him there,
      The visor-bars were twisted towards the face,
    The crest, which was a lady very fair,
      Wrought wonderfully, was shifted from its place.

    The shower'd mail-rings on the speedwell lay,
      Perhaps my eyes were dazzled with the light
    That blazed in the west, yet surely on that day
      Some crimson thing had changed the grass from bright

    Pure green I love so. But the knight who died
      Lay there for days after the other went;
    Until one day I heard a voice that cried:
      Fair knight, I see Sir Robert we were sent

    To carry dead or living to the king.
      So the knights came and bore him straight away
    On their lance truncheons, such a batter'd thing,
      His mother had not known him on that day,

    But for his helm-crest, a gold lady fair
      Wrought wonderfully.

              THE PRINCE.

                            Ah, they were brothers then,
    And often rode together, doubtless where
      The swords were thickest, and were loyal men,

    Until they fell in these same evil dreams.

              RAPUNZEL.

      Yea, love; but shall we not depart from hence?
    The white moon groweth golden fast, and gleams
      Between the aspens stems; I fear, and yet a sense

    Of fluttering victory comes over me,
      That will not let me fear aright; my heart,
    Feel how it beats, love, strives to get to thee;
      I breathe so fast that my lips needs must part;

    Your breath swims round my mouth, but let us go.

              THE PRINCE.

      I, Sebald, also, pluck from off the staff
    The crimson banner; let it lie below,
      Above it in the wind let grasses laugh.

    Now let us go, love, down the winding stair,
      With fingers intertwined: ay, feel my sword!
    I wrought it long ago, with golden hair
      Flowing about the hilts, because a word,

    Sung by a minstrel old, had set me dreaming
      Of a sweet bow'd down face with yellow hair;
    Betwixt green leaves I used to see it gleaming,
      A half smile on the lips, though lines of care

    Had sunk the cheeks, and made the great eyes hollow;
      What other work in all the world had I,
    But through all turns of fate that face to follow?
      But wars and business kept me there to die.

    O child, I should have slain my brother, too,
      My brother, Love, lain moaning in the grass,
    Had I not ridden out to look for you,
      When I had watch'd the gilded courtiers pass

    From the golden hall. But it is strange your name
      Is not the same the minstrel sung of yore;
    You call'd it Rapunzel, 'tis not the name.
      See, love, the stems shine through the open door.


 _Morning in the woods._

              RAPUNZEL.

    O love! me and my unknown name you have well won;
      The witch's name was Rapunzel: eh! not so sweet?
    No! but is this real grass, love, that I tread upon?
      What call they these blue flowers that lean across my feet?

              THE PRINCE.

    Dip down your dear face in the dewy grass, O love!
      And ever let the sweet slim harebells, tenderly hung,
    Kiss both your parted lips; and I will hang above,
      And try to sing that song the dreamy harper sung.

              _He sings._

          'Twixt the sunlight and the shade
          Float up memories of my maid:
                God, remember Guendolen!

          Gold or gems she did not wear,
          But her yellow rippled hair,
                Like a veil, hid Guendolen!

          'Twixt the sunlight and the shade,
          My rough hands so strangely made,
                Folded Golden Guendolen.

          Hands used to grip the sword-hilt hard,
          Framed her face, while on the sward
                Tears fell down from Guendolen.

          Guendolen now speaks no word,
          Hands fold round about the sword:
                Now no more of Guendolen.

          Only 'twixt the light and shade
          Floating memories of my maid
                Make me pray for Guendolen.

              GUENDOLEN.

    I kiss thee, new-found name! but I will never go:
      Your hands need never grip the hammer'd sword again,
    But all my golden hair shall ever round you flow,
      Between the light and shade from Golden Guendolen.


 _Afterwards, in the Palace._

              KING SEBALD.

    I took my armour off,
      Put on king's robes of gold;
    Over the kirtle green
      The gold fell fold on fold.

              THE WITCH, _out of hell_.

          _Guendolen! Guendolen!
          One lock of hair!_

              GUENDOLEN.

    I am so glad, for every day
    He kisses me much the same way
    As in the tower: under the sway
            Of all my golden hair.

              KING SEBALD.

    We rode throughout the town,
      A gold crown on my head;
    Through all the gold-hung streets,
      Praise God! the people said.

              THE WITCH.

          _Gwendolen! Guendolen!
          Lend me your hair!_

              GUENDOLEN.

    Verily, I seem like one
    Who, when day is almost done,
    Through a thick wood meets the sun
            That blazes in her hair.

              KING SEBALD.

    Yea, at the palace gates,
      Praise God! the great knights said,
    For Sebald the high king,
      And the lady's golden head.

              THE WITCH.

          _Woe is me! Guendolen
          Sweeps back her hair._

              GUENDOLEN.

    Nothing wretched now, no screams;
    I was unhappy once in dreams,
    And even now a harsh voice seems
                To hang about my hair.

              THE WITCH.

          WOE! THAT ANY MAN COULD DARE
          TO CLIMB UP THE YELLOW STAIR,
          GLORIOUS GUENDOLEN'S GOLDEN HAIR.




CONCERNING GEFFRAY TESTE NOIRE




CONCERNING GEFFRAY TESTE NOIRE


    And if you meet the Canon of Chimay,
      As going to Ortaise you well may do,
    Greet him from John of Castel Neuf, and say
      All that I tell you, for all this is true.

    This Geffray Teste Noire was a Gascon thief,
      Who, under shadow of the English name,
    Pilled all such towns and countries as were lief
      To King Charles and St. Denis; thought it blame

    If anything escaped him; so my lord,
      The Duke of Berry, sent Sir John Bonne Lance,
    And other knights, good players with the sword,
      To check this thief, and give the land a chance.

    Therefore we set our bastides round the tower
      That Geffray held, the strong thief! like a king,
    High perch'd upon the rock of Ventadour,
      Hopelessly strong by Christ! It was mid spring,

    When first I joined the little army there
      With ten good spears; Auvergne is hot, each day
    We sweated armed before the barrier;
      Good feats of arms were done there often. Eh?

    Your brother was slain there? I mind me now,
      A right good man-at-arms, God pardon him!
    I think 'twas Geffray smote him on the brow
      With some spiked axe, and while he totter'd, dim

    About the eyes, the spear of Alleyne Roux
      Slipped through his camaille and his throat; well, well!
    Alleyne is paid now; your name Alleyne too?
      Mary! how strange! but this tale I would tell:

    For spite of all our bastides, damned Blackhead
      Would ride abroad whene'er he chose to ride,
    We could not stop him; many a burgher bled
      Dear gold all round his girdle; far and wide

    The villaynes dwelt in utter misery
      'Twixt us and thief Sir Geffray; hauled this way
    By Sir Bonne Lance at one time; he gone by,
      Down comes this Teste Noire on another day.

    And therefore they dig up the stone, grind corn,
      Hew wood, draw water, yea, they lived, in short,
    As I said just now, utterly forlorn,
      Till this our knave and blackhead was out-fought.

    So Bonne Lance fretted, thinking of some trap
      Day after day, till on a time he said:
    John of Newcastle, if we have good hap,
      We catch our thief in two days. How? I said.

    Why, Sir, to-day he rideth out again,
      Hoping to take well certain sumpter mules
    From Carcassonne, going with little train,
      Because, forsooth, he thinketh us mere fools;

    But if we set an ambush in some wood,
      He is but dead: so, Sir, take thirty spears
    To Verville forest, if it seem you good.
      Then felt I like the horse in Job, who hears

    The dancing trumpet sound, and we went forth;
      And my red lion on the spear-head flapped,
    As faster than the cool wind we rode north,
      Towards the wood of Verville; thus it happed.

    We rode a soft pace on that day, while spies
      Got news about Sir Geffray: the red wine
    Under the road-side bush was clear; the flies,
      The dragon-flies I mind me most, did shine

    In brighter arms than ever I put on;
      So: Geffray, said our spies, would pass that way
    Next day at sundown: then he must be won;
      And so we enter'd Verville wood next day,

    In the afternoon; through it the highway runs,
      'Twixt copses of green hazel, very thick,
    And underneath, with glimmering of suns,
      The primroses are happy; the dews lick

    The soft green moss: 'Put cloths about your arms,
      Lest they should glitter; surely they will go
    In a long thin line, watchful for alarms,
      With all their carriages of booty; so,

    Lay down my pennon in the grass: Lord God.
      What have we lying here? will they be cold,
    I wonder, being so bare, above the sod,
      Instead of under? This was a knight too, fold

    Lying on fold of ancient rusted mail;
      No plate at all, gold rowels to the spurs,
    And see the quiet gleam of turquoise pale
      Along the ceinture; but the long time blurs

    Even the tinder of his coat to nought,
      Except these scraps of leather; see how white
    The skull is, loose within the coif! He fought
      A good fight, maybe, ere he was slain quite.

    No armour on the legs too; strange in faith!
      A little skeleton for a knight, though: ah!
    This one is bigger, truly without scathe
      His enemies escaped not! ribs driven out far;

    That must have reach'd the heart, I doubt: how now,
      What say you, Aldovrand, a woman? why?'
    Under the coif a gold wreath on the brow,
      Yea, see the hair not gone to powder, lie,

    Golden, no doubt, once: yea, and very small,
      This for a knight; but for a dame, my lord,
    These loose-hung bones seem shapely still, and tall.
      Didst ever see a woman's bones, my Lord?

    Often, God help me! I remember when
      I was a simple boy, fifteen years old,
    The Jacquerie froze up the blood of men
      With their fell deeds, not fit now to be told.

    God help again! we enter'd Beauvais town,
      Slaying them fast, whereto I help'd, mere boy
    As I was then; we gentles cut them down,
      These burners and defilers, with great joy.

    Reason for that, too, in the great church there
      These fiends had lit a fire, that soon went out,
    The church at Beauvais being so great and fair:
      My father, who was by me, gave a shout

    Between a beast's howl and a woman's scream,
      Then, panting, chuckled to me: 'John, look! look!
    Count the dames' skeletons!' From some bad dream
      Like a man just awaked, my father shook;

    And I, being faint with smelling the burnt bones,
      And very hot with fighting down the street,
    And sick of such a life, fell down, with groans
      My head went weakly nodding to my feet.

    --An arrow had gone through her tender throat,
      And her right wrist was broken; then I saw
    The reason why she had on that war-coat,
      Their story came out clear without a flaw;

    For when he knew that they were being waylaid,
      He threw it over her, yea, hood and all;
    Whereby he was much hack'd, while they were stay'd
      By those their murderers; many an one did fall

    Beneath his arm, no doubt, so that he clear'd
      Their circle, bore his death-wound out of it;
    But as they rode, some archer least afear'd
      Drew a strong bow, and thereby she was hit.

    Still as he rode he knew not she was dead,
      Thought her but fainted from her broken wrist,
    He bound with his great leathern belt: she bled?
      Who knows! he bled too, neither was there miss'd

    The beating of her heart, his heart beat well
      For both of them, till here, within this wood,
    He died scarce sorry; easy this to tell;
      After these years the flowers forget their blood.

    How could it be? never before that day,
      However much a soldier I might be,
    Could I look on a skeleton and say
      I care not for it, shudder not: now see,

    Over those bones I sat and pored for hours,
      And thought, and dream'd, and still I scarce could see
    The small white bones that lay upon the flowers,
      But evermore I saw the lady; she

    With her dear gentle walking leading in,
      By a chain of silver twined about her wrists,
    Her loving knight, mounted and arm'd to win
      Great honour for her, fighting in the lists.

    O most pale face, that brings such joy and sorrow
      Into men's hearts (yea, too, so piercing sharp
    That joy is, that it marcheth nigh to sorrow
      For ever, like an overwinded harp).

    Your face must hurt me always: pray you now,
      Doth it not hurt you too? seemeth some pain
    To hold you always, pain to hold your brow
      So smooth, unwrinkled ever; yea again,

    Your long eyes where the lids seem like to drop,
      Would you not, lady, were they shut fast, feel
    Far merrier? there so high they will not stop,
      They are most sly to glide forth and to steal

    Into my heart; I kiss their soft lids there,
      And in green gardens scarce can stop my lips
    From wandering on your face, but that your hair
      Falls down and tangles me, back my face slips.

    Or say your mouth, I saw you drink red wine
      Once at a feast; how slowly it sank in,
    As though you fear'd that some wild fate might twine
      Within that cup, and slay you for a sin.

    And when you talk your lips do arch and move
      In such wise that a language new I know
    Besides their sound; they quiver, too, with love
      When you are standing silent; know this, too,

    I saw you kissing once, like a curved sword
      That bites with all its edge, did your lips lie,
    Curled gently, slowly, long time could afford
      For caught-up breathings: like a dying sigh

    They gather'd up their lines and went away,
      And still kept twitching with a sort of smile,
    As likely to be weeping presently;
      Your hands too, how I watch'd them all the while!

    Cry out St. Peter now, quoth Aldovrand;
      I cried, St. Peter! broke out from the wood
    With all my spears; we met them hand to hand,
      And shortly slew them; natheless, by the rood,

    We caught not Blackhead then, or any day;
      Months after that he died at last in bed,
    From a wound pick'd up at a barrier-fray;
      That same year's end a steel bolt in the head,

    And much bad living killed Teste Noire at last;
      John Froissart knoweth he is dead by now,
    No doubt, but knoweth not this tale just past;
      Perchance then you can tell him what I show.

    In my new castle, down beside the Eure,
      There is a little chapel of squared stone,
    Painted inside and out; in green nook pure
      There did I lay them, every wearied bone;

    And over it they lay, with stone-white hands
      Clasped fast together, hair made bright with gold;
    This Jaques Picard, known through many lands,
      Wrought cunningly; he's dead now: I am old.




A GOOD KNIGHT IN PRISON


              SIR GUY, _being in the court of a Pagan castle_.

          This castle where I dwell, it stands
        A long way off from Christian lands,
        A long way off my lady's hands,
        A long way off the aspen trees,
        And murmur of the lime-tree bees.

          But down the Valley of the Rose
        My lady often hawking goes,
        Heavy of cheer; oft turns behind,
        Leaning towards the western wind,
        Because it bringeth to her mind
        Sad whisperings of happy times,
        The face of him who sings these rhymes.

          King Guilbert rides beside her there,
        Bends low and calls her very fair,
        And strives, by pulling down his hair,
        To hide from my dear lady's ken
        The grisly gash I gave him, when
        I cut him down at Camelot;
        However he strives, he hides it not,
        That tourney will not be forgot,
        Besides, it is King Guilbert's lot,
        Whatever he says she answers not.

          Now tell me, you that are in love,
        From the king's son to the wood-dove,
        Which is the better, he or I?

          For this king means that I should die
        In this lone Pagan castle, where
        The flowers droop in the bad air
        On the September evening.

          Look, now I take mine ease and sing,
        Counting as but a little thing
        The foolish spite of a bad king.

          For these vile things that hem me in,
        These Pagan beasts who live in sin,
        The sickly flowers pale and wan,
        The grim blue-bearded castellan,
        The stanchions half worn-out with rust,
        Whereto their banner vile they trust:
        Why, all these things I hold them just
        As dragons in a missal book,
        Wherein, whenever we may look,
        We see no horror, yea delight
        We have, the colours are so bright;
        Likewise we note the specks of white,
        And the great plates of burnish'd gold.

          Just so this Pagan castle old,
        And everything I can see there,
        Sick-pining in the marshland air,
        I note: I will go over now,
        Like one who paints with knitted brow,
        The flowers and all things one by one,
    From the snail on the wall to the setting sun.

          Four great walls, and a little one
        That leads down to the barbican,
        Which walls with many spears they man,
        When news comes to the castellan
        Of Launcelot being in the land.

          And as I sit here, close at hand
        Four spikes of sad sick sunflowers stand;
        The castellan with a long wand
        Cuts down their leaves as he goes by,
        Ponderingly, with screw'd-up eye,
        And fingers twisted in his beard.
        Nay, was it a knight's shout I heard?
        I have a hope makes me afeard:
        It cannot be, but if some dream
        Just for a minute made me deem
        I saw among the flowers there
        My lady's face with long red hair,
        Pale, ivory-colour'd dear face come,
        As I was wont to see her some
        Fading September afternoon,
        And kiss me, saying nothing, soon
        To leave me by myself again;
          Could I get this by longing? vain!

          The castellan is gone: I see
        On one broad yellow flower a bee
        Drunk with much honey.
                                Christ! again,
        Some distant knight's voice brings me pain,
        I thought I had forgot to feel,
        I never heard the blissful steel
        These ten years past; year after year,
        Through all my hopeless sojourn here,
        No Christian pennon has been near.
        Laus Deo! the dragging wind draws on
        Over the marshes, battle won,
        Knights' shouts, and axes hammering;
        Yea, quicker now the dint and ring
        Of flying hoofs; ah, castellan,
        When they come back count man for man,
        Say whom you miss.

              THE PAGANS, _from the battlements_.

                            Mahound to aid!
        Why flee ye so like men dismay'd?

              THE PAGANS, _from without_.

        Nay, haste! for here is Launcelot,
        Who follows quick upon us, hot
        And shouting with his men-at-arms.

              SIR GUY.

        Also the Pagans raise alarms,
        And ring the bells for fear; at last
        My prison walls will be well past.

              SIR LAUNCELOT, _from outside_.

        Ho! in the name of the Trinity,
        Let down the drawbridge quick to me,
        And open doors, that I may see
        Guy the good knight!

              THE PAGANS, _from the battlements_.

                              Nay, Launcelot,
        With mere big words ye win us not.

              SIR LAUNCELOT.

        Bid Miles bring up la perriere,
        And archers clear the vile walls there.
        Bring back the notches to the ear,
        Shoot well together! God to aid!
        These miscreants will be well paid.

        Hurrah! all goes together; Miles
        Is good to win my lady's smiles
        For his good shooting: Launcelot!
        On knights apace! this game is hot!

              SIR GUY _sayeth afterwards_.

        I said, I go to meet her now,
        And saying so, I felt a blow
        From some clench'd hand across my brow,
        And fell down on the sunflowers
        Just as a hammering smote my ears;
        After which this I felt in sooth,
        My bare hands throttling without ruth
        The hairy-throated castellan;
        Then a grim fight with those that ran
        To slay me, while I shouted: God
        For the Lady Mary! deep I trod
        That evening in my own red blood;
        Nevertheless so stiff I stood,
        That when the knights burst the old wood
        Of the castle-doors, I was not dead.

          I kiss the Lady Mary's head,
        Her lips, and her hair golden red,
        Because to-day we have been wed.




OLD LOVE


    You must be very old, Sir Giles,
      I said; he said: Yea, very old!
    Whereat the mournfullest of smiles
      Creased his dry skin with many a fold.

    They hammer'd out my basnet point
      Into a round salade, he said,
    The basnet being quite out of joint,
      Natheless the salade rasps my head.

    He gazed at the great fire awhile:
      And you are getting old, Sir John;
    (He said this with that cunning smile
      That was most sad) we both wear on;

    Knights come to court and look at me,
      With eyebrows up; except my lord,
    And my dear lady, none I see
      That know the ways of my old sword.

    (My lady! at that word no pang
      Stopp'd all my blood). But tell me, John,
    Is it quite true that Pagans hang
      So thick about the east, that on

    The eastern sea no Venice flag
      Can fly unpaid for? True, I said,
    And in such way the miscreants drag
      Christ's cross upon the ground, I dread

    That Constantine must fall this year.
      Within my heart, these things are small;
    This is not small, that things outwear
      I thought were made for ever, yea, all,

    All things go soon or late, I said.
      I saw the duke in court next day;
    Just as before, his grand great head
      Above his gold robes dreaming lay,

    Only his face was paler; there
      I saw his duchess sit by him;
    And she, she was changed more; her hair
      Before my eyes that used to swim,

    And make me dizzy with great bliss
      Once, when I used to watch her sit,
    Her hair is bright still, yet it is
      As though some dust were thrown on it.

    Her eyes are shallower, as though
      Some grey glass were behind; her brow
    And cheeks the straining bones show through,
      Are not so good for kissing now.

    Her lips are drier now she is
      A great duke's wife these many years,
    They will not shudder with a kiss
      As once they did, being moist with tears.

    Also her hands have lost that way
      Of clinging that they used to have;
    They look'd quite easy, as they lay
      Upon the silken cushions brave

    With broidery of the apples green
      My Lord Duke bears upon his shield.
    Her face, alas! that I have seen
      Look fresher than an April field,

    This is all gone now; gone also
      Her tender walking; when she walks
    She is most queenly I well know,
      And she is fair still. As the stalks

    Of faded summer-lilies are,
      So is she grown now unto me
    This spring-time, when the flowers star
      The meadows, birds sing wonderfully.

    I warrant once she used to cling
      About his neck, and kiss'd him so,
    And then his coming step would ring
      Joy-bells for her; some time ago.

    Ah! sometimes like an idle dream
      That hinders true life overmuch,
    Sometimes like a lost heaven, these seem.
      This love is not so hard to smutch.




THE GILLIFLOWER OF GOLD


    A golden gilliflower to-day
    I wore upon my helm alway,
    And won the prize of this tourney.
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    However well Sir Giles might sit,
    His sun was weak to wither it,
    Lord Miles's blood was dew on it:
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    Although my spear in splinters flew,
    From John's steel-coat, my eye was true;
    I wheel'd about, and cried for you,
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    Yea, do not doubt my heart was good,
    Though my sword flew like rotten wood,
    To shout, although I scarcely stood,
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    My hand was steady too, to take
    My axe from round my neck, and break
    John's steel-coat up for my love's sake.
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    When I stood in my tent again,
    Arming afresh, I felt a pain
    Take hold of me, I was so fain,
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    To hear: _Honneur aux fils des preux!_
    Right in my ears again, and shew
    The gilliflower blossom'd new.
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    The Sieur Guillaume against me came,
    His tabard bore three points of flame
    From a red heart: with little blame,
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    Our tough spears crackled up like straw;
    He was the first to turn and draw
    His sword, that had nor speck nor flaw;
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    But I felt weaker than a maid,
    And my brain, dizzied and afraid,
    Within my helm a fierce tune play'd,
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    Until I thought of your dear head,
    Bow'd to the gilliflower bed,
    The yellow flowers stain'd with red;
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    Crash! how the swords met: _giroflée!_
    The fierce tune in my helm would play,
    _La belle! la belle! jaune giroflée!
      Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    Once more the great swords met again:
    "_La belle! la belle!_" but who fell then?
    Le Sieur Guillaume, who struck down ten;
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    And as with mazed and unarm'd face,
    Toward my own crown and the Queen's place,
    They led me at a gentle pace.
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._

    I almost saw your quiet head
    Bow'd o'er the gilliflower bed,
    The yellow flowers stain'd with red.
      _Hah! hah! la belle jaune giroflée._




SHAMEFUL DEATH


    There were four of us about that bed;
      The mass-priest knelt at the side,
    I and his mother stood at the head,
      Over his feet lay the bride;
    We were quite sure that he was dead,
      Though his eyes were open wide.

    He did not die in the night,
      He did not die in the day,
    But in the morning twilight
      His spirit pass'd away,
    When neither sun nor moon was bright,
      And the trees were merely grey.

    He was not slain with the sword,
      Knight's axe, or the knightly spear,
    Yet spoke he never a word
      After he came in here;
    I cut away the cord
      From the neck of my brother dear.

    He did not strike one blow,
      For the recreants came behind,
    In a place where the hornbeams grow,
      A path right hard to find,
    For the hornbeam boughs swing so,
      That the twilight makes it blind.

    They lighted a great torch then,
      When his arms were pinion'd fast,
    Sir John the knight of the Fen,
      Sir Guy of the Dolorous Blast,
    With knights threescore and ten,
      Hung brave Lord Hugh at last.

    I am threescore and ten,
      And my hair is all turn'd grey,
    But I met Sir John of the Fen
      Long ago on a summer day,
    And am glad to think of the moment when
      I took his life away.

    I am threescore and ten,
      And my strength is mostly pass'd,
    But long ago I and my men,
      When the sky was overcast,
    And the smoke roll'd over the reeds of the fen,
      Slew Guy of the Dolorous Blast.

    And now, knights all of you,
      I pray you pray for Sir Hugh,
    A good knight and a true,
      And for Alice, his wife, pray too.




THE EVE OF CRECY


    Gold on her head, and gold on her feet,
    And gold where the hems of her kirtle meet,
    And a golden girdle round my sweet;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    Margaret's maids are fair to see,
    Freshly dress'd and pleasantly;
    Margaret's hair falls down to her knee;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    If I were rich I would kiss her feet;
    I would kiss the place where the gold hems meet,
    And the golden girdle round my sweet:
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    Ah me! I have never touch'd her hand;
    When the arriere-ban goes through the land,
    Six basnets under my pennon stand;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    And many an one grins under his hood:
    Sir Lambert du Bois, with all his men good,
    Has neither food nor firewood;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    If I were rich I would kiss her feet,
    And the golden girdle of my sweet,
    And thereabouts where the gold hems meet;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    Yet even now it is good to think,
    While my few poor varlets grumble and drink
    In my desolate hall, where the fires sink,
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    Of Margaret sitting glorious there,
    In glory of gold and glory of hair,
    And glory of glorious face most fair;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    Likewise to-night I make good cheer,
    Because this battle draweth near:
    For what have I to lose or fear?
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    For, look you, my horse is good to prance
    A right fair measure in this war-dance,
    Before the eyes of Philip of France;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    And sometime it may hap, perdie,
    While my new towers stand up three and three,
    And my hall gets painted fair to see,
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._

    That folks may say: Times change, by the rood,
    For Lambert, banneret of the wood,
    Has heaps of food and firewood;
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite;_

    And wonderful eyes, too, under the hood
    Of a damsel of right noble blood.
    St. Ives, for Lambert of the Wood!
        _Ah! qu'elle est belle La Marguerite._




THE JUDGMENT OF GOD


    Swerve to the left, son Roger, he said,
      When you catch his eyes through the helmet-slit,
    Swerve to the left, then out at his head,
      And the Lord God give you joy of it!

    The blue owls on my father's hood
      Were a little dimm'd as I turn'd away;
    This giving up of blood for blood
      Will finish here somehow to-day.

    So, when I walk'd out from the tent,
      Their howling almost blinded me;
    Yet for all that I was not bent
      By any shame. Hard by, the sea

    Made a noise like the aspens where
      We did that wrong, but now the place
    Is very pleasant, and the air
      Blows cool on any passer's face.

    And all the wrong is gather'd now
      Into the circle of these lists:
    Yea, howl out, butchers! tell me how
      His hands were cut off at the wrists;

    And how Lord Roger bore his face
      A league above his spear-point, high
    Above the owls, to that strong place
      Among the waters; yea, yea, cry:

    What a brave champion we have got!
      Sir Oliver, the flower of all
    The Hainault knights! The day being hot,
      He sat beneath a broad white pall,

    White linen over all his steel;
      What a good knight he look'd! his sword
    Laid thwart his knees; he liked to feel
      Its steadfast edge clear as his word.

    And he look'd solemn; how his love
      Smiled whitely on him, sick with fear!
    How all the ladies up above
      Twisted their pretty hands! so near

    The fighting was: Ellayne! Ellayne!
      They cannot love like you can, who
    Would burn your hands off, if that pain
      Could win a kiss; am I not true

    To you for ever? therefore I
      Do not fear death or anything;
    If I should limp home wounded, why,
      While I lay sick you would but sing,

    And soothe me into quiet sleep.
      If they spat on the recreant knight,
    Threw stones at him, and cursed him deep,
      Why then: what then? your hand would light

    So gently on his drawn-up face,
      And you would kiss him, and in soft
    Cool scented clothes would lap him, pace
      The quiet room and weep oft, oft

    Would turn and smile, and brush his cheek
      With your sweet chin and mouth; and in
    The order'd garden you would seek
      The biggest roses: any sin.

    And these say: No more now my knight,
      Or God's knight any longer: you,
    Being than they so much more white,
      So much more pure and good and true,

    Will cling to me for ever; there,
      Is not that wrong turn'd right at last
    Through all these years, and I wash'd clean?
      Say, yea, Ellayne; the time is past,

    Since on that Christmas-day last year
      Up to your feet the fire crept,
    And the smoke through the brown leaves sere
      Blinded your dear eyes that you wept;

    Was it not I that caught you then,
      And kiss'd you on the saddle-bow?
    Did not the blue owl mark the men
      Whose spears stood like the corn a-row?

    This Oliver is a right good knight,
      And must needs beat me, as I fear,
    Unless I catch him in the fight,
      My father's crafty way: John, here!

    Bring up the men from the south gate,
      To help me if I fall or win,
    For even if I beat, their hate
      Will grow to more than this mere grin.




THE LITTLE TOWER


    Up and away through the drifting rain!
    Let us ride to the Little Tower again,

    Up and away from the council board!
    Do on the hauberk, gird on the sword.

    The king is blind with gnashing his teeth,
    Change gilded scabbard to leather sheath:

    Though our arms are wet with the slanting rain,
    This is joy to ride to my love again:

    I laugh in his face when he bids me yield;
    Who knows one field from the other field,

    For the grey rain driveth all astray?
    Which way through the floods, good carle, I pray

    The left side yet! the left side yet!
    Till your hand strikes on the bridge parapet.

    Yea so: the causeway holdeth good
    Under the water? Hard as wood,

    Right away to the uplands; speed, good knight!
    Seven hours yet before the light.

    Shake the wet off on the upland road;
    My tabard has grown a heavy load.

    What matter? up and down hill after hill;
    Dead grey night for five hours still.

    The hill-road droppeth lower again,
    Lower, down to the poplar plain.

    No furlong farther for us to-night,
    The Little Tower draweth in sight;

    They are ringing the bells, and the torches glare,
    Therefore the roofs of wet slate stare.

    There she stands, and her yellow hair slantingly
    Drifts the same way that the rain goes by.

    Who will be faithful to us to-day,
    With little but hard glaive-strokes for pay?

    The grim king fumes at the council-board:
    Three more days, and then the sword;

    Three more days, and my sword through his head;
    And above his white brows, pale and dead,

    A paper crown on the top of the spire;
    And for her the stake and the witches' fire.

    Therefore though it be long ere day,
    Take axe and pick and spade, I pray.

    Break the dams down all over the plain:
    God send us three more days such rain!

    Block all the upland roads with trees;
    The Little Tower with no great ease

    Is won, I warrant; bid them bring
    Much sheep and oxen, everything

    The spits are wont to turn with; wine
    And wheaten bread, that we may dine

    In plenty each day of the siege.
    Good friends, ye know me no hard liege;

    My lady is right fair, see ye!
    Pray God to keep you frank and free.

    Love Isabeau, keep goodly cheer;
    The Little Tower will stand well here

    Many a year when we are dead,
    And over it our green and red,

    Barred with the Lady's golden head,
    From mere old age when we are dead.




THE SAILING OF THE SWORD


    Across the empty garden-beds,
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_
    I scarcely saw my sisters' heads
      Bowed each beside a tree.
    I could not see the castle leads,
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_

    Alicia wore a scarlet gown,
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_
    But Ursula's was russet brown:
      For the mist we could not see
    The scarlet roofs of the good town,
      _When the Sword went out to sea._

    Green holly in Alicia's hand,
      _When the Sword went out to sea;_
    With sere oak-leaves did Ursula stand;
      O! yet alas for me!
    I did but bear a peel'd white wand,
      _When the Sword went out to sea._

    O, russet brown and scarlet bright,
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_
    My sisters wore; I wore but white:
      Red, brown, and white, are three;
    Three damozels; each had a knight,
      _When the Sword went out to sea._

    Sir Robert shouted loud, and said:
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_
    Alicia, while I see thy head,
      What shall I bring for thee?
    O, my sweet Lord, a ruby red:
      _The Sword went out to sea._

    Sir Miles said, while the sails hung down,
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_
    O, Ursula! while I see the town,
      What shall I bring for thee?
    Dear knight, bring back a falcon brown:
      _The Sword went out to sea._

    But my Roland, no word he said
      _When the Sword went out to sea,_
    But only turn'd away his head;
      A quick shriek came from me:
    Come back, dear lord, to your white maid.
      _The Sword went out to sea._

    The hot sun bit the garden-beds
      _When the Sword came back from sea;_
    Beneath an apple-tree our heads
      Stretched out toward the sea;
    Grey gleam'd the thirsty castle-leads,
      _When the Sword came back from sea._

    Lord Robert brought a ruby red,
      _When the Sword came back from sea;_
    He kissed Alicia on the head:
      I am come back to thee;
    'Tis time, sweet love, that we were wed,
      _Now the Sword is back from sea!_

    Sir Miles he bore a falcon brown,
      _When the Sword came back from sea;_
    His arms went round tall Ursula's gown:
      What joy, O love, but thee?
    Let us be wed in the good town,
      _Now the Sword is back from sea!_

    My heart grew sick, no more afraid,
      _When the Sword came back from sea;_
    Upon the deck a tall white maid
      Sat on Lord Roland's knee;
    His chin was press'd upon her head,
      _When the Sword came back from sea!_




SPELL-BOUND


    How weary is it none can tell,
      How dismally the days go by!
    I hear the tinkling of the bell,
      I see the cross against the sky.

    The year wears round to Autumn-tide,
      Yet comes no reaper to the corn;
    The golden land is like a bride
      When first she knows herself forlorn;

    She sits and weeps with all her hair
      Laid downward over tender hands;
    For stainèd silk she hath no care,
      No care for broken ivory wands;

    The silver cups beside her stand;
      The golden stars on the blue roof
    Yet glitter, though against her hand
      His cold sword presses for a proof

    He is not dead, but gone away.
      How many hours did she wait
    For me, I wonder? Till the day
      Had faded wholly, and the gate

    Clanged to behind returning knights?
      I wonder did she raise her head
    And go away, fleeing the lights;
      And lay the samite on her bed,

    The wedding samite strewn with pearls:
      Then sit with hands laid on her knees,
    Shuddering at half-heard sound of girls
      That chatter outside in the breeze?

    I wonder did her poor heart throb
      At distant tramp of coming knight?
    How often did the choking sob
      Raise up her head and lips? The light,

    Did it come on her unawares,
      And drag her sternly down before
    People who loved her not? in prayers
      Did she say one name and no more?

    And once, all songs they ever sung,
      All tales they ever told to me,
    This only burden through them rung:
      _O golden love that waitest me!_

    _The days pass on, pass on apace,
      Sometimes I have a little rest
    In fairest dreams, when on thy face
      My lips lie, or thy hands are prest_

    _About my forehead, and thy lips
      Draw near and nearer to mine own;
    But when the vision from me slips,
      In colourless dawn I lie and moan,_

    _And wander forth with fever'd blood,
      That makes me start at little things,
    The blackbird screaming from the wood,
      The sudden whirr of pheasants' wings._

    _O dearest, scarcely seen by me!_
      But when that wild time had gone by,
    And in these arms I folded thee,
      Who ever thought those days could die?

    Yet now I wait, and you wait too,
      For what perchance may never come;
    You think I have forgotten you,
      That I grew tired and went home.

    But what if some day as I stood
      Against the wall with strainèd hands,
    And turn'd my face toward the wood,
      Away from all the golden lands;

    And saw you come with tired feet,
      And pale face thin and wan with care,
    And stainèd raiment no more neat,
      The white dust lying on your hair:

    Then I should say, I could not come;
      This land was my wide prison, dear;
    I could not choose but go; at home
      There is a wizard whom I fear:

    He bound me round with silken chains
      I could not break; he set me here
    Above the golden-waving plains,
      Where never reaper cometh near.

    And you have brought me my good sword,
      Wherewith in happy days of old
    I won you well from knight and lord;
      My heart upswells and I grow bold.

    But I shall die unless you stand,
      Half lying now, you are so weak,
    Within my arms, unless your hand
      Pass to and fro across my cheek.




THE WIND


    Ah! no, no, it is nothing, surely nothing at all,
    Only the wild-going wind round by the garden-wall,
    For the dawn just now is breaking, the wind beginning to fall.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    So I will sit, and think and think of the days gone by,
    Never moving my chair for fear the dogs should cry,
    Making no noise at all while the flambeau burns awry.

    For my chair is heavy and carved, and with sweeping green behind
    It is hung, and the dragons thereon grin out in the gusts of the wind;
    On its folds an orange lies, with a deep gash cut in the rind.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    If I move my chair it will scream, and the orange will roll out afar,
    And the faint yellow juice ooze out like blood from a wizard's jar;
    And the dogs will howl for those who went last month to the war.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    So I will sit and think of love that is over and past,
    O, so long ago! Yes, I will be quiet at last:
    Whether I like it or not, a grim half-slumber is cast

    Over my worn old brains, that touches the roots of my heart,
    And above my half-shut eyes, the blue roof 'gins to part,
    And show the blue spring sky, till I am ready to start

    From out of the green-hung chair; but something keeps me still,
    And I fall in a dream that I walk'd with her on the side of a hill,
    Dotted, for was it not spring? with tufts of the daffodil.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    And Margaret as she walk'd held a painted book in her hand;
    Her finger kept the place; I caught her, we both did stand
    Face to face, on the top of the highest hill in the land.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    I held to her long bare arms, but she shudder'd away from me,
    While the flush went out of her face as her head fell back on a tree,
    And a spasm caught her mouth, fearful for me to see;

    And still I held to her arms till her shoulder touched my mail,
    Weeping she totter'd forward, so glad that I should prevail,
    And her hair went over my robe, like a gold flag over a sail.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    I kiss'd her hard by the ear, and she kiss'd me on the brow,
    And then lay down on the grass, where the mark on the moss is now,
    And spread her arms out wide while I went down below.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    And then I walk'd for a space to and fro on the side of the hill,
    Till I gather'd and held in my arms great sheaves of the daffodil,
    And when I came again my Margaret lay there still.

    I piled them high and high above her heaving breast,
    How they were caught and held in her loose ungirded vest!
    But one beneath her arm died, happy so to be prest!

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    Again I turn'd my back and went away for an hour;
    She said no word when I came again, so, flower by flower,
    I counted the daffodils over, and cast them languidly lower.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    My dry hands shook and shook as the green gown show'd again,
    Clear'd from the yellow flowers, and I grew hollow with pain,
    And on to us both there fell from the sun-shower drops of rain.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._

    Alas! alas! there was blood on the very quiet breast,
    Blood lay in the many folds of the loose ungirded vest,
    Blood lay upon her arm where the flower had been prest.

    I shriek'd and leapt from my chair, and the orange roll'd out afar,
    The faint yellow juice oozed out like blood from a wizard's jar;
    And then in march'd the ghosts of those that had gone to the war.

    I knew them by the arms that I was used to paint
    Upon their long thin shields; but the colours were all grown faint,
    And faint upon their banner was Olaf, king and saint.

        _Wind, wind! thou art sad, art thou kind?
        Wind, wind, unhappy! thou art blind,
        Yet still thou wanderest the lily-seed to find._




THE BLUE CLOSET


              THE DAMOZELS.

        Lady Alice, lady Louise,
        Between the wash of the tumbling seas
        We are ready to sing, if so ye please;
        So lay your long hands on the keys;
                      Sing, _Laudate pueri_.

      _And ever the great bell overhead
      Boom'd in the wind a knell for the dead,
      Though no one toll'd it, a knell for the dead._

              LADY LOUISE.

      Sister, let the measure swell
      Not too loud; for you sing not well
      If you drown the faint boom of the bell;
                      He is weary, so am I.

      _And ever the chevron overhead
      Flapped on the banner of the dead;
      (Was he asleep, or was he dead?)_

              LADY ALICE.

      Alice the Queen, and Louise the Queen,
      Two damozels wearing purple and green,
      Four lone ladies dwelling here
      From day to day and year to year;
      And there is none to let us go;
      To break the locks of the doors below,
      Or shovel away the heaped-up snow;
      And when we die no man will know
      That we are dead; but they give us leave,
      Once every year on Christmas-eve,
      To sing in the Closet Blue one song;
      And we should be so long, so long,
      If we dared, in singing; for dream on dream,
      They float on in a happy stream;
      Float from the gold strings, float from the keys,
      Float from the open'd lips of Louise;
      But, alas! the sea-salt oozes through
      The chinks of the tiles of the Closet Blue;
      _And ever the great bell overhead
      Booms in the wind a knell for the dead,
      The wind plays on it a knell for the dead._

              _They sing all together._

    How long ago was it, how long ago,
    He came to this tower with hands full of snow?

    Kneel down, O love Louise, kneel down! he said,
    And sprinkled the dusty snow over my head.

    He watch'd the snow melting, it ran through my hair,
    Ran over my shoulders, white shoulders and bare.

    I cannot weep for thee, poor love Louise,
    For my tears are all hidden deep under the seas;

    In a gold and blue casket she keeps all my tears,
    But my eyes are no longer blue, as in old years;

    Yea, they grow grey with time, grow small and dry,
    I am so feeble now, would I might die.

      _And in truth the great bell overhead
      Left off his pealing for the dead,
      Perchance, because the wind was dead._

    Will he come back again, or is he dead?
    O! is he sleeping, my scarf round his head?

    Or did they strangle him as he lay there,
    With the long scarlet scarf I used to wear?

    Only I pray thee, Lord, let him come here!
    Both his soul and his body to me are most dear.

    Dear Lord, that loves me, I wait to receive
    Either body or spirit this wild Christmas-eve.

      _Through the floor shot up a lily red,
      With a patch of earth from the land of the dead,
      For he was strong in the land of the dead._

        What matter that his cheeks were pale,
          His kind kiss'd lips all grey?
        O, love Louise, have you waited long?
          O, my lord Arthur, yea.

        What if his hair that brush'd her cheek
          Was stiff with frozen rime?
        His eyes were grown quite blue again,
          As in the happy time.

        O, love Louise, this is the key
          Of the happy golden land!
        O, sisters, cross the bridge with me,
          My eyes are full of sand.
        What matter that I cannot see,
          If ye take me by the hand?

      _And ever the great bell overhead,
      And the tumbling seas mourned for the dead;
      For their song ceased, and they were dead._




THE TUNE OF SEVEN TOWERS


      No one goes there now:
        For what is left to fetch away
      From the desolate battlements all arow,
        And the lead roof heavy and grey?
    _Therefore, said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._

      No one walks there now;
        Except in the white moonlight
      The white ghosts walk in a row;
        If one could see it, an awful sight,
    _Listen! said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._

      But none can see them now,
        Though they sit by the side of the moat,
      Feet half in the water, there in a row,
        Long hair in the wind afloat.
    _Therefore, said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._

      If any will go to it now,
        He must go to it all alone,
      Its gates will not open to any row
        Of glittering spears: will _you_ go alone?
    _Listen! said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._

      By my love go there now,
        To fetch me my coif away,
      My coif and my kirtle, with pearls arow,
        Oliver, go to-day!
    _Therefore, said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._

      I am unhappy now,
        I cannot tell you why;
      If you go, the priests and I in a row
        Will pray that you may not die.
    _Listen! said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._

      If you will go for me now,
        I will kiss your mouth at last;
               [_She sayeth inwardly._]
      (_The graves stand grey in a row._)
        Oliver, hold me fast!
    _Therefore, said fair Yoland of the flowers,
    This is the tune of Seven Towers._




GOLDEN WINGS


    Midways of a wallèd garden,
      In the happy poplar land,
      Did an ancient castle stand,
    With an old knight for a warden.

    Many scarlet bricks there were
      In its walls, and old grey stone;
      Over which red apples shone
    At the right time of the year.

    On the bricks the green moss grew.
      Yellow lichen on the stone,
      Over which red apples shone;
    Little war that castle knew.

    Deep green water fill'd the moat,
      Each side had a red-brick lip,
      Green and mossy with the drip
    Of dew and rain; there was a boat

    Of carven wood, with hangings green
      About the stern; it was great bliss
      For lovers to sit there and kiss
    In the hot summer noons, not seen.

    Across the moat the fresh west wind
      In very little ripples went;
      The way the heavy aspens bent
    Towards it, was a thing to mind.

    The painted drawbridge over it
      Went up and down with gilded chains,
      'Twas pleasant in the summer rains
    Within the bridge-house there to sit.

    There were five swans that ne'er did eat
      The water-weeds, for ladies came
      Each day, and young knights did the same,
    And gave them cakes and bread for meat.

    They had a house of painted wood,
      A red roof gold-spiked over it,
      Wherein upon their eggs to sit
    Week after week; no drop of blood,

    Drawn from men's bodies by sword-blows,
      Came ever there, or any tear;
      Most certainly from year to year
    'Twas pleasant as a Provence rose.

    The banners seem'd quite full of ease,
      That over the turret-roofs hung down;
      The battlements could get no frown
    From the flower-moulded cornices.

    Who walked in that garden there?
      Miles and Giles and Isabeau,
      Tall Jehane du Castel beau,
    Alice of the golden hair,

    Big Sir Gervaise, the good knight,
      Fair Ellayne le Violet,
      Mary, Constance fille de fay,
    Many dames with footfall light.

    Whosoever wander'd there,
      Whether it be dame or knight,
      Half of scarlet, half of white
    Their raiment was; of roses fair

    Each wore a garland on the head,
      At Ladies' Gard the way was so:
      Fair Jehane du Castel beau
    Wore her wreath till it was dead.

    Little joy she had of it,
      Of the raiment white and red,
      Or the garland on her head,
    She had none with whom to sit

    In the carven boat at noon;
      None the more did Jehane weep,
      She would only stand and keep
    Saying: He will be here soon!

    Many times in the long day
      Miles and Giles and Gervaise passed,
      Holding each some white hand fast,
    Every time they heard her say:

    Summer cometh to an end,
      Undern cometh after noon;
      Golden wings will be here soon,
    What if I some token send?

    Wherefore that night within the hall,
      With open mouth and open eyes,
      Like some one listening with surprise,
    She sat before the sight of all.

    Stoop'd down a little she sat there,
      With neck stretch'd out and chin thrown up,
      One hand around a golden cup;
    And strangely with her fingers fair

    She beat some tune upon the gold;
      The minstrels in the gallery
      Sung: Arthur, who will never die,
    In Avallon he groweth old.

    And when the song was ended, she
      Rose and caught up her gown and ran;
      None stopp'd her eager face and wan
    Of all that pleasant company.

    Right so within her own chamber
      Upon her bed she sat; and drew
      Her breath in quick gasps; till she knew
    That no man follow'd after her.

    She took the garland from her head,
      Loosed all her hair, and let it lie
      Upon the coverlet; thereby
    She laid the gown of white and red;

    And she took off her scarlet shoon,
      And bared her feet; still more and more
      Her sweet face redden'd; evermore
    She murmur'd: He will be here soon;

    Truly he cannot fail to know
      My tender body waits him here;
      And if he knows, I have no fear
    For poor Jehane du Castel beau.

    She took a sword within her hand,
      Whose hilts were silver, and she sung
      Somehow like this, wild words that rung
    A long way over the moonlit land:

      Gold wings across the sea!
      Grey light from tree to tree,
      Gold hair beside my knee,
      I pray thee come to me,
      Gold wings!

                  The water slips,
        The red-bill'd moorhen dips.
      Sweet kisses on red lips;
      Alas! the red rust grips,
      And the blood-red dagger rips,
      Yet, O knight, come to me!

      Are not my blue eyes sweet?
      The west wind from the wheat
      Blows cold across my feet;
      Is it not time to meet
      Gold wings across the sea?

      White swans on the green moat,
      Small feathers left afloat
      By the blue-painted boat;
      Swift running of the stoat,
      Sweet gurgling note by note
      Of sweet music.

                      O gold wings,
      Listen how gold hair sings,
      And the Ladies Castle rings,
      Gold wings across the sea.

      I sit on a purple bed,
      Outside, the wall is red,
      Thereby the apple hangs,
      And the wasp, caught by the fangs,

      Dies in the autumn night,
      And the bat flits till light,
      And the love-crazèd knight

      Kisses the long wet grass:
      The weary days pass,
      Gold wings across the sea.

      Gold wings across the sea!
      Moonlight from tree to tree,
      Sweet hair laid on my knee,
      O, sweet knight, come to me.

      Gold wings, the short night slips,
      The white swan's long neck drips,
      I pray thee kiss my lips,
      Gold wings across the sea!

    No answer through the moonlit night;
      No answer in the cold grey dawn;
      No answer when the shaven lawn
    Grew green, and all the roses bright.

    Her tired feet look'd cold and thin,
      Her lips were twitch'd, and wretched tears,
      Some, as she lay, roll'd past her ears,
    Some fell from off her quivering chin.

    Her long throat, stretched to its full length,
      Rose up and fell right brokenly;
      As though the unhappy heart was nigh
    Striving to break with all its strength.

    And when she slipp'd from off the bed,
      Her cramp'd feet would not hold her; she
      Sank down and crept on hand and knee,
    On the window-sill she laid her head.

    There, with crooked arm upon the sill,
      She look'd out, muttering dismally:
      There is no sail upon the sea,
    No pennon on the empty hill.

    I cannot stay here all alone,
      Or meet their happy faces here,
      And wretchedly I have no fear;
    A little while, and I am gone.

    Therewith she rose upon her feet,
      And totter'd; cold and misery
      Still made the deep sobs come, till she
    At last stretch'd out her fingers sweet,

    And caught the great sword in her hand;
      And, stealing down the silent stair,
      Barefooted in the morning air.
    And only in her smock, did stand

    Upright upon the green lawn grass;
      And hope grew in her as she said:
      I have thrown off the white and red,
    And pray God it may come to pass

    I meet him; if ten years go by
      Before I meet him; if, indeed,
      Meanwhile both soul and body bleed,
    Yet there is end of misery,

    And I have hope. He could not come,
      But I can go to him and show
      These new things I have got to know,
    And make him speak, who has been dumb.

    O Jehane! the red morning sun
      Changed her white feet to glowing gold,
      Upon her smock, on crease and fold,
    Changed that to gold which had been dun.

    O Miles, and Giles, and Isabeau,
      Fair Ellayne le Violet,
      Mary, Constance fille de fay!
    Where is Jehane du Castel beau?

    O big Gervaise ride apace!
      Down to the hard yellow sand,
      Where the water meets the land.
    This is Jehane by her face.

    Why has she a broken sword?
      Mary! she is slain outright;
      Verily a piteous sight;
    Take her up without a word!

    Giles and Miles and Gervaise there,
      Ladies' Gard must meet the war;
      Whatsoever knights these are,
    Man the walls withouten fear!

    Axes to the apple-trees,
      Axes to the aspens tall!
      Barriers without the wall
    May be lightly made of these.

    O poor shivering Isabeau;
      Poor Ellayne le Violet,
      Bent with fear! we miss to-day
    Brave Jehane du Castel beau.

    O poor Mary, weeping so!
      Wretched Constance fille de fay!
      Verily we miss to-day
    Fair Jehane du Castel beau.

    The apples now grow green and sour
      Upon the mouldering castle-wall,
      Before they ripen there they fall:
    There are no banners on the tower,

    The draggled swans most eagerly eat
      The green weeds trailing in the moat;
      Inside the rotting leaky boat
    You see a slain man's stiffen'd feet.




THE HAYSTACK IN THE FLOODS


    Had she come all the way for this,
    To part at last without a kiss?
    Yea, had she borne the dirt and rain
    That her own eyes might see him slain
    Beside the haystack in the floods?

    Along the dripping leafless woods,
    The stirrup touching either shoe,
    She rode astride as troopers do;
    With kirtle kilted to her knee,
    To which the mud splash'd wretchedly;
    And the wet dripp'd from every tree
    Upon her head and heavy hair,
    And on her eyelids broad and fair;
    The tears and rain ran down her face.
    By fits and starts they rode apace,
    And very often was his place
    Far off from her; he had to ride
    Ahead, to see what might betide
    When the roads cross'd; and sometimes, when
    There rose a murmuring from his men,
    Had to turn back with promises.
    Ah me! she had but little ease;
    And often for pure doubt and dread
    She sobb'd, made giddy in the head
    By the swift riding; while, for cold,
    Her slender fingers scarce could hold
    The wet reins; yea, and scarcely, too,
    She felt the foot within her shoe
    Against the stirrup: all for this,
    To part at last without a kiss
    Beside the haystack in the floods.

    For when they near'd that old soak'd hay,
    They saw across the only way
    That Judas, Godmar, and the three
    Red running lions dismally
    Grinn'd from his pennon, under which
    In one straight line along the ditch,
    They counted thirty heads.

                                So then,
    While Robert turn'd round to his men,
    She saw at once the wretched end,
    And, stooping down, tried hard to rend
    Her coif the wrong way from her head,
    And hid her eyes; while Robert said:
    Nay, love, 'tis scarcely two to one,
    At Poictiers where we made them run
    So fast: why, sweet my love, good cheer,
    The Gascon frontier is so near,
    Nought after this.

                        But: O! she said,
    My God! my God! I have to tread
    The long way back without you; then
    The court at Paris; those six men;
    The gratings of the Chatelet;
    The swift Seine on some rainy day
    Like this, and people standing by,
    And laughing, while my weak hands try
    To recollect how strong men swim.
    All this, or else a life with him,
    For which I should be damned at last,
    Would God that this next hour were past!

    He answer'd not, but cried his cry,
    St. George for Marny! cheerily;
    And laid his hand upon her rein.
    Alas! no man of all his train
    Gave back that cheery cry again;
    And, while for rage his thumb beat fast
    Upon his sword-hilt, some one cast
    About his neck a kerchief long,
    And bound him.

                    Then they went along
    To Godmar; who said: Now, Jehane,
    Your lover's life is on the wane
    So fast, that, if this very hour
    You yield not as my paramour,
    He will not see the rain leave off:
    Nay, keep your tongue from gibe and scoff
    Sir Robert, or I slay you now.

    She laid her hand upon her brow,
    Then gazed upon the palm, as though
    She thought her forehead bled, and: No!
    She said, and turn'd her head away,
    As there were nothing else to say,
    And everything were settled: red
    Grew Godmar's face from chin to head:
    Jehane, on yonder hill there stands
    My castle, guarding well my lands;
    What hinders me from taking you,
    And doing that I list to do
    To your fair wilful body, while
    Your knight lies dead?

                            A wicked smile
    Wrinkled her face, her lips grew thin,
    A long way out she thrust her chin:
    You know that I should strangle you
    While you were sleeping; or bite through
    Your throat, by God's help: ah! she said,
    Lord Jesus, pity your poor maid!
    For in such wise they hem me in,
    I cannot choose but sin and sin,
    Whatever happens: yet I think
    They could not make me eat or drink,
    And so should I just reach my rest.
    Nay, if you do not my behest,
    O Jehane! though I love you well,
    Said Godmar, would I fail to tell
    All that I know? Foul lies, she said.
    Eh? lies, my Jehane? by God's head,
    At Paris folks would deem them true!
    Do you know, Jehane, they cry for you:
    Jehane the brown! Jehane the brown!
    Give us Jehane to burn or drown!
    Eh! gag me Robert! Sweet my friend,
    This were indeed a piteous end
    For those long fingers, and long feet,
    And long neck, and smooth shoulders sweet;
    An end that few men would forget
    That saw it. So, an hour yet:
    Consider, Jehane, which to take
    Of life or death!

                      So, scarce awake,
    Dismounting, did she leave that place,
    And totter some yards: with her face
    Turn'd upward to the sky she lay,
    Her head on a wet heap of hay,
    And fell asleep: and while she slept,
    And did not dream, the minutes crept
    Round to the twelve again; but she,
    Being waked at last, sigh'd quietly,
    And strangely childlike came, and said:
    I will not. Straightway Godmar's head,
    As though it hung on strong wires, turn'd
    Most sharply round, and his face burn'd.

    For Robert, both his eyes were dry,
    He could not weep, but gloomily
    He seem'd to watch the rain; yea, too,
    His lips were firm; he tried once more
    To touch her lips; she reached out, sore
    And vain desire so tortured them,
    The poor grey lips, and now the hem
    Of his sleeve brush'd them.

                                With a start
    Up Godmar rose, thrust them apart;
    From Robert's throat he loosed the bands
    Of silk and mail; with empty hands
    Held out, she stood and gazed, and saw,
    The long bright blade without a flaw
    Glide out from Godmar's sheath, his hand
    In Robert's hair; she saw him bend
    Back Robert's head; she saw him send
    The thin steel down; the blow told well,
    Right backward the knight Robert fell,
    And moaned as dogs do, being half dead,
    Unwitting, as I deem: so then
    Godmar turn'd grinning to his men,
    Who ran, some five or six, and beat
    His head to pieces at their feet.

    Then Godmar turn'd again and said:
    So, Jehane, the first fitte is read!
    Take note, my lady, that your way
    Lies backward to the Chatelet!
    She shook her head and gazed awhile
    At her cold hands with a rueful smile,
    As though this thing had made her mad.

    This was the parting that they had
    Beside the haystack in the floods.




TWO RED ROSES ACROSS THE MOON


    There was a lady lived in a hall,
    Large of her eyes, and slim and tall;
    And ever she sung from noon to noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon._

    There was a knight came riding by
    In early spring, when the roads were dry;
    And he heard that lady sing at the noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon._

    Yet none the more he stopp'd at all,
    But he rode a-gallop past the hall;
    And left that lady singing at noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon._

    Because, forsooth, the battle was set,
    And the scarlet and blue had got to be met,
    He rode on the spur till the next warm noon:
    _Two red roses across the moon._

    But the battle was scatter'd from hill to hill,
    From the windmill to the watermill;
    And he said to himself, as it near'd the noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon._

    You scarce could see for the scarlet and blue,
    A golden helm or a golden shoe:
    So he cried, as the fight grew thick at the noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon!_

    Verily then the gold bore through
    The huddled spears of the scarlet and blue;
    And they cried, as they cut them down at the noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon!_

    I trow he stopp'd when he rode again
    By the hall, though draggled sore with the rain;
    And his lips were pinch'd to kiss at the noon
    _Two red roses across the moon._

    Under the may she stoop'd to the crown,
    All was gold, there was nothing of brown;
    And the horns blew up in the hall at noon,
    _Two red roses across the moon._




WELLAND RIVER


    Fair Ellayne she walk'd by Welland river,
      Across the lily lee:
    O, gentle Sir Robert, ye are not kind
      To stay so long at sea.

    Over the marshland none can see
      Your scarlet pennon fair;
    O, leave the Easterlings alone,
      Because of my golden hair.

    The day when over Stamford bridge
      That dear pennon I see
    Go up toward the goodly street,
      'Twill be a fair day for me.

    O, let the bonny pennon bide
      At Stamford, the good town,
    And let the Easterlings go free,
      And their ships go up and down.

    For every day that passes by
      I wax both pale and green,
    From gold to gold of my girdle
      There is an inch between.

    I sew'd it up with scarlet silk
      Last night upon my knee,
    And my heart grew sad and sore to think
      Thy face I'd never see.

    I sew'd it up with scarlet silk,
      As I lay upon my bed:
    Sorrow! the man I'll never see
      That had my maidenhead.

    But as Ellayne sat on her window-seat
      And comb'd her yellow hair,
    She saw come over Stamford bridge
      The scarlet pennon fair.

    As Ellayne lay and sicken'd sore,
      The gold shoes on her feet,
    She saw Sir Robert and his men
      Ride up the Stamford street.

    He had a coat of fine red gold,
      And a bascinet of steel;
    Take note his goodly Collayne sword
      Smote the spur upon his heel.

    And by his side, on a grey jennet,
      There rode a fair lady,
    For every ruby Ellayne wore,
      I count she carried three.

    Say, was not Ellayne's gold hair fine,
      That fell to her middle free?
    But that lady's hair down in the street,
      Fell lower than her knee.

    Fair Ellayne's face, from sorrow and grief,
      Was waxen pale and green:
    That lady's face was goodly red,
      She had but little tene.

    But as he pass'd by her window
      He grew a little wroth:
    O, why does yon pale face look at me
      From out the golden cloth?

    It is some burd, the fair dame said,
      That aye rode him beside,
    Has come to see your bonny face
      This merry summer-tide.

    But Ellayne let a lily-flower
      Light on his cap of steel:
    O, I have gotten two hounds, fair knight,
      The one has served me well;

    But the other, just an hour agone,
      Has come from over sea,
    And all his fell is sleek and fine,
      But little he knows of me.

    Now, which shall I let go, fair knight,
      And which shall bide with me?
    O, lady, have no doubt to keep
      The one that best loveth thee.

    O, Robert, see how sick I am!
      Ye do not so by me.
    Lie still, fair love, have ye gotten harm
      While I was on the sea?

    Of one gift, Robert, that ye gave,
      I sicken to the death,
    I pray you nurse-tend me, my knight,
      Whiles that I have my breath.

    Six fathoms from the Stamford bridge
      He left that dame to stand,
    And whiles she wept, and whiles she cursed
      That she ever had taken land.

    He has kiss'd sweet Ellayne on the mouth,
      And fair she fell asleep,
    And long and long days after that
      Sir Robert's house she did keep.




RIDING TOGETHER


    For many, many days together
      The wind blew steady from the East;
    For many days hot grew the weather,
      About the time of our Lady's Feast.

    For many days we rode together,
      Yet met we neither friend nor foe;
    Hotter and clearer grew the weather,
      Steadily did the East wind blow.

    We saw the trees in the hot, bright weather,
      Clear-cut, with shadows very black,
    As freely we rode on together
      With helms unlaced and bridles slack.

    And often as we rode together,
      We, looking down the green-bank'd stream,
    Saw flowers in the sunny weather,
      And saw the bubble-making bream.

    And in the night lay down together,
      And hung above our heads the rood,
    Or watch'd night-long in the dewy weather,
      The while the moon did watch the wood.

    Our spears stood bright and thick together,
      Straight out the banners stream'd behind,
    As we gallop'd on in the sunny weather,
      With faces turn'd towards the wind.

    Down sank our threescore spears together,
      As thick we saw the pagans ride;
    His eager face in the clear fresh weather,
      Shone out that last time by my side.

    Up the sweep of the bridge we dash'd together,
      It rock'd to the crash of the meeting spears,
    Down rain'd the buds of the dear spring weather,
      The elm-tree flowers fell like tears.

    There, as we roll'd and writhed together,
      I threw my arms above my head,
    For close by my side, in the lovely weather,
      I saw him reel and fall back dead.

    I and the slayer met together,
      He waited the death-stroke there in his place,
    With thoughts of death, in the lovely weather,
      Gapingly mazed at my madden'd face.

    Madly I fought as we fought together;
      In vain: the little Christian band
    The pagans drown'd, as in stormy weather,
      The river drowns low-lying land.

    They bound my blood-stain'd hands together,
      They bound his corpse to nod by my side:
    Then on we rode, in the bright March weather,
      With clash of cymbals did we ride.

    We ride no more, no more together;
      My prison-bars are thick and strong,
    I take no heed of any weather,
      The sweet Saints grant I live not long.




FATHER JOHN'S WAR-SONG


              THE REAPERS.

    So many reapers, Father John,
    So many reapers and no little son,
    To meet you when the day is done,
    With little stiff legs to waddle and run?
    Pray you beg, borrow, or steal one son.
    Hurrah for the corn-sheaves of Father John!

              FATHER JOHN.

    O maiden Mary, be wary, be wary!
    And go not down to the river,
    Lest the kingfisher, your evil wisher,
    Lure you down to the river,
    Lest your white feet grow muddy,
    Your red hair too ruddy
    With the river-mud so red;
    But when you are wed
    Go down to the river.
    O maiden Mary, be very wary,
    And dwell among the corn!
    See, this dame Alice, maiden Mary,
    Her hair is thin and white,
    But she is a housewife good and wary,
    And a great steel key hangs bright
    From her gown, as red as the flowers in corn;
    She is good and old like the autumn corn.

              MAIDEN MARY.

    This is knight Roland, Father John,
    Stark in his arms from a field half-won;
    Ask him if he has seen your son:
    Roland, lay your sword on the corn,
    The piled-up sheaves of the golden corn.

              KNIGHT ROLAND.

    Why does she kiss me, Father John?
    She is my true love truly won!
    Under my helm is room for one,
    But the molten lead-streams trickle and run
    From my roof-tree, burning under the sun;
    No corn to burn, we had eaten the corn,
    There was no waste of the golden corn.

              FATHER JOHN.

    Ho, you reapers, away from the corn,
    To march with the banner of Father John!

              THE REAPERS.

    We will win a house for Roland his son,
    And for maiden Mary with hair like corn,
    As red as the reddest of golden corn.

              OMNES.

    Father John, you have got a son,
    Seven feet high when his helm is on
    Pennon of Roland, banner of John,
    Star of Mary, march well on.




SIR GILES' WAR-SONG


      _Ho! is there any will ride with me,
          Sir Giles, le bon des barrières?_

    The clink of arms is good to hear,
    The flap of pennons fair to see;
      _Ho! is there any will ride with me,
          Sir Giles, le bon des barrières?_

    The leopards and lilies are fair to see;
    St. George Guienne! right good to hear:
      _Ho! is there any will ride with me,
          Sir Giles, le bon des barrières?_

    I stood by the barrier,
    My coat being blazon'd fair to see;
      _Ho! is there any will ride with me,
          Sir Giles, le bon des barrières?_

    Clisson put out his head to see,
    And lifted his basnet up to hear;
      I pull'd him through the bars to ME,
          _Sir Giles; le bon des barrières._




NEAR AVALON


    A ship with shields before the sun,
    Six maidens round the mast,
    A red-gold crown on every one,
    A green gown on the last.

    The fluttering green banners there
    Are wrought with ladies' heads most fair,
    And a portraiture of Guenevere
    The middle of each sail doth bear.

    A ship which sails before the wind,
    And round the helm six knights,
    Their heaumes are on, whereby, half blind,
    They pass by many sights.

    The tatter'd scarlet banners there,
    Right soon will leave the spear-heads bare.
    Those six knights sorrowfully bear,
    In all their heaumes some yellow hair.




PRAISE OF MY LADY


    My lady seems of ivory
    Forehead, straight nose, and cheeks that be
    Hollow'd a little mournfully.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Her forehead, overshadow'd much
    By bows of hair, has a wave such
    As God was good to make for me.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Not greatly long my lady's hair,
    Nor yet with yellow colour fair,
    But thick and crispèd wonderfully:
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Heavy to make the pale face sad,
    And dark, but dead as though it had
    Been forged by God most wonderfully
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Of some strange metal, thread by thread,
    To stand out from my lady's head,
    Not moving much to tangle me.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Beneath her brows the lids fall slow.
    The lashes a clear shadow throw
    Where I would wish my lips to be.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Her great eyes, standing far apart,
    Draw up some memory from her heart,
    And gaze out very mournfully;
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    So beautiful and kind they are,
    But most times looking out afar,
    Waiting for something, not for me.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    I wonder if the lashes long
    Are those that do her bright eyes wrong,
    For always half tears seem to be
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Lurking below the underlid,
    Darkening the place where they lie hid:
    If they should rise and flow for me!
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Her full lips being made to kiss,
    Curl'd up and pensive each one is;
    This makes me faint to stand and see.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Her lips are not contented now,
    Because the hours pass so slow
    Towards a sweet time: (pray for me),
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Nay, hold thy peace! for who can tell?
    But this at least I know full well,
    Her lips are parted longingly,
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    So passionate and swift to move,
    To pluck at any flying love,
    That I grow faint to stand and see.
                  _Beata mea Domina_!

    Yea! there beneath them is her chin,
    So fine and round, it were a sin
    To feel no weaker when I see
                  _Beata mea Domina_!

    God's dealings; for with so much care
    And troublous, faint lines wrought in there,
    He finishes her face for me.
                  _Beata mea Domina_!

    Of her long neck what shall I say?
    What things about her body's sway,
    Like a knight's pennon or slim tree
                  _Beata mea Domina_!

    Set gently waving in the wind;
    Or her long hands that I may find
    On some day sweet to move o'er me?
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    God pity me though, if I miss'd
    The telling, how along her wrist
    The veins creep, dying languidly
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    Inside her tender palm and thin.
    Now give me pardon, dear, wherein
    My voice is weak and vexes thee.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    All men that see her any time,
    I charge you straightly in this rhyme,
    What, and wherever you may be,
                  _Beata mea Domina!_

    To kneel before her; as for me,
    I choke and grow quite faint to see
    My lady moving graciously.
                  _Beata mea Domina!_




SUMMER DAWN


    Pray but one prayer for me 'twixt thy closed lips;
      Think but one thought of me up in the stars.
    The summer night waneth, the morning light slips,
      Faint and grey 'twixt the leaves of the aspen, betwixt the
                cloud-bars,
    That are patiently waiting there for the dawn:
      Patient and colourless, though Heaven's gold
    Waits to float through them along with the sun.
    Far out in the meadows, above the young corn,
      The heavy elms wait, and restless and cold
    The uneasy wind rises; the roses are dun;
    They pray the long gloom through for daylight new born,
    Round the lone house in the midst of the corn.
      Speak but one word to me over the corn,
      Over the tender, bow'd locks of the corn.




IN PRISON


    Wearily, drearily,
    Half the day long,
    Flap the great banners
    High over the stone;
    Strangely and eerily
    Sounds the wind's song,
    Bending the banner-poles.

    While, all alone,
    Watching the loophole's spark,
    Lie I, with life all dark,
    Feet tether'd, hands fetter'd
    Fast to the stone,
    The grim walls, square letter'd
    With prison'd men's groan.

    Still strain the banner-poles
    Through the wind's song,
    Westward the banner rolls
    Over my wrong.




THE END


 Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
 Edinburgh & London




Transcriber's Note

    Minor spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without
    note, whilst archaic spellings have been retained.

    Many single- and double-quotation marks were omitted in the original
    publication. Logical corrections, made from this text alone, would
    only compound any discrepancies and therefore such punctuation
    remains as printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Defence of Guenevere and Other
Poems, by William Morris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE ***

***** This file should be named 22650-8.txt or 22650-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/5/22650/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Stephen Blundell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿Project Gutenberg's Poems By The Way & Love Is Enough, by William Morris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Poems By The Way & Love Is Enough

Author: William Morris

Release Date: March 10, 2005 [EBook #15311]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS BY THE WAY & LOVE IS ENOUGH ***




Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Carol David and Lynn Bornath
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. Page images
were generously made available by The Internet Archive.






WILLIAM MORRIS'S WORKS


Cheaper Issue of the LIBRARY EDITION of Mr. WILLIAM MORRIS'S POETICAL
WORKS. Complete in Eleven Volumes, price 5s. net each, viz.:--


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 4 vols., 5s. net each.
THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE, AND OTHER POEMS, 5s. net.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON. 5s. net.
POEMS BY THE WAY: AND LOVE IS ENOUGH. 5s. net.
THE STORY OF SIGURD THE VOLSUNG, AND THE FALL OF THE NIBLUNGS. 5s.
net.
THE ÆNEIDS OF VIRGIL. Done into English Verse. 5s. net.
THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER. Done into English Verse. 5s. net.
THE TALE OF BEOWULF. Translated by WILLIAM MORRIS and A.J. WYATT. 5s.
net.


Certain of the POETICAL WORKS may also be had in the following
Editions:--


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. POPULAR EDITION in 5 vols., 121110, 25s. or 5s.
each sold separately.
  The same in 10 Parts, 25s. or 2s.6d. each sold separately.
  The same in 4 vols. (Silver Library), 3s.6d. each.
  The same in 12 Parts, crown 8vo, paper covers, Parts 1-8, 10 and 11,
  each 1s. net; Parts 9 and 12, 2s. net each.
  CHEAP EDITION in 1 vol., 8vo, 6s. net.
POEMS BY THE WAY. Square crown 8vo, 6s.
THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE, AND OTHER POEMS. Fcap. 8vo, 1s.6d. net.



PROSE WORKS


A TALE OF THE HOUSE OF THE WOLFINGS. Written in Prose and Verse.
Square crown 8vo, 6s.
THE ROOTS OF THE MOUNTAINS. Written in Prose and Verse. Square crown
8vo, 8s.
THE STORY OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN. Square post 8vo, 5s. net.
THE WOOD BEYOND THE WORLD. Crown 8vo, 6s. net.
THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END: A Tale. 2 vols. 8vo, 28s.
THE WATER OF THE WONDROUS ISLES. Crown 8vo, 7s.6d.
THE SUNDERING FLOOD: A Romance. Crown 8vo, 7s.6d.
A DREAM OF JOHN BALL, AND A KING'S LESSON. 16mo, 1s.6d.
NEWS FROM NOWHERE; OR, AN EPOCH OF REST. Post 8vo, 1s.6d.
HOPES AND FEARS FOR ART. Five Lectures. Crown 8vo, 4s.6d.
SIGNS OF CHANGE. Seven Lectures. Post 8vo, 4s.6d.
AN ADDRESS DELIVERED TO STUDENTS OF THE BIRMINGHAM Municipal School of
Art. 8vo, 2s.6d. net.
SOME HINTS ON PATTERN-DESIGNING: A Lecture. 8vo, 2s.6d. net.
ART AND ITS PRODUCERS, AND THE ARTS AND CRAFTS OF TO-DAY. 8vo, 2s.6d.
net.
ARTS AND CRAFTS ESSAYS by Members of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition
Society. With a Preface by WILLIAM MORRIS. Crown 8vo, 2s.6d. net.
ARCHITECTURE, INDUSTRY, AND WEALTH: Collected Papers. Crown
8vo, 6s. net.
THE STORY OF GRETTIR THE STRONG. Translated from the Icelandic by
EIRÍKR MAGNÚSSON and WILLIAM MORRIS. Crown 8vo, 5s. net.
THREE NORTHERN LOVE STORIES, AND OTHER TALES.  Translated from the
Icelandic by EIRÍKR MAGNÚSSON and WILLIAM MORRIS.  Crown 8vo, 6s. net.


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
LONDON, NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA




POEMS BY THE WAY
LOVE IS ENOUGH



POEMS BY THE WAY
& LOVE IS ENOUGH

BY

WILLIAM MORRIS

NEW IMPRESSION

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA
1907

_BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

First Edition in this form, June 1896;
Reprinted February 1898, May 1902,
and June 1907_




CONTENTS


POEMS BY THE WAY


FROM THE UPLAND TO THE SEA

OF THE WOOING OF HALLBIORN THE STRONG

ECHOES OF LOVE'S HOUSE

THE BURGHERS' BATTLE

HOPE DIETH: LOVE LIVETH

ERROR AND LOSS

THE HALL AND THE WOOD

THE DAY OF DAYS

TO THE MUSE OF THE NORTH

OF THE THREE SEEKERS

LOVE'S GLEANING-TIDE

THE MESSAGE OF THE MARCH WIND

A DEATH SONG

ICELAND FIRST SEEN

THE RAVEN AND THE KING'S DAUGHTER

SPRING'S BEDFELLOW

MEETING IN WINTER

THE TWO SIDES OF THE RIVER

LOVE FULFILLED

THE KING OF DENMARK'S SONS

ON THE EDGE OF THE WILDERNESS

A GARDEN BY THE SEA

MOTHER AND SON

THUNDER IN THE GARDEN

THE GOD OF THE POOR

LOVE'S REWARD

THE FOLK-MOTE BY THE RIVER

THE VOICE OF TOIL

GUNNAR'S HOWE ABOVE THE HOUSE AT LITHEND

THE DAY IS COMING

EARTH THE HEALER, EARTH THE KEEPER

ALL FOR THE CAUSE

PAIN AND TIME STRIVE NOT

DRAWING NEAR THE LIGHT

VERSES FOR PICTURES

FOR THE BRIAR ROSE

ANOTHER FOR THE BRIAR ROSE

THE WOODPECKER

THE LION

THE FOREST

POMONA

FLORA

THE ORCHARD

TAPESTRY TREES

THE FLOWERING ORCHARD

THE END OF MAY

THE HALF OF LIFE GONE

MINE AND THINE

THE LAY OF CHRISTINE

HILDEBRAND AND HELLELIL

THE SON'S SORROW

AGNES AND THE HILL-MAN

KNIGHT AAGEN AND MAIDEN ELSE

HAFBUR AND SIGNY

GOLDILOCKS AND GOLDILOCKS



LOVE IS ENOUGH






POEMS BY THE WAY




FROM THE UPLAND TO THE SEA


Shall we wake one morn of spring,
Glad at heart of everything,
Yet pensive with the thought of eve?
Then the white house shall we leave.
Pass the wind-flowers and the bays,
Through the garth, and go our ways,
Wandering down among the meads
Till our very joyance needs
Rest at last; till we shall come
To that Sun-god's lonely home,
Lonely on the hillside grey,
Whence the sheep have gone away;
Lonely till the feast-time is,
When with prayer and praise of bliss,
Thither comes the country side.
There awhile shall we abide,
Sitting low down in the porch
By that image with the torch:
Thy one white hand laid upon
The black pillar that was won
From the far-off Indian mine;
And my hand nigh touching thine,
But not touching; and thy gown
Fair with spring-flowers cast adown
From thy bosom and thy brow.
There the south-west wind shall blow
Through thine hair to reach my cheek,
As thou sittest, nor mayst speak,
Nor mayst move the hand I kiss
For the very depth of bliss;
Nay, nor turn thine eyes to me.
Then desire of the great sea
Nigh enow, but all unheard,
In the hearts of us is stirred,
And we rise, we twain at last,
And the daffodils downcast,
Feel thy feet and we are gone
From the lonely Sun-Crowned one,
Then the meads fade at our back,
And the spring day 'gins to lack
That fresh hope that once it had;
But we twain grow yet more glad,
And apart no more may go
When the grassy slope and low
Dieth in the shingly sand:
Then we wander hand in hand
By the edges of the sea,
And I weary more for thee
Than if far apart we were,
With a space of desert drear
'Twixt thy lips and mine, O love!
Ah, my joy, my joy thereof!





OF THE WOOING OF HALLBIORN THE STRONG

A STORY FROM THE LAND-SETTLING BOOK OF ICELAND, CHAPTER XXX.


At Deildar-Tongue in the autumn-tide,
_So many times over comes summer again_,
Stood Odd of Tongue his door beside.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_
Dim and dusk the day was grown,
As he heard his folded wethers moan.
Then through the garth a man drew near,
With painted shield and gold-wrought spear.
Good was his horse and grand his gear,
And his girths were wet with Whitewater.
"Hail, Master Odd, live blithe and long!
How fare the folk at Deildar-Tongue?"
"All hail, thou Hallbiorn the Strong!
How fare the folk by the Brothers'-Tongue?"
"Meat have we there, and drink and fire,
Nor lack all things that we desire.
But by the other Whitewater
Of Hallgerd many a tale we hear."
"Tales enow may my daughter make
If too many words be said for her sake."
"What saith thine heart to a word of mine,
That I deem thy daughter fair and fine?
Fair and fine for a bride is she,
And I fain would have her home with me."
"Full many a word that at noon goes forth
Comes home at even little worth.
Now winter treadeth on autumn-tide,
So here till the spring shalt thou abide.
Then if thy mind be changed no whit.
And ye still will wed, see ye to it!
And on the first of summer days,
A wedded man, ye may go your ways.
Yet look, howso the thing will fall,
My hand shall meddle nought at all.
Lo, now the night and rain draweth up.
And within doors glimmer stoop and cup.
And hark, a little sound I know,
The laugh of Snæbiorn's fiddle-bow,
My sister's son, and a craftsman good,
When the red rain drives through the iron wood."
Hallbiorn laughed, and followed in,
And a merry feast there did begin.
Hallgerd's hands undid his weed,
Hallgerd's hands poured out the mead.
Her fingers at his breast he felt,
As her hair fell down about his belt.
Her fingers with the cup he took,
And o'er its rim at her did look.
Cold cup, warm hand, and fingers slim.
Before his eyes were waxen dim.
And if the feast were foul or fair,
He knew not, save that she was there.
He knew not if men laughed or wept,
While still 'twixt wall and daïs she stept.
Whether she went or stood that eve,
Not once his eyes her face did leave.
But  Snæbiorn laughed and  Snæbiorn sang,
And sweet his smitten fiddle rang.
And Hallgerd stood beside him there,
_So many times over comes summer again_
Nor ever once he turned to her,
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_

Master Odd on the morrow spake,
_So many times over comes summer again._
"Hearken, O guest, if ye be awake,"
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_
"Sure ye champions of the south
Speak many things from a silent mouth.
And thine, meseems, last night did pray
That ye might well be wed to-day.
The year's ingathering feast it is,
A goodly day to give thee bliss.
Come hither, daughter, fine and fair,
Here is a wooer from Whitewater.
Fast away hath he gotten fame,
And his father's name is e'en my name.
Will ye lay hand within his hand,
That blossoming fair our house may stand?"
She laid her hand within his hand;
White she was as the lily wand.
Low sang  Snæbiorn's brand in its sheath,
And his lips were waxen grey as death.
"Snæbiorn, sing us a song of worth.
If your song must be silent from now henceforth.
Clear and loud his voice outrang,
And a song of worth at the wedding he sang.
"Sharp sword," he sang, "and death is sure."
_So many times over comes summer again_,
"But love doth over all endure."
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_

Now winter cometh and weareth away,
_So many times over comes summer again_,
And glad is Hallbiorn many a day.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_
Full soft he lay his love beside;
But dark are the days of winter-tide.
Dark are the days, and the nights are long,
And sweet and fair was  Snæbiorn's song.
Many a time he talked with her,
Till they deemed the summer-tide was there.
And they forgat the wind-swept ways
And angry fords of the flitting-days.
While the north wind swept the hillside there
They forgat the other Whitewater.
While nights at Deildar-Tongue were long,
They clean forgat the Brothers'-Tongue.
But whatso falleth 'twixt Hell and Home,
_So many times over comes summer again,_
Full surely again shall summer come.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_

To Odd spake Hallbiorn on a day
_So many times over comes summer again,_
"Gone is the snow from everyway."
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_
"Now green is grown Whitewater-side,
And I to Whitewater will ride."
Quoth Odd, "Well fare thou winter-guest,
May thine own Whitewater be best
Well is a man's purse better at home
Than open where folk go and come."
"Come ye carles of the south country,
Now shall we go our kin to see!
For the lambs are bleating in the south,
And the salmon swims towards Olfus mouth,
Girth and graithe and gather your gear!
And ho for the other Whitewater!"
Bright was the moon as bright might be,
And  Snæbiorn rode to the north country.
And Odd to Reykholt is gone forth,
To see if his mares be ought of worth.
But Hallbiorn into the bower is gone
And there sat Hallgerd all alone.
She was not dight to go nor ride,
She had no joy of the summer-tide.
Silent she sat and combed her hair,
That fell all round about her there.
The slant beam lay upon her head,
And gilt her golden locks to red.
He gazed at her with hungry eyes
And fluttering did his heart arise.
"Full hot," he said, "is the sun to-day,
And the snow is gone from the mountain-way
The king-cup grows above the grass,
And through the wood do the thrushes pass."
Of all his words she hearkened none,
But combed her hair amidst the sun.
"The laden beasts stand in the garth
And their heads are turned to Helliskarth."
The sun was falling on her knee,
And she combed her gold hair silently.
"To-morrow great will be the cheer
At the Brothers'-Tongue by Whitewater."
From her folded lap the sunbeam slid;
She combed her hair, and the word she hid.
"Come, love; is the way so long and drear
From Whitewater to Whitewater?"
The sunbeam lay upon the floor;
She combed her hair and spake no more.
He drew her by the lily hand:
"I love thee better than all the land."
He drew her by the shoulders sweet:
"My threshold is but for thy feet."
He drew her by the yellow hair:
"O why wert thou so deadly fair?
O am I wedded to death?" he cried,
"Is the Dead-strand come to Whitewater side?"
And the sun was fading from the room,
But her eyes were bright in the change and the gloom.
"Sharp sword," she sang, "and death is sure,
But over all doth love endure."
She stood up shining in her place
And laughed beneath his deadly face.
Instead of the sunbeam gleamed a brand,
The hilts were hard in Hallbiorn's hand:
The bitter point was in Hallgerd's breast
That  Snæbiorn's lips of love had pressed.
Morn and noon, and nones passed o'er,
And the sun is far from the bower door.
To-morrow morn shall the sun come back,
_So many times over comes summer again_,
But Hallgerd's feet the floor shall lack.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_

Now Hallbiorn's house-carles ride full fast,
_So many times over comes summer again_,
Till many a mile of way is past.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_
But when they came over Oxridges,
'Twas, "Where shall we give our horses ease?"
When Shieldbroad-side was well in sight,
'Twas, "Where shall we lay our heads to-night?"
Hallbiorn turned and raised his head;
"Under the stones of the waste," he said.
Quoth one, "The clatter of hoofs anigh."
Quoth the other, "Spears against the sky!"
"Hither ride men from the Wells apace;
Spur we fast to a kindlier place."
Down from his horse leapt Hallbiorn straight:
"Why should the supper of Odin wait?
Weary and chased I will not come
To the table of my fathers' home."
With that came  Snæbiorn, who but he,
And twelve in all was his company.
 Snæbiorn's folk were on their feet;
He spake no word as they did meet.
They fought upon the northern hill:
Five are the howes men see there still.
Three men of  Snæbiorn's fell to earth
And Hallbiorn's twain that were of worth.
And never a word did  Snæbiorn say,
Till Hallbiorn's foot he smote away.
Then Hallbiorn cried: "Come, fellow of mine,
To the southern bent where the sun doth shine."
Tottering into the sun he went,
And slew two more upon the bent.
And on the bent where dead he lay
Three howes do men behold to-day.
And never a word spake  Snæbiorn yet,
Till in his saddle he was set.
Nor was there any heard his voice,
_So many times over comes summer again_
Till he came to his ship in Grimsar-oyce.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_

On so fair a day they hoisted sail,
_So many times over comes summer again_,
And for Norway well did the wind avail.
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_
But  Snæbiorn looked aloft and said:
"I see in the sail a stripe of red:
Murder, meseems, is the name of it,
And ugly things about it flit.
A stripe of blue in the sail I see:
Cold death of men it seems to me.
And next I see a stripe of black,
For a life fulfilled of bitter lack."
Quoth one, "So fair a wind doth blow
That we shall see Norway soon enow."
"Be blithe, O shipmate,"  Snæbiorn said,
"Tell Hacon the Earl that I be dead."
About the midst of the Iceland main
Round veered the wind to the east again.
And west they drave, and long they ran
Till they saw a land was white and wan.
"Yea,"  Snæbiorn said, "my home it is,
Ye bear a man shall have no bliss.
Far off beside the Greekish sea
The maidens pluck the grapes in glee.
Green groweth the wheat in the English land,
And the honey-bee flieth on every hand.
In Norway by the cheaping town
The laden beasts go up and down.
In Iceland many a mead they mow
And Hallgerd's grave grows green enow.
But these are Gunnbiorn's skerries wan,
Meet harbour for a hapless man.
In all lands else is love alive,
But here is nought with grief to strive.
Fail not for a while, O eastern wind,
For nought but grief is left behind.
And before me here a rest I know,"
_So many times over comes summer again,_
"A grave beneath the Greenland snow,"
_What healing in summer if winter be vain?_





ECHOES OF LOVE'S HOUSE



Love gives every gift whereby we long to live:
"Love takes every gift, and nothing back doth give."

Love unlocks the lips that else were ever dumb:
"Love locks up the lips whence all things good might come."

Love makes clear the eyes that else would never see:
"Love makes blind the eyes to all but me and thee."

Love turns life to joy till nought is left to gain:
"Love turns life to woe till hope is nought and vain."

Love, who changest all, change me nevermore!
"Love, who changest all, change my sorrow sore!"

Love burns up the world to changeless heaven and blest,
"Love burns up the world to a void of all unrest."

And there we twain are left, and no more work we need:
"And I am left alone, and who my work shall heed?"

Ah! I praise thee, Love, for utter joyance won!
"And is my praise nought worth for all my life undone?"





THE BURGHERS' BATTLE



Thick rise the spear-shafts o'er the land
That erst the harvest bore;
The sword is heavy in the hand,
_And we return no more_.
The light wind waves the Ruddy Fox,
Our banner of the war,
And ripples in the Running Ox,
_And we return no more_.
Across our stubble acres now
The teams go four and four;
But out-worn elders guide the plough,
_And we return no more_.
And now the women heavy-eyed
Turn through the open door
From gazing down the highway wide,
_Where we return no more_.
The shadows of the fruited close
Dapple the feast-hall floor;
There lie our dogs and dream and doze,
_And we return no more_.
Down from the minster tower to-day
Fall the soft chimes of yore
Amidst the chattering jackdaws' play:
_And we return no more_.
But underneath the streets are still;
Noon, and the market's o'er!
Back go the goodwives o'er the hill;
_For we return no more_.
What merchant to our gates shall come?
What wise man bring us lore?
What abbot ride away to Rome,
_Now we return no more?_
What mayor shall rule the hall we built?
Whose scarlet sweep the floor?
What judge shall doom the robber's guilt,
_Now we return no more?_
New houses in the street shall rise
Where builded we before,
Of other stone wrought otherwise;
_For we return no more_.
And crops shall cover field and hill
Unlike what once they bore,
And all be done without our will,
_Now we return no more_.
Look up! the arrows streak the sky,
The horns of battle roar;
The long spears lower and draw nigh,
_And we return no more_.
Remember how beside the wain,
We spoke the word of war,
And sowed this harvest of the plain,
_And we return no more_.
Lay spears about the Ruddy Fox!
The days of old are o'er;
Heave sword about the Running Ox!
_For we return no more._





HOPE DIETH: LOVE LIVETH


Strong are thine arms, O love, and strong
Thine heart to live, and love, and long;
But thou art wed to grief and wrong:
Live, then, and long, though hope be dead!
Live on, and labour through the years!
Make pictures through the mist of tears,
Of unforgotten happy fears,
That crossed the time ere hope was dead.
Draw near the place where once we stood
Amid delight's swift-rushing flood,
And we and all the world seemed good
Nor needed hope now cold and dead.
Dream in the dawn I come to thee
Weeping for things that may not be!
Dream that thou layest lips on me!
Wake, wake to clasp hope's body dead!
Count o'er and o'er, and one by one,
The minutes of the happy sun
That while agone on kissed lips shone,
Count on, rest not, for hope is dead.
Weep, though no hair's breadth thou shalt move
The living Earth, the heaven above,
By all the bitterness of love!
Weep and cease not, now hope is dead!
Sighs rest thee not, tears bring no ease,
Life hath no joy, and Death no peace:
The years change not, though they decrease,
For hope is dead, for hope is dead.
Speak, love, I listen: far away
I bless the tremulous lips, that say,
"Mock not the afternoon of day,
Mock not the tide when hope is dead!"
I bless thee, O my love, who say'st:
"Mock not the thistle-cumbered waste;
I hold Love's hand, and make no haste
Down the long way, now hope is dead.
With other names do we name pain,
The long years wear our hearts in vain.
Mock not our loss grown into gain,
Mock not our lost hope lying dead.
Our eyes gaze for no morning-star,
No glimmer of the dawn afar;
Full silent wayfarers we are
Since ere the noon-tide hope lay dead.
Behold with lack of happiness
The master, Love, our hearts did bless
Lest we should think of him the less:
Love dieth not, though hope is dead!"





ERROR AND LOSS


Upon an eve I sat me down and wept,
Because the world to me seemed nowise good;
Still autumn was it, and the meadows slept,
The misty hills dreamed, and the silent wood
Seemed listening to the sorrow of my mood:
I knew not if the earth with me did grieve,
Or if it mocked my grief that bitter eve.

Then 'twixt my tears a maiden did I see,
Who drew anigh me on the leaf-strewn grass,
Then stood and gazed upon me pitifully
With grief-worn eyes, until my woe did pass
From me to her, and tearless now I was,
And she mid tears was asking me of one
She long had sought unaided and alone.

I knew not of him, and she turned away
Into the dark wood, and my own great pain
Still held me there, till dark had slain the day,
And perished at the grey dawn's hand again;
Then from the wood a voice cried: "Ah, in vain,
In vain I seek thee, O thou bitter-sweet!
In what lone land are set thy longed-for feet?"

Then I looked up, and lo, a man there came
From midst the trees, and stood regarding me
Until my tears were dried for very shame;
Then he cried out: "O mourner, where is she
Whom I have sought o'er every land and sea?
I love her and she loveth me, and still
We meet no more than green hill meeteth hill."

With that he passed on sadly, and I knew
That these had met and missed in the dark night,
Blinded by blindness of the world untrue,
That hideth love and maketh wrong of right.
Then midst my pity for their lost delight,
Yet more with barren longing I grew weak,
Yet more I mourned that I had none to seek.





THE HALL AND THE WOOD


'Twas in the water-dwindling tide
When July days were done,
Sir Rafe of Greenhowes 'gan to ride
In the earliest of the sun.

He left the white-walled burg behind,
He rode amidst the wheat.
The westland-gotten wind blew kind
Across the acres sweet.

Then rose his heart and cleared his brow,
And slow he rode the way:
"As then it was, so is it now,
Not all hath worn away."

So came he to the long green lane
That leadeth to the ford,
And saw the sickle by the wain
Shine bright as any sword.

The brown carles stayed 'twixt draught and draught,
And murmuring, stood aloof,
But one spake out when he had laughed:
"God bless the Green-wood Roof!"

Then o'er the ford and up he fared:
And lo the happy hills!
And the mountain-dale by summer cleared,
That oft the winter fills.

Then forth he rode by Peter's gate,
And smiled and said aloud:
"No more a day doth the Prior wait;
White stands the tower and proud."

There leaned a knight on the gateway side
In armour white and wan,
And after the heels of the horse he cried,
"God keep the hunted man!"

Then quoth Sir Rafe, "Amen, amen!"
For he deemed the word was good;
But never a while he lingered then
Till he reached the Nether Wood.



He rode by ash, he rode by oak,
He rode the thicket round,
And heard no woodman strike a stroke,
No wandering wife he found.

He rode the wet, he rode the dry,
He rode the grassy glade:
At Wood-end yet the sun was high,
And his heart was unafraid.

There on the bent his rein he drew,
And looked o'er field and fold,
O'er all the merry meads he knew
Beneath the mountains old.

He gazed across to the good Green Howe
As he smelt the sun-warmed sward;
Then his face grew pale from chin to brow,
And he cried, "God save the sword!"

For there beyond the winding way,
Above the orchards green,
Stood up the ancient gables grey
With ne'er a roof between.

His naked blade in hand he had,
O'er rough and smooth he rode,
Till he stood where once his heart was glad
Amidst his old abode.



Across the hearth a tie-beam lay
Unmoved a weary while.
The flame that clomb the ashlar grey
Had burned it red as tile.

The sparrows bickering on the floor
Fled at his entering in;
The swift flew past the empty door
His winged meat to win.

Red apples from the tall old tree
O'er the wall's rent were shed.
Thence oft, a little lad, would he
Look down upon the lead.

There turned the cheeping chaffinch now
And feared no birding child;
Through the shot-window thrust a bough
Of garden-rose run wild.

He looked to right, he looked to left,
And down to the cold grey hearth,
Where lay an axe with half burned heft
Amidst the ashen dearth.

He caught it up and cast it wide
Against the gable wall;
Then to the daïs did he stride,
O'er beam and bench and all.

Amidst there yet the high-seat stood,
Where erst his sires had sat;
And the mighty board of oaken wood,
The fire had stayed thereat.

Then through the red wrath of his eyne
He saw a sheathed sword,
Laid thwart that wasted field of wine,
Amidmost of the board.

And by the hilts a slug-horn lay,
And therebeside a scroll,
He caught it up and turned away
From the lea-land of the bowl.

Then with the sobbing grief he strove,
For he saw his name thereon;
And the heart within his breast uphove
As the pen's tale now he won,

"O Rafe, my love of long ago!
Draw forth thy father's blade,
And blow the horn for friend and foe,
And the good green-wood to aid!"

He turned and took the slug-horn up,
And set it to his mouth,
And o'er that meadow of the cup
Blew east and west and south.

He drew the sword from out the sheath
And shook the fallow brand;
And there a while with bated breath,
And hearkening ear did stand.

Him-seemed the horn's voice he might hear--
Or the wind that blew o'er all.
Him-seemed that footsteps drew anear--
Or the boughs shook round the hall.

Him-seemed he heard a voice he knew--
Or a dream of while agone.
Him-seemed bright raiment towards him drew--
Or bright the sun-set shone.

She stood before him face to face,
With the sun-beam thwart her hand,
As on the gold of the Holy Place
The painted angels stand.

With many a kiss she closed his eyes;
She kissed him cheek and chin:
E'en so in the painted Paradise
Are Earth's folk welcomed in.

There in the door the green-coats stood,
O'er the bows went up the cry,
"O welcome, Rafe, to the free green-wood,
With us to live and die."

It was bill and bow by the high-seat stood,
And they cried above the bows,
"Now welcome, Rafe, to the good green-wood,
And welcome Kate the Rose!"

White, white in the moon is the woodland plash,
White is the woodland glade,
Forth wend those twain, from oak to ash,
With light hearts unafraid.

The summer moon high o'er the hill,
All silver-white is she,
And Sir Rafe's good men with bow and bill,
They go by two and three.

In the fair green-wood where lurks no fear,
Where the King's writ runneth not,
There dwell they, friends and fellows dear,
While summer days are hot.

And when the leaf from the oak-tree falls,
And winds blow rough and strong,
With the carles of the woodland thorps and halls
They dwell, and fear no wrong.

And there the merry yule they make,
And see the winter wane,
And fain are they for true-love's sake,
And the folk thereby are fain.

For the ploughing carle and the straying herd
Flee never for Sir Rafe:
No barefoot maiden wends afeard,
And she deems the thicket safe.

But sore adread do the chapmen ride;
Wide round the wood they go;
And the judge and the sergeants wander wide,
Lest they plead before the bow.

Well learned and wise is Sir Rafe's good sword,
And straight the arrows fly,
And they find the coat of many a lord,
And the crest that rideth high.





THE DAY OF DAYS


Each eve earth falleth down the dark,
As though its hope were o'er;
Yet lurks the sun when day is done
Behind to-morrow's door.

Grey grows the dawn while men-folk sleep,
Unseen spreads on the light,
Till the thrush sings to the coloured things,
And earth forgets the night.

No otherwise wends on our Hope:
E'en as a tale that's told
Are fair lives lost, and all the cost
Of wise and true and bold.

We've toiled and failed; we spake the word;
None hearkened; dumb we lie;
Our Hope is dead, the seed we spread
Fell o'er the earth to die.

What's this? For joy our hearts stand still,
And life is loved and dear,
The lost and found the Cause hath crowned,
The Day of Days is here.





TO THE MUSE OF THE NORTH


O muse that swayest the sad Northern Song,
Thy right hand full of smiting and of wrong,
Thy left hand holding pity; and thy breast
Heaving with hope of that so certain rest:
Thou, with the grey eyes kind and unafraid,
The soft lips trembling not, though they have said
The doom of the World and those that dwell therein.
The lips that smile not though thy children win
The fated Love that draws the fated Death.
O, borne adown the fresh stream of thy breath,
Let some word reach my ears and touch my heart,
That, if it may be, I may have a part
In that great sorrow of thy children dead
That vexed the brow, and bowed adown the head,
Whitened the hair, made life a wondrous dream,
And death the murmur of a restful stream,
But left no stain upon those souls of thine
Whose greatness through the tangled world doth shine.
O Mother, and Love and Sister all in one,
Come thou; for sure I am enough alone
That thou thine arms about my heart shouldst throw,
And wrap me in the grief of long ago.





OF THE THREE SEEKERS



There met three knights on the woodland,
And the first was clad in silk array:
The second was dight in iron and steel,
But the third was rags from head to heel.
"Lo, now is the year and the day come round
When we must tell what we have found."
The first said: "I have found a king
Who grudgeth no gift of anything."
The second said: "I have found a knight
Who hath never turned his back in fight."
But the third said: "I have found a love
That Time and the World shall never move."

Whither away to win good cheer?
"With me," said the first, "for my king is near."
So to the King they went their ways;
But there was a change of times and days.
"What men are ye," the great King said,
"That ye should eat my children's bread?
My waste has fed full many a store,
And mocking and grudge have I gained therefore.
Whatever waneth as days wax old.
Full worthy to win are goods and gold."

Whither away to win good cheer?
"With me," said the second, "my knight is near.
So to the knight they went their ways,
But there was a change of times and days.
He dwelt in castle sure and strong,
For fear lest aught should do him wrong.
Guards by gate and hall there were,
And folk went in and out in fear.
When he heard the mouse run in the wall,
"Hist!" he said, "what next shall befall?
Draw not near, speak under your breath,
For all new-comers tell of death.
Bring me no song nor minstrelsy,
Round death it babbleth still," said he.
"And what is fame and the praise of men,
When lost life cometh not again?"

Whither away to seek good cheer?
"Ah me!" said the third, "that my love were anear!
Were the world as little as it is wide,
In a happy house should ye abide.
Were the world as kind as it is hard,
Ye should behold a fair reward."

So far by high and low have they gone,
They have come to a waste was rock and stone.
But lo, from the waste, a company
Full well bedight came riding by;
And in the midst, a queen, so fair,
That God wrought well in making her.

The first and second knights abode
To gaze upon her as she rode,
Forth passed the third with head down bent,
And stumbling ever as he went.
His shoulder brushed her saddle-bow;
He trembled with his head hung low.
His hand brushed o'er her golden gown,
As on the waste he fell adown.
So swift to earth her feet she set,
It seemed that there her arms he met.
His lips that looked the stone to meet
Were on her trembling lips and sweet.
Softly she kissed him cheek and chin,
His mouth her many tears drank in.
"Where would'st thou wander, love," she said,
"Now I have drawn thee from the dead?"
"I go my ways," he said, "and thine
Have nought to do with grief and pine."
"All ways are one way now," she said,
"Since I have drawn thee from the dead."
Said he, "But I must seek again
Where first I met thee in thy pain:
I am not clad so fair," said he,
"But yet the old hurts thou may'st see.
And thou, but for thy gown of gold,
A piteous tale of thee were told."
"There is no pain on earth," she said,
"Since I have drawn thee from the dead."
"And parting waiteth for us there,"
Said he, "as it was yester-year."

"Yet first a space of love," she said,
"Since I have drawn thee from the dead."
He laughed; said he, "Hast thou a home
Where I and these my friends may come?"
Laughing, "The world's my home," she said,
"Now I have drawn thee from the dead.
Yet somewhere is a space thereof
Where I may dwell beside my love.
There clear the river grows for him
Till o'er its stones his keel shall swim.
There faint the thrushes in their song,
And deem he tarrieth overlong.
There summer-tide is waiting now
Until he bids the roses blow.
Come, tell my flowery fields," she said,
"How I have drawn thee from the dead."

Whither away to win good cheer?
"With me," he said, "for my love is here.
The wealth of my house it waneth not;
No gift it giveth is forgot.
No fear my house may enter in,
For nought is there that death may win.
Now life is little, and death is nought,
Since all is found that erst I sought."





LOVE'S GLEANING-TIDE



Draw not away thy hands, my love,
With wind alone the branches move,
And though the leaves be scant above
The Autumn shall not shame us.

Say; Let the world wax cold and drear,
What is the worst of all the year
But life, and what can hurt us, dear,
Or death, and who shall blame us?

Ah, when the summer comes again
How shall we say, we sowed in vain?
The root was joy, the stem was pain,
The ear a nameless blending.

The root is dead and gone, my love,
The stem's a rod our truth to prove;
The ear is stored for nought to move
Till heaven and earth have ending.





THE MESSAGE OF THE MARCH WIND



Fair now is the spring-tide, now earth lies beholding
With the eyes of a lover, the face of the sun;
Long lasteth the daylight, and hope is enfolding
The green-growing acres with increase begun.

Now sweet, sweet it is through the land to be straying
'Mid the birds and the blossoms and the beasts of the field;
Love mingles with love, and no evil is weighing
On thy heart or mine, where all sorrow is healed.

From township to township, o'er down and by tillage
Fair, far have we wandered and long was the day;
But now cometh eve at the end of the village,
Where over the grey wall the church riseth grey.

There is wind in the twilight; in the white road before us
The straw from the ox-yard is blowing about;
The moon's rim is rising, a star glitters o'er us,
And the vane on the spire-top is swinging in doubt.

Down there dips the highway, toward the bridge crossing over
The brook that runs on to the Thames and the sea.
Draw closer, my sweet, we are lover and lover;
This eve art thou given to gladness and me.

Shall we be glad always? Come closer and hearken:
Three fields further on, as they told me down there,
When the young moon has set, if the March sky should darken,
We might see from the hill-top the great city's glare.

Hark, the wind in the elm-boughs! from London it bloweth,
And telleth of gold, and of hope and unrest;
Of power that helps not; of wisdom that knoweth,
But teacheth not aught of the worst and the best.

Of the rich men it telleth, and strange is the story
How they have, and they hanker, and grip far and wide;
And they live and they die, and the earth and its glory
Has been but a burden they scarce might abide.

Hark! the March wind again of a people is telling;
Of the life that they live there, so haggard and grim,
That if we and our love amidst them had been dwelling
My fondness had faltered, thy beauty grown dim.

This land we have loved in our love and our leisure
For them hangs in heaven, high out of their reach;
The wide hills o'er the sea-plain for them have no pleasure,
The grey homes of their fathers no story to teach.

The singers have sung and the builders have builded,
The painters have fashioned their tales of delight;
For what and for whom hath the world's book been gilded,
When all is for these but the blackness of night?

How long, and for what is their patience abiding?
How oft and how oft shall their story be told,
While the hope that none seeketh in darkness is hiding,
And in grief and in sorrow the world groweth old?

Come back to the inn, love, and the lights and the fire,
And the fiddler's old tune and the shuffling of feet;
For there in a while shall be rest and desire,
And there shall the morrow's uprising be sweet.

Yet, love, as we wend, the wind bloweth behind us,
And beareth the last tale it telleth to-night,
How here in the spring-tide the message shall find us;
For the hope that none seeketh is coming to light.

Like the seed of mid-winter, unheeded, unperished,
Like the autumn-sown wheat 'neath the snow lying green,
Like the love that overtook us, unawares and uncherished,
Like the babe 'neath thy girdle that groweth unseen;

So the hope of the people now buddeth and groweth,
Rest fadeth before it, and blindness and fear;
It biddeth us learn all the wisdom it knoweth;
It hath found us and held us, and biddeth us hear:

For it beareth the message: "Rise up on the morrow
And go on your ways toward the doubt and the strife;
Join hope to our hope and blend sorrow with sorrow.
And seek for men's love in the short days of life."

But lo, the old inn, and the lights, and the fire,
And the fiddler's old tune and the shuffling of feet;
Soon for us shall be quiet and rest and desire,
And to-morrow's uprising to deeds shall be sweet.





A DEATH SONG



What cometh here from west to east awending?
And who are these, the marchers stern and slow?
We bear the message that the rich are sending
Aback to those who bade them wake and know.
_Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day._

We asked them for a life of toilsome earning,
They bade us bide their leisure for our bread;
We craved to speak to tell our woeful learning:
We come back speechless, bearing back our dead.
_Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day._

They will not learn; they have no ears to hearken.
They turn their faces from the eyes of fate;
Their gay-lit halls shut out the skies that darken.
But, lo! this dead man knocking at the gate.
_Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day._

Here lies the sign that we shall break our prison;
Amidst the storm he won a prisoner's rest;
But in the cloudy dawn the sun arisen
Brings us our day of work to win the best.
_Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day._





ICELAND FIRST SEEN


Lo from our loitering ship
a new land at last to be seen;
Toothed rocks down the side of the firth
on the east guard a weary wide lea,
And black slope the hillsides above,
striped adown with their desolate green:
And a peak rises up on the west
from the meeting of cloud and of sea,
Foursquare from base unto point
like the building of Gods that have been,
The last of that waste of the mountains
all cloud-wreathed and snow-flecked and grey,
And bright with the dawn that began
just now at the ending of day.

Ah! what came we forth for to see
that our hearts are so hot with desire?
Is it enough for our rest,
the sight of this desolate strand,
And the mountain-waste voiceless as death
but for winds that may sleep not nor tire?
Why do we long to wend forth
through the length and breadth of a land,
Dreadful with grinding of ice,
and record of scarce hidden fire,
But that there 'mid the grey grassy dales
sore scarred by the ruining streams
Lives the tale of the Northland of old
and the undying glory of dreams?

O land, as some cave by the sea
where the treasures of old have been laid,
The sword it may be of a king
whose name was the turning of fight:
Or the staff of some wise of the world
that many things made and unmade.
Or the ring of a woman maybe
whose woe is grown wealth and delight.
No wheat and no wine grows above it,
no orchard for blossom and shade;
The few ships that sail by its blackness
but deem it the mouth of a grave;
Yet sure when the world shall awaken,
this too shall be mighty to save.

Or rather, O land, if a marvel
it seemeth that men ever sought
Thy wastes for a field and a garden
fulfilled of all wonder and doubt,
And feasted amidst of the winter
when the fight of the year had been fought,
Whose plunder all gathered together
was little to babble about;
Cry aloud from thy wastes, O thou land,
"Not for this nor for that was I wrought
Amid waning of realms and of riches
and death of things worshipped and sure,
I abide here the spouse of a God,
and I made and I make and endure."

O Queen of the grief without knowledge,
of the courage that may not avail,
Of the longing that may not attain,
of the love that shall never forget,
More joy than the gladness of laughter
thy voice hath amidst of its wail:
More hope than of pleasure fulfilled
amidst of thy blindness is set;
More glorious than gaining of all
thine unfaltering hand that shall fail:
For what is the mark on thy brow
but the brand that thy Brynhild doth bear?
Lone once, and loved and undone
by a love that no ages outwear.

Ah! when thy Balder comes back,
and bears from the heart of the Sun
Peace and the healing of pain,
and the wisdom that waiteth no more;
And the lilies are laid on thy brow
'mid the crown of the deeds thou hast done;
And the roses spring up by thy feet
that the rocks of the wilderness wore.
Ah! when thy Balder comes back
and we gather the gains he hath won,
Shall we not linger a little
to talk of thy sweetness of old,
Yea, turn back awhile to thy travail
whence the Gods stood aloof to behold?





THE RAVEN AND THE KING'S DAUGHTER



THE RAVEN

King's daughter sitting in tower so high,
_Fair summer is on many a shield._
Why weepest thou as the clouds go by?
_Fair sing the swans 'twixt firth and field._
Why weepest thou in the window-seat
Till the tears run through thy fingers sweet?


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

I weep because I sit alone
Betwixt these walls of lime and stone.
Fair folk are in my father's hall,
But for me he built this guarded wall.
And here the gold on the green I sew
Nor tidings of my true-love know.


THE RAVEN

King's daughter, sitting above the sea,
I shall tell thee a tale shall gladden thee.
Yestreen I saw a ship go forth
When the wind blew merry from the north.
And by the tiller Steingrim sat,
And O, but my heart was glad thereat!
For 'twixt ashen plank and dark blue sea
His sword sang sweet of deeds to be.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

O barren sea, thou bitter bird,
And a barren tale my ears have heard.


THE RAVEN

Thy father's men were hard thereby
In byrny bright and helmet high.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

O worser waxeth thy story far,
For these drew upon me bolt and bar.
Fly south, O fowl, to the field of death
For nothing sweet thy grey neb saith.


THE RAVEN

O, there was Olaf the lily-rose,
As fair as any oak that grows.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

O sweet bird, what did he then
Among the spears of my father's men?


THE RAVEN

'Twixt ashen plank and dark blue sea,
He sang: My true love waiteth me.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

As well as this dull floor knows my feet,
I am not weary yet, my sweet.


THE RAVEN

He sang: As once her hand I had,
Her lips at last shall make me glad.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

As once our fingers met, O love,
So shall our lips be fain thereof.


THE RAVEN

He sang: Come wrack and iron and flame,
For what shall breach the wall but fame?


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

Be swift to rise and set, O Sun,
Lest life 'twixt hope and death be done.


THE RAVEN

King's daughter sitting in tower so high,
A gift for my tale ere forth I fly,
The gold from thy finger fair and fine,
Thou hadst it from no love of thine.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

By my father's ring another there is,
I had it with my mother's kiss.
Fly forth, O fowl, across the sea
To win another gift of me.
Fly south to bring me tidings true,
_Fair summer is on many a shield._
Of the eve grown red with the battle-dew,
_Fair sing the swans 'twixt firth and field._




THE RAVEN

King's daughter sitting in tower so high,
_Fair summer is on many a shield._
Tidings to hearken ere thou die,
_Fair sing the swans 'twixt firth and field._
In the Frankish land the spear points met,
And wide about the field was wet.
And high ere the cold moon quenched the sun,
Blew Steingrim's horn for battle won.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

Fair fall thee, fowl! Tell tidings true
Of deeds that men that day did do.


THE RAVEN

Steingrim before his banner went,
And helms were broke and byrnies rent.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

A doughty man and good at need;
Tell men of any other's deed?


THE RAVEN

Where Steingrim through the battle bore
Still Olaf went a foot before.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

O fair with deeds the world doth grow!
Where is my true-love gotten now?


THE RAVEN

Upon the deck beside the mast
He lieth now, and sleepeth fast.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

Heard'st thou before his sleep began
That he spake word of any man?


THE RAVEN

Methought of thee he sang a song,
But nothing now he saith for long.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

And wottest thou where he will wend
With the world before him from end to end?


THE RAVEN

Before the battle joined that day
Steingrim a word to him did say:
"If we bring the banner back in peace,
In the King's house much shall my fame increase;
Till there no guarded door shall be
But it shall open straight to me.
Then to the bower we twain shall go
Where thy love the golden seam doth sew.
I shall bring thee in and lay thine hand
About the neck of that lily-wand.
And let the King be lief or loth
One bed that night shall hold you both."
Now north belike runs Steingrim's prow,
And the rain and the wind from the south do blow.


THE KING'S DAUGHTER

Lo, fowl of death, my mother's ring,
But the bridal song I must learn to sing.
And fain were I for a space alone,
For O the wind, and the wind doth moan.
And I must array the bridal bed,
_Fair summer is on many a shield._
For O the rain, and the rain drifts red!
_Fair sing the swans 'twixt firth and field._



Before the day from the night was born,
_Fair summer is on many a shield._
She heard the blast of Steingrim's horn,
_Fair sing the swans 'twixt firth and field._
Before the day was waxen fair
Were Steingrim's feet upon the stair.
"O bolt and bar they fall away,
But heavy are Steingrim's feet to-day."
"O heavy the feet of one who bears
The longing of days and the grief of years!
Lie down, lie down, thou lily-wand
That on thy neck I may lay his hand.
Whether the King be lief or loth
To-day one bed shall hold you both.
O thou art still as he is still,
So sore as ye longed to talk your fill
And good it were that I depart,
Now heart is laid so close to heart.
For sure ye shall talk so left alone
_Fair summer is on many a shield._
Of days to be below the stone."
_Fair sing the swans 'twixt firth and field._





SPRING'S BEDFELLOW



Spring went about the woods to-day,
The soft-foot winter-thief,
And found where idle sorrow lay
'Twixt flower and faded leaf.

She looked on him, and found him fair
For all she had been told;
She knelt adown beside him there,
And sang of days of old.

His open eyes beheld her nought,
Yet 'gan his lips to move;
But life and deeds were in her thought,
And he would sing of love.

So sang they till their eyes did meet,
And faded fear and shame;
More bold he grew, and she more sweet,
Until they sang the same.

Until, say they who know the thing,
Their very lips did kiss,
And Sorrow laid abed with Spring
Begat an earthly bliss.





MEETING IN WINTER



Winter in the world it is,
Round about the unhoped kiss
Whose dream I long have sorrowed o'er;
Round about the longing sore,
That the touch of thee shall turn
Into joy too deep to burn.

Round thine eyes and round thy mouth
Passeth no murmur of the south,
When my lips a little while
Leave thy quivering tender smile,
As we twain, hand holding hand,
Once again together stand.

Sweet is that, as all is sweet;
For the white drift shalt thou meet,
Kind and cold-cheeked and mine own,
Wrapped about with deep-furred gown
In the broad-wheeled chariot:
Then the north shall spare us not;
The wide-reaching waste of snow
Wilder, lonelier yet shall grow
As the reddened sun falls down.
But the warders of the town,
When they flash the torches out
O'er the snow amid their doubt,
And their eyes at last behold
Thy red-litten hair of gold;
Shall they open, or in fear
Cry, "Alas! what cometh here?
Whence hath come this Heavenly One
To tell of all the world undone?"

They shall open, and we shall see
The long street litten scantily
By the long stream of light before
The guest-hall's half-open door;
And our horses' bells shall cease
As we reach the place of peace;
Thou shalt tremble, as at last
The worn threshold is o'er-past,
And the fire-light blindeth thee:
Trembling shalt thou cling to me
As the sleepy merchants stare
At thy cold hands slim and fair
Thy soft eyes and happy lips
Worth all lading of their ships.

O my love, how sweet and sweet
That first kissing of thy feet,
When the fire is sunk alow,
And the hall made empty now
Groweth solemn, dim and vast!
O my love, the night shall last
Longer than men tell thereof
Laden with our lonely love!





THE TWO SIDES OF THE RIVER



THE YOUTHS

O winter, O white winter, wert thou gone,
No more within the wilds were I alone,
Leaping with bent bow over stock and stone!

No more alone my love the lamp should burn,
Watching the weary spindle twist and turn,
Or o'er the web hold back her tears and yearn:
O winter, O white winter, wert thou gone!


THE MAIDENS

Sweet thoughts fly swiftlier than the drifting snow,
And with the twisting threads sweet longings grow,
And o'er the web sweet pictures come and go,
For no white winter are we long alone.


THE YOUTHS

O stream so changed, what hast thou done to me,
That I thy glittering ford no more can see
Wreathing with white her fair feet lovingly?

See, in the rain she stands, and, looking down
With frightened eyes upon thy whirlpools brown,
Drops to her feet again her girded gown.
O hurrying turbid stream, what hast thou done?


THE MAIDENS

The clouds lift, telling of a happier day
When through the thin stream I shall take my way,
Girt round with gold, and garlanded with may,
What rushing stream can keep us long alone?


THE YOUTHS

O burning Sun, O master of unrest,
Why must we, toiling, cast away the best,
Now, when the bird sleeps by her empty nest?

See, with my garland lying at her feet,
In lonely labour stands mine own, my sweet,
Above the quern half-filled with half-ground wheat.
O red taskmaster, that thy flames were done!


THE MAIDENS

O love, to-night across the half-shorn plain
Shall I not go to meet the yellow wain,
A look of love at end of toil to gain?
What flaming sun can keep us long alone?


THE YOUTHS

To-morrow, said I, is grape gathering o'er;
To-morrow, and our loves are twinned no more.
To-morrow came, to bring us woe and war.

What have I done, that I should stand with these
Hearkening the dread shouts borne upon the breeze,
While she, far off, sits weeping 'neath her trees?
Alas, O kings, what is it ye have done?


THE MAIDENS

Come, love, delay not; come, and slay my dread!
Already is the banquet table spread;
In the cool chamber flower-strewn is my bed:
Come, love, what king shall keep us long alone?


THE YOUTHS

O city, city, open thou thy gate!
See, with life snatched from out the hand of fate!
How on thy glittering triumph I must wait!

Are not her hands stretched out to me? Her eyes,
Grow they not weary as each new hope dies,
And lone before her still the long road lies?
O golden city, fain would I be gone!


THE MAIDENS

And thou art happy, amid shouts and songs,
And all that unto conquering men belongs.
Night hath no fear for me, and day no wrongs.
What brazen city gates can keep us, lone?


THE YOUTHS

O long, long road, how bare thou art, and grey!
Hill after hill thou climbest, and the day
Is ended now, O moonlit endless way!

And she is standing where the rushes grow,
And still with white hand shades her anxious brow,
Though 'neath the world the sun is fallen now,
O dreary road, when will thy leagues be done?


THE MAIDENS

O tremblest thou, grey road, or do my feet
Tremble with joy, thy flinty face to meet?
Because my love's eyes soon mine eyes shall greet?
No heart thou hast to keep us long alone.


THE YOUTHS

O wilt thou ne'er depart, thou heavy night?
When will thy slaying bring on the morning bright,
That leads my weary feet to my delight?

Why lingerest thou, filling with wandering fears
My lone love's tired heart; her eyes with tears
For thoughts like sorrow for the vanished years?
Weaver of ill thoughts, when wilt thou be gone?


THE MAIDENS

Love, to the east are thine eyes turned as mine,
In patient watching for the night's decline?
And hast thou noted this grey widening line?
Can any darkness keep us long alone?


THE YOUTHS

O day, O day, is it a little thing
That thou so long unto thy life must cling,
Because I gave thee such a welcoming?

I called thee king of all felicity,
I praised thee that thou broughtest joy so nigh;
Thine hours are turned to years, thou wilt not die;
O day so longed for, would that thou wert gone!


THE MAIDENS

The light fails, love; the long day soon shall be
Nought but a pensive happy memory
Blessed for the tales it told to thee and me.
How hard it was, O love, to be alone.





LOVE FULFILLED



Hast thou longed through weary days
For the sight of one loved face?
Hast thou cried aloud for rest,
Mid the pain of sundering hours;
Cried aloud for sleep and death,
Since the sweet unhoped for best
Was a shadow and a breath?
O, long now, for no fear lowers
O'er these faint feet-kissing flowers.
O, rest now; and yet in sleep
All thy longing shalt thou keep.

Thou shalt rest and have no fear
Of a dull awaking near,
Of a life for ever blind,
Uncontent and waste and wide.
Thou shalt wake and think it sweet
That thy love is near and kind.
Sweeter still for lips to meet;
Sweetest that thine heart doth hide
Longing all unsatisfied
With all longing's answering
Howsoever close ye cling.

Thou rememberest how of old
E'en thy very pain grew cold,
How thou might'st not measure bliss
E'en when eyes and hands drew nigh.
Thou rememberest all regret
For the scarce remembered kiss.
The lost dream of how they met,
Mouths once parched with misery.
Then seemed Love born but to die,
Now unrest, pain, bliss are one,
Love, unhidden and alone.





THE KING OF DENMARK'S SONS



In Denmark gone is many a year,
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun,_
Two sons of Gorm the King there were,
_So grey is the sea when day is done._

Both these were gotten in lawful bed
Of Thyrre Denmark's Surety-head.

Fair was Knut of face and limb
As the breast of the Queen that suckled him.

But Harald was hot of hand and heart
As lips of lovers ere they part.

Knut sat at home in all men's love,
But over the seas must Harald rove.

And for every deed by Harald won,
Gorm laid more love on Knut alone.

On a high-tide spake the King in hall,
"Old I grow as the leaves that fall.

"Knut shall reign when I am dead,
So shall the land have peace and aid.

"But many a ship shall Harald have,
For I deem the sea well wrought for his grave."

Then none spake save the King again,
"If Knut die all my days be vain.

"And whoso the tale of his death shall tell,
Hath spoken a word to gain him hell.

"Lo here a doom I will not break,"
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun._
"For life or death or any man's sake,"
_So grey is the sea when day is done._



O merry days in the summer-tide!
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun._
When the ships sail fair and the young men ride,
_So grey is the sea when day is done._

Now Harald has got him east away,
And each morrow of fight was a gainful day.

But Knut is to his fosterer gone
To deal in deeds of peace alone.

So wear the days, and well it is
Such lovely lords should dwell in bliss.

O merry in the winter-tide
When men to Yule-feast wend them wide.

And here lieth Knut in the Lima-firth
When the lift is low o'er the Danish earth.

"Tell me now, Shipmaster mine,
What are yon torches there that shine?"

"Lord, no torches may these be
But golden prows across the sea.

"For over there the sun shines now
And the gold worms gape from every prow."

The sun and the wind came down o'er the sea,
"Tell them over how many they be!"

"Ten I tell with shield-hung sides.
Nought but a fool his death abides."

"Ten thou tellest, and we be three,
Good need that we do manfully.

"Good fellows, grip the shield and spear
For Harald my brother draweth near.

"Well breakfast we when night is done,
And Valhall's cock crows up the sun."

Up spoke Harald in wrathful case:
"I would have word with this waxen face!

"What wilt thou pay, thou huckstered
That I let thee live another year?

"For oath that thou wilt never reign
Will I let thee live a year or twain."

"Kisses and love shalt thou have of me
If yet my liegeman thou wilt be.

"But stroke of sword, and dint of axe,
Or ere thou makest my face as wax."

As thick the arrows fell around
As fall sere leaves on autumn ground.

In many a cheek the red did wane
No maid might ever kiss again.

"Lay me aboard," Lord Harald said,
"The winter day will soon be dead!

"Lay me aboard the bastard's ship,
And see to it lest your grapnels slip!"

Then some they knelt and some they drowned,
And some lay dead Lord Knut around.

"Look here at the wax-white corpse of him,
As fair as the Queen in face and limb!

"Make now for the shore, for the moon is bright,
And I would be home ere the end of night.

"Two sons last night had Thyrre the Queen,
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun._
And both she may lack ere the woods wax green,"
_So grey is the sea when day is done._



A little before the morning tide,
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun,_
Queen Thyrre looked out of her window-side,
_So grey is the sea when day is done._

"O men-at-arms, what men be ye?"
"Harald thy son come over the sea."

"Why is thy face so pale, my son?"
"It may be red or day is done."

"O evil words of an evil hour!
Come, sweet son, to thy mother's bower!"

None from the Queen's bower went that day
Till dark night over the meadows lay.

None thenceforth heard wail or cry
Till the King's feast was waxen high.

Then into the hall Lord Harald came
When the great wax lights were all aflame.

"What tidings, son, dost thou bear to me?
Speak out before I drink with thee."

"Tidings small for a seafarer.
Two falcons in the sea-cliffs were;

"And one was white and one was grey,
And they fell to battle on a day;

"They fought in the sun, they fought in the wind,
No boot the white fowl's wounds to bind.

"They fought in the wind, they fought in the sun,
And the white fowl died when the play was done."

"Small tidings these to bear o'er the sea!
Good hap that nothing worser they be!

"Small tidings for a travelled man!
Drink with me, son, whiles yet ye can!

"Drink with me ere thy day and mine,
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun,_
Be nought but a tale told over the wine."
_So grey is the sea when day is done._



Now fareth the King with his men to sleep,
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun,_
And dim the maids from the Queen's bower creep,
_So grey is the sea when day is done._

And in the hall is little light,
And there standeth the Queen with cheeks full white.

And soft the feet of women fall
From end to end of the King's great hall.

These bear the gold-wrought cloths away,
And in other wise the hall array;

Till all is black that hath been gold
So heavy a tale there must be told.

The morrow men looked on King Gorm and said,
"Hath he dreamed a dream or beheld the dead?

"Why is he sad who should be gay?
Why are the old man's lips so grey?"

Slow paced the King adown the hall,
Nor looked aside to either wall,

Till in high-seat there he sat him down,
And deadly old men deemed him grown.

"O Queen, what thrall's hands durst do this,
To strip my hall of mirth and bliss?"

"No thrall's hands in the hangings were,
No thrall's hands made the tenters bare.

"King's daughters' hands have done the deed,
The hands of Denmark's Surety-head."

"Nought betters the deed thy word unsaid.
Tell me that Knut my son is dead!"

She said: "The doom on thee, O King!
For thine own lips have said the thing."

Men looked to see the King arise,
The death of men within his eyes.

Men looked to see his bitter sword
That once cleared ships from board to board.

But in the hall no sword gleamed wide,
His hand fell down along his side.

No red there came into his cheek,
He fell aback as one made weak.

His wan cheek brushed the high-seat's side,
And in the noon of day he died.

So lieth King Gorm beneath the grass,
But from mouth to mouth this tale did pass.

And Harald reigned and went his way,
_So fair upriseth the rim of the sun._
And still is the story told to-day,
_So grey is the sea when day is done._




ON THE EDGE OF THE WILDERNESS



PUELLÆ

Whence comest thou, and whither goest thou?
Abide! abide! longer the shadows grow;
What hopest thou the dark to thee will show?

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

Why should I name the land across the sea
Wherein I first took hold on misery?
Why should I name the land that flees from me?

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

What wilt thou do within the desert place
Whereto thou turnest now thy careful face?
Stay but a while to tell us of thy case.

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

What, nigh the journey's end shall I abide,
When in the waste mine own love wanders wide,
When from all men for me she still doth hide?

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Nay, nay; but rather she forgetteth thee,
To sit upon the shore of some warm sea,
Or in green gardens where sweet fountains be.

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

Will ye then keep me from the wilderness,
Where I at least, alone with my distress,
The quiet land of changing dreams may bless?

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Forget the false forgetter and be wise,
And 'mid these clinging hands and loving eyes,
Dream, not in vain, thou knowest paradise.

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

Ah! with your sweet eyes shorten not the day,
Nor let your gentle hands my journey stay!
Perchance love is not wholly cast away.

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Pluck love away as thou wouldst pluck a thorn
From out thy flesh; for why shouldst thou be born
To bear a life so wasted and forlorn?

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

Yea, why then was I born, since hope is pain,
And life a lingering death, and faith but vain,
And love the loss of all I seemed to gain?

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Dost thou believe that this shall ever be,
That in our land no face thou e'er shalt see,
No voice thou e'er shalt hear to gladden thee?

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

No longer do I know of good or bad,
I have forgotten that I once was glad;
I do but chase a dream that I have had.

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Stay! take one image for thy dreamful night;
Come, look at her, who in the world's despite
Weeps for delaying love and lost delight.

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

Mock me not till to-morrow. Mock the dead,
They will not heed it, or turn round the head,
To note who faithless are, and who are wed.

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

We mock thee not. Hast thou not heard of those
Whose faithful love the loved heart holds so close,
That death must wait till one word lets it loose?

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

I hear you not: the wind from off the waste
Sighs like a song that bids me make good haste
The wave of sweet forgetfulness to taste.

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Come back! like such a singer is the wind,
As to a sad tune sings fair words and kind,
That he with happy tears all eyes may blind!

Abide! abide! for we are happy here.


AMANS

Did I not hear her sweet voice cry from far,
That o'er the lonely waste fair fields there are,
Fair days that know not any change or care?

Let me depart, since ye are happy here.


PUELLÆ

Oh, no! not far thou heardest her, but nigh;
Nigh, 'twixt the waste's edge and the darkling sky.
Turn back again, too soon it is to die.

Abide! a little while be happy here.


AMANS

How with the lapse of lone years could I strive,
And can I die now that thou biddest live?
What joy this space 'twixt birth and death can give.

Can we depart, who are so happy here?





A GARDEN BY THE SEA


I know a little garden-close,
Set thick with lily and red rose,
Where I would wander if I might
From dewy morn to dewy night,
And have one with me wandering.

And though within it no birds sing,
And though no pillared house is there,
And though the apple-boughs are bare
Of fruit and blossom, would to God
Her feet upon the green grass trod,
And I beheld them as before.

There comes a murmur from the shore,
And in the close two fair streams are,
Drawn from the purple hills afar,
Drawn down unto the restless sea:
Dark hills whose heath-bloom feeds no bee,
Dark shore no ship has ever seen,
Tormented by the billows green
Whose murmur comes unceasingly
Unto the place for which I cry.

For which I cry both day and night,
For which I let slip all delight,
Whereby I grow both deaf and blind,
Careless to win, unskilled to find,
And quick to lose what all men seek.

Yet tottering as I am and weak,
Still have I left a little breath
To seek within the jaws of death
An entrance to that happy place,
To seek the unforgotten face,
Once seen, once kissed, once reft from me
Anigh the murmuring of the sea.





MOTHER AND SON


Now sleeps the land of houses,
and dead night holds the street,
And there thou liest, my baby,
and sleepest soft and sweet;
My man is away for awhile,
but safe and alone we lie,
And none heareth thy breath but thy mother,
and the moon looking down from the sky
On the weary waste of the town,
as it looked on the grass-edged road
Still warm with yesterday's sun,
when I left my old abode;
Hand in hand with my love,
that night of all nights in the year;
When the river of love o'erflowed
and drowned all doubt and fear,
And we two were alone in the world,
and once if never again,
We knew of the secret of earth
and the tale of its labour and pain.

Lo amidst London I lift thee,
and how little and light thou art,
And thou without hope or fear
thou fear and hope of my heart!
Lo here thy body beginning,
O son, and thy soul and thy life;
But how will it be if thou livest,
and enterest into the strife,
And in love we dwell together
when the man is grown in thee,
When thy sweet speech I shall hearken,
and yet 'twixt thee and me
Shall rise that wall of distance,
that round each one doth grow,
And maketh it hard and bitter
each other's thought to know.

Now, therefore, while yet thou art little
and hast no thought of thine own,
I will tell thee a word of the world;
of the hope whence thou hast grown;
Of the love that once begat thee,
of the sorrow that hath made
Thy little heart of hunger,
and thy hands on my bosom laid.
Then mayst thou remember hereafter,
as whiles when people say
All this hath happened before
in the life of another day;
So mayst thou dimly remember
this tale of thy mother's voice,
As oft in the calm of dawning
I have heard the birds rejoice,
As oft I have heard the storm-wind
go moaning through the wood;
And I knew that earth was speaking,
and the mother's voice was good.

Now, to thee alone will I tell it
that thy mother's body is fair,
In the guise of the country maidens
Who play with the sun and the air;
Who have stood in the row of the reapers
in the August afternoon,
Who have sat by the frozen water
in the high day of the moon,
When the lights of the Christmas feasting
were dead in the house on the hill,
And the wild geese gone to the salt-marsh
had left the winter still.
Yea, I am fair, my firstling;
if thou couldst but remember me!
The hair that thy small hand clutcheth
is a goodly sight to see;
I am true, but my face is a snare;
soft and deep are my eyes,
And they seem for men's beguiling
fulfilled with the dreams of the wise.
Kind are my lips, and they look
as though my soul had learned
Deep things I have never heard of.
My face and my hands are burned
By the lovely sun of the acres;
three months of London town
And thy birth-bed have bleached them indeed,
"But lo, where the edge of the gown"
(So said thy father) "is parting
the wrist that is white as the curd
From the brown of the hand that I love,
bright as the wing of a bird."

Such is thy mother, O firstling,
yet strong as the maidens of old,
Whose spears and whose swords were the warders
of homestead, of field, and of fold.
Oft were my feet on the highway,
often they wearied the grass;
From dusk unto dusk of the summer
three times in a week would I pass
To the downs from the house on the river
through the waves of the blossoming corn.
Fair then I lay down in the even,
and fresh I arose on the morn,
And scarce in the noon was I weary.
Ah, son, in the days of thy strife,
If thy soul could but harbour a dream
of the blossom of my life!
It would be as the sunlit meadows
beheld from a tossing sea,
And thy soul should look on a vision
of the peace that is to be.

Yet, yet the tears on my cheek!
and what is this doth move
My heart to thy heart, beloved,
save the flood of yearning love?
For fair and fierce is thy father,
and soft and strange are his eyes
That look on the days that shall be
with the hope of the brave and the wise.
It was many a day that we laughed,
as over the meadows we walked,
And many a day I hearkened
and the pictures came as he talked;
It was many a day that we longed,
and we lingered late at eve
Ere speech from speech was sundered,
and my hand his hand could leave.
Then I wept when I was alone,
and I longed till the daylight came;
And down the stairs I stole,
and there was our housekeeping dame
(No mother of me, the foundling)
kindling the fire betimes
Ere the haymaking folk went forth
to the meadows down by the limes;
All things I saw at a glance;
the quickening fire-tongues leapt
Through the crackling heap of sticks,
and the sweet smoke up from it crept,
And close to the very hearth
the low sun flooded the floor,
And the cat and her kittens played
in the sun by the open door.
The garden was fair in the morning,
and there in the road he stood
Beyond the crimson daisies
and the bush of southernwood.
Then side by side together
through the grey-walled place we went,
And O the fear departed,
and the rest and sweet content!

Son, sorrow and wisdom he taught me,
and sore I grieved and learned
As we twain grew into one;
and the heart within me burned
With the very hopes of his heart.
Ah, son, it is piteous,
But never again in my life
shall I dare to speak to thee thus;
So may these lonely words
about thee creep and cling,
These words of the lonely night
in the days of our wayfaring.
Many a child of woman
to-night is born in the town,
The desert of folly and wrong;
and of what and whence are they grown?
Many and many an one
of wont and use is born;
For a husband is taken to bed
as a hat or a ribbon is worn.
Prudence begets her thousands;
"good is a housekeeper's life,
So shall I sell my body
that I may be matron and wife."
"And I shall endure foul wedlock
and bear the children of need."
Some are there born of hate,
many the children of greed.
"I, I too can be wedded,
though thou my love hast got."
"I am fair and hard of heart,
and riches shall be my lot."
And all these are the good and the happy,
on whom the world dawns fair.
O son, when wilt thou learn
of those that are born of despair,
As the fabled mud of the Nile
that quickens under the sun
With a growth of creeping things,
half dead when just begun?
E'en such is the care of Nature
that man should never die,
Though she breed of the fools of the earth,
and the dregs of the city sty.

But thou, O son, O son,
of very love wert born,
When our hope fulfilled bred hope,
and fear was a folly outworn.
On the eve of the toil and the battle
all sorrow and grief we weighed,
We hoped and we were not ashamed,
we knew and we were not afraid.

Now waneth the night and the moon;
ah, son, it is piteous
That never again in my life
shall I dare to speak to thee thus.
But sure from the wise and the simple
shall the mighty come to birth;
And fair were my fate, beloved,
if I be yet on the earth
When the world is awaken at last,
and from mouth to mouth they tell
Of thy love and thy deeds and thy valour,
and thy hope that nought can quell.





THUNDER IN THE GARDEN


When the boughs of the garden hang heavy with rain
And the blackbird reneweth his song,
And the thunder departing yet rolleth again,
I remember the ending of wrong.

When the day that was dusk while his death was aloof
Is ending wide-gleaming and strange
For the clearness of all things beneath the world's roof,
I call back the wild chance and the change.

For once we twain sat through the hot afternoon
While the rain held aloof for a while,
Till she, the soft-clad, for the glory of June
Changed all with the change of her smile.

For her smile was of longing, no longer of glee,
And her fingers, entwined with mine own,
With caresses unquiet sought kindness of me
For the gift that I never had known.

Then down rushed the rain, and the voice of the thunder
Smote dumb all the sound of the street,
And I to myself was grown nought but a wonder,
As she leaned down my kisses to meet.

That she craved for my lips that had craved her so often,
And the hand that had trembled to touch,
That the tears filled her eyes I had hoped not to soften
In this world was a marvel too much.

It was dusk 'mid the thunder, dusk e'en as the night,
When first brake out our love like the storm,
But no night-hour was it, and back came the light
While our hands with each other were warm.

And her smile killed with kisses, came back as at first
As she rose up and led me along,
And out to the garden, where nought was athirst,
And the blackbird renewing his song.

Earth's fragrance went with her, as in the wet grass,
Her feet little hidden were set;
She bent down her head, 'neath the roses to pass,
And her arm with the lily was wet.

In the garden we wandered while day waned apace
And the thunder was dying aloof;
Till the moon o'er the minster-wall lifted his face,
And grey gleamed out the lead of the roof.

Then we turned from the blossoms, and cold were they grown:
In the trees the wind westering moved;
Till over the threshold back fluttered her gown,
And in the dark house was I loved.





THE GOD OF THE POOR


There was a lord that hight Maltete,
Among great lords he was right great,
On poor folk trod he like the dirt,
None but God might do him hurt.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

With a grace of prayers sung loud and late
Many a widow's house he ate;
Many a poor knight at his hands
Lost his house and narrow lands.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

He burnt the harvests many a time,
He made fair houses heaps of lime;
Whatso man loved wife or maid
Of Evil-head was sore afraid.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

He slew good men and spared the bad;
Too long a day the foul dog had,
E'en as all dogs will have their day;
But God is as strong as man, I say.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

For a valiant knight, men called Boncoeur,
Had hope he should not long endure,
And gathered to him much good folk,
Hardy hearts to break the yoke.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

But Boncoeur deemed it would be vain
To strive his guarded house to gain;
Therefore, within a little while,
He set himself to work by guile.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

He knew that Maltete loved right well
Red gold and heavy. If from hell
The Devil had cried, "Take this gold cup,"
Down had he gone to fetch it up.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Twenty poor men's lives were nought
To him, beside a ring well wrought.
The pommel of his hunting-knife
Was worth ten times a poor man's life.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

A squire new-come from over-sea
Boncoeur called to him privily,
And when he knew his lord's intent,
Clad like a churl therefrom he went
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

But when he came where dwelt Maltete,
With few words did he pass the gate,
For Maltete built him walls anew,
And, wageless, folk from field he drew.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Now passed the squire through this and that,
Till he came to where Sir Maltete sat,
And over red wine wagged his beard:
Then spoke the squire as one afeard.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Lord, give me grace, for privily
I have a little word for thee."
"Speak out," said Maltete, "have no fear,
For how can thy life to thee be dear?"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Such an one I know," he said,
"Who hideth store of money red."
Maltete grinned at him cruelly:
"Thou florin-maker, come anigh."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"E'en such as thou once preached of gold,
And showed me lies in books full old,
Nought gat I but evil brass,
Therefore came he to the worser pass."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Hast thou will to see his skin?
I keep my heaviest marks therein,
For since nought else of wealth had he,
I deemed full well he owed it me."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Nought know I of philosophy,"
The other said, "nor do I lie.
Before the moon begins to shine,
May all this heap of gold be thine."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Ten leagues from this a man there is,
Who seemeth to know but little bliss,
And yet full many a pound of gold
A dry well nigh his house doth hold."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"John-a-Wood is he called, fair lord,
Nor know I whence he hath this hoard."
Then Maltete said, "As God made me,
A wizard over-bold is he!"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"It were a good deed, as I am a knight,
To burn him in a fire bright;
This John-a-Wood shall surely die,
And his gold in my strong chest shall lie."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"This very night, I make mine avow.
The truth of this mine eyes shall know."
Then spoke an old knight in the hall,
"Who knoweth what things may befall?"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"I rede thee go with a great rout,
For thy foes they ride thick about."
"Thou and the devil may keep my foes,
Thou redest me this gold to lose."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"I shall go with but some four or five,
So shall I take my thief alive.
For if a great rout he shall see,
Will he not hide his wealth from me?"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

The old knight muttered under his breath,
"Then mayhap ye shall but ride to death."
But Maltete turned him quickly round,
"Bind me this grey-beard under ground!"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Because ye are old, ye think to jape.
Take heed, ye shall not long escape.
When I come back safe, old carle, perdie,
Thine head shall brush the linden-tree."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Therewith he rode with his five men,
And Boncoeur's spy, for good leagues ten,
Until they left the beaten way,
And dusk it grew at end of day.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

There, in a clearing of the wood,
Was John's house, neither fair nor good.
In a ragged plot his house anigh,
Thin coleworts grew but wretchedly.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

John-a-Wood in his doorway sat,
Turning over this and that,
And chiefly how he best might thrive,
For he had will enough to live.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Green coleworts from a wooden bowl
He ate; but careful was his soul,
For if he saw another day,
Thenceforth was he in Boncoeur's pay.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

So when he saw how Maltete came,
He said, "Beginneth now the game!"
And in the doorway did he stand
Trembling, with hand joined fast to hand.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

When Maltete did this carle behold
Somewhat he doubted of his gold,
But cried out, "Where is now thy store
Thou hast through books of wicked lore?"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Then said the poor man, right humbly,
"Fair lord, this was not made by me,
I found it in mine own dry well,
And had a mind thy grace to tell.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Therefrom, my lord, a cup I took
This day, that thou thereon mightst look,
And know me to be leal and true,"
And from his coat the cup he drew.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Then Maltete took it in his hand,
Nor knew he aught that it used to stand
On Boncoeur's cupboard many a day.
"Go on," he said, "and show the way.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Give me thy gold, and thou shalt live,
Yea, in my house thou well mayst thrive."
John turned about and 'gan to go
Unto the wood with footsteps slow.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

But as they passed by John's woodstack,
Growled Maltete, "Nothing now doth lack
Wherewith to light a merry fire,
And give my wizard all his hire."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._



The western sky was red as blood,
Darker grew the oaken-wood;
"Thief and carle, where are ye gone?
Why are we in the wood alone?
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"What is the sound of this mighty horn?
Ah, God! that ever I was born!
The basnets flash from tree to tree;
Show me, thou Christ, the way to flee!"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Boncoeur it was with fifty men;
Maltete was but one to ten,
And his own folk prayed for grace,
With empty hands in that lone place.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Grace shall ye have," Boncoeur said,
"All of you but Evil-head."
Lowly could that great lord be,
Who could pray so well as he?
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Then could Maltete howl and cry,
Little will he had to die.
Soft was his speech, now it was late,
But who had will to save Maltete?
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

They brought him to the house again,
And toward the road he looked in vain.
Lonely and bare was the great highway,
Under the gathering moonlight grey.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

They took off his gilt basnet,
That he should die there was no let;
They took off his coat of steel,
A damned man he well might feel.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Will ye all be rich as kings,
Lacking naught of all good things?"
"Nothing do we lack this eve;
When thou art dead, how can we grieve?"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

"Let me drink water ere I die,
None henceforth comes my lips anigh."
They brought it him in that bowl of wood.
He said, "This is but poor men's blood!"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

They brought it him in the cup of gold.
He said, "The women I have sold
Have wept it full of salt for me;
I shall die gaping thirstily."
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

On the threshold of that poor homestead
They smote off his evil head;
They set it high on a great spear,
And rode away with merry cheer.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

At the dawn, in lordly state,
They rode to Maltete's castle-gate.
"Whoso willeth laud to win,
Make haste to let your masters in!"
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Forthwith opened they the gate,
No man was sorry for Maltete.
Boncoeur conquered all his lands,
A good knight was he of his hands.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

Good men he loved, and hated bad;
Joyful days and sweet he had;
Good deeds did he plenteously;
Beneath him folk lived frank and free.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

He lived long, with merry days;
None said aught of him but praise.
God on him have full mercy;
A good knight merciful was he.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._



The great lord, called Maltete, is dead;
Grass grows above his feet and head,
And a holly-bush grows up between
His rib-bones gotten white and clean.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._

A carle's sheep-dog certainly
Is a mightier thing than he.
Till London-bridge shall cross the Nen,
Take we heed of such-like men.
_Deus est Deus pauperum._





LOVE'S REWARD


It was a knight of the southern land
Rode forth upon the way
When the birds sang sweet on either hand
About the middle of the May.

But when he came to the lily-close,
Thereby so fair a maiden stood,
That neither the lily nor the rose
Seemed any longer fair nor good.

"All hail, thou rose and lily-bough!
What dost thou weeping here,
For the days of May are sweet enow,
And the nights of May are dear?"

"Well may I weep and make my moan.
Who am bond and captive here;
Well may I weep who lie alone,
Though May be waxen dear."

"And is there none shall ransom thee?
Mayst thou no borrow find?"
"Nay, what man may my borrow be,
When all my wealth is left behind?"

"Perchance some ring is left with thee,
Some belt that did thy body bind?"
"Nay, no man may my borrow be,
My rings and belt are left behind."

"The shoes that the May-blooms kissed on thee
Might yet be things to some men's mind."
"Nay, no man may my borrow be,
My golden shoes are left behind."

"The milk-white sark that covered thee
A dear-bought token some should find."
"Nay, no man may my borrow be,
My silken sark is left behind."

"The kiss of thy mouth and the love of thee
Better than world's wealth should I find."
"Nay, thou mayst not my borrow be,
For all my love is left behind.

"A year agone come Midsummer-night
I woke by the Northern sea;
I lay and dreamed of my delight
Till love no more would let me be.

"Seaward I went by night and cloud
To hear the white swans sing;
But though they sang both clear and loud,
I hearkened a sweeter thing.

"O sweet and sweet as none may tell
Was the speech so close 'twixt lip and lip:
But fast, unseen, the black oars fell
That drave to shore the rover's ship.

"My love lay bloody on the strand
Ere stars were waxen wan:
Naught lacketh graves the Northern land
If to-day it lack a lovelier man.

"I sat and wept beside the mast
When the stars were gone away.
Naught lacketh the Northland joy gone past
If it lack the night and day."



"Is there no place in any land
Where thou wouldst rather be than here?"
"Yea, a lone grave on a cold sea-strand
My heart for a little holdeth dear."

"Of all the deeds that women do
Is there none shall bring thee some delight?"
"To lie down and die where lay we two
Upon Midsummer night."

"I will bring thee there where thou wouldst be,
A borrow shalt thou find."
"Wherewith shall I reward it thee
For wealth and good-hap left behind?"

"A kiss from lips that love not me,
A good-night somewhat kind;
A narrow house to share with thee
When we leave the world behind."



They have taken ship and sailed away
Across the Southland main;
They have sailed by hills were green and gay,
A land of goods and gain.

They have sailed by sea-cliffs stark and white
And hillsides fair enow;
They have sailed by lands of little night
Where great the groves did grow.

They have sailed by islands in the sea
That the clouds lay thick about;
And into a main where few ships be
Amidst of dread and doubt.

With broken mast and battered side
They drave amidst the tempest's heart;
But why should death to these betide
Whom love did hold so well apart?

The flood it drave them toward the strand,
The ebb it drew them fro;
The swallowing seas that tore the land
Cast them ashore and let them go.

"Is this the land? is this the land,
Where life and I must part a-twain?"
"Yea, this is e'en the sea-washed strand
That made me yoke-fellow of pain.

"The strand is this, the sea is this,
The grey bent and the mountains grey;
But no mound here his grave-mound is;
Where have they borne my love away?"

"What man is this with shield and spear
Comes riding down the bent to us?
A goodly man forsooth he were
But for his visage piteous."

"Ghost of my love, so kind of yore,
Art thou not somewhat gladder grown
To feel my feet upon this shore?
O love, thou shalt not long be lone."

"Ghost of my love, each day I come
To see where God first wrought us wrong:
Now kind thou com'st to call me home.
Be sure I shall not tarry long."



"Come here, my love; come here for rest,
So sore as my body longs for thee!
My heart shall beat against thy breast,
As arms of thine shall comfort me."

"Love, let thy lips depart no more
From those same eyes they once did kiss,
The very bosom wounded sore
When sorrow clave the heart of bliss!"

O was it day, or was it night,
As there they told their love again?
The high-tide of the sun's delight,
Or whirl of wind and drift of rain?

"Speak sweet, my love, of how it fell,
And how thou cam'st across the sea,
And what kind heart hath served thee well,
And who thy borrow there might be?"

Naught but the wind and sea made moan
As hastily she turned her round;
From light clouds wept the morn alone,
Not the dead corpse upon the ground.

"O look, my love, for here is he
Who once of all the world was kind,
And led my sad heart o'er the sea!
And now must he be left behind."

She kissed his lips that yet did smile,
She kissed his eyes that were not sad:
"O thou who sorrow didst beguile,
And now wouldst have me wholly glad!

"A little gift is this," she said,
"Thou once hadst deemed great gift enow;
Yet surely shalt thou rest thine head
Where I one day shall lie alow.

"There shalt thou wake to think of me,
And by thy face my face shall find;
And I shall then thy borrow be
When all the world is left behind."





THE FOLK-MOTE BY THE RIVER



It was up in the morn we rose betimes
From the hall-floor hard by the row of limes.

It was but John the Red and I,
And we were the brethren of Gregory;

And Gregory the Wright was one
Of the valiant men beneath the sun,

And what he bade us that we did
For ne'er he kept his counsel hid.

So out we went, and the clattering latch
Woke up the swallows under the thatch.

It was dark in the porch, but our scythes we felt,
And thrust the whetstone under the belt.

Through the cold garden boughs we went
Where the tumbling roses shed their scent.

Then out a-gates and away we strode
O'er the dewy straws on the dusty road,

And there was the mead by the town-reeve's close
Where the hedge was sweet with the wilding rose.

Then into the mowing grass we went
Ere the very last of the night was spent.

Young was the moon, and he was gone,
So we whet our scythes by the stars alone:

But or ever the long blades felt the hay
Afar in the East the dawn was grey.

Or ever we struck our earliest stroke
The thrush in the hawthorn-bush awoke.

While yet the bloom of the swathe was dim
The blackbird's bill had answered him.

Ere half of the road to the river was shorn
The sunbeam smote the twisted thorn.



Now wide was the way 'twixt the standing grass
For the townsfolk unto the mote to pass,

And so when all our work was done
We sat to breakfast in the sun,

While down in the stream the dragon-fly
'Twixt the quivering rushes flickered by;

And though our knives shone sharp and white
The swift bleak heeded not the sight.

So when the bread was done away
We looked along the new-shorn hay,

And heard the voice of the gathering-horn
Come over the garden and the corn;

For the wind was in the blossoming wheat
And drave the bees in the lime-boughs sweet.

Then loud was the horn's voice drawing near,
And it hid the talk of the prattling weir.

And now was the horn on the pathway wide
That we had shorn to the river-side.

So up we stood, and wide around
We sheared a space by the Elders' Mound;

And at the feet thereof it was
That highest grew the June-tide grass;

And over all the mound it grew
With clover blent, and dark of hue.

But never aught of the Elders' Hay
To rick or barn was borne away.

But it was bound and burned to ash
In the barren close by the reedy plash.

For 'neath that mound the valiant dead
Lay hearkening words of valiance said

When wise men stood on the Elders' Mound,
And the swords were shining bright around.



And now we saw the banners borne
On the first of the way that we had shorn;
So we laid the scythe upon the sward
And girt us to the battle-sword.

For after the banners well we knew
Were the Freemen wending two and two.

There then that highway of the scythe
With many a hue was brave and blythe.

And first below the Silver Chief
Upon the green was the golden sheaf.

And on the next that went by it
The White Hart in the Park did sit.

Then on the red the White Wings flew,
And on the White was the Cloud-fleck blue.

Last went the Anchor of the Wrights
Beside the Ship of the Faring-Knights.

Then thronged the folk the June-tide field
With naked sword and painted shield,

Till they came adown to the river-side,
And there by the mound did they abide.

Now when the swords stood thick and white
As the mace reeds stand in the streamless bight,

There rose a man on the mound alone
And over his head was the grey mail done.

When over the new-shorn place of the field
Was nought but the steel hood and the shield.

The face on the mound shone ruddy and hale,
But the hoar hair showed from the hoary mail.

And there rose a hand by the ruddy face
And shook a sword o'er the peopled place.

And there came a voice from the mound and said:
"O sons, the days of my youth are dead,

And gone are the faces I have known
In the street and the booths of the goodly town.

O sons, full many a flock have I seen
Feed down this water-girdled green.

Full many a herd of long-horned neat
Have I seen 'twixt water-side and wheat.

Here by this water-side full oft
Have I heaved the flowery hay aloft.

And oft this water-side anigh
Have I bowed adown the wheat-stalks high.

And yet meseems I live and learn
And lore of younglings yet must earn.

For tell me, children, whose are these
Fair meadows of the June's increase?

Whose are these flocks and whose the neat,
And whose the acres of the wheat?"



Scarce did we hear his latest word,
On the wide shield so rang the sword.

So rang the sword upon the shield
That the lark was hushed above the field.

Then sank the shouts and again we heard
The old voice come from the hoary beard:



"Yea, whose are yonder gables then,
And whose the holy hearths of men?
Whose are the prattling children there,
And whose the sunburnt maids and fair?

Whose thralls are ye, hereby that stand,
Bearing the freeman's sword in hand?"

As glitters the sun in the rain-washed grass,
So in the tossing swords it was;

As the thunder rattles along and adown
E'en so was the voice of the weaponed town.

And there was the steel of the old man's sword.
And there was his hollow voice, and his word:



"Many men, many minds, the old saw saith,
Though hereof ye be sure as death.

For what spake the herald yestermorn
But this, that ye were thrall-folk born;

That the lord that owneth all and some
Would send his men to fetch us home

Betwixt the haysel, and the tide
When they shear the corn in the country-side?

O children, Who was the lord? ye say,
What prayer to him did our fathers pray?

Did they hold out hands his gyves to bear?
Did their knees his high hall's pavement wear?

Is his house built up in heaven aloft?
Doth he make the sun rise oft and oft?

Doth he hold the rain in his hollow hand?
Hath he cleft this water through the land?

Or doth he stay the summer-tide,
And make the winter days abide?

O children, Who is the lord? ye say,
Have we heard his name before to-day?

O children, if his name I know,
He hight Earl Hugh of the Shivering Low:

For that herald bore on back and breast
The Black Burg under the Eagle's Nest."



As the voice of the winter wind that tears
At the eaves of the thatch and its emptied ears,

E'en so was the voice of laughter and scorn
By the water-side in the mead new-shorn;

And over the garden and the wheat
Went the voice of women shrilly-sweet.



But now by the hoary elder stood
A carle in raiment red as blood.

Red was his weed and his glaive was white,
And there stood Gregory the Wright.

So he spake in a voice was loud and strong:
"Young is the day though the road is long;

There is time if we tarry nought at all
For the kiss in the porch and the meat in the hall.

And safe shall our maidens sit at home
For the foe by the way we wend must come.

Through the three Lavers shall we go
And raise them all against the foe.

Then shall we wend the Downland ways,
And all the shepherd spearmen raise.

To Cheaping Raynes shall we come adown
And gather the bowmen of the town;

And Greenstead next we come unto
Wherein are all folk good and true.

When we come our ways to the Outer Wood
We shall be an host both great and good;

Yea when we come to the open field
There shall be a many under shield.

And maybe Earl Hugh shall lie alow
And yet to the house of Heaven shall go.

But we shall dwell in the land we love
And grudge no hallow Heaven above.

Come ye, who think the time o'er long
Till we have slain the word of wrong!

Come ye who deem the life of fear
On this last day hath drawn o'er near!

Come after me upon the road
That leadeth to the Erne's abode."



Down then he leapt from off the mound
And back drew they that were around

Till he was foremost of all those
Betwixt the river and the close.

And uprose shouts both glad and strong
As followed after all the throng;

And overhead the banners flapped,
As we went on our ways to all that happed.



The fields before the Shivering Low
Of many a grief of manfolk know;

There may the autumn acres tell
Of how men met, and what befell.

The Black Burg under the Eagle's nest
Shall tell the tale as it liketh best.

And sooth it is that the River-land
Lacks many an autumn-gathering hand.

And there are troth-plight maids unwed
Shall deem awhile that love is dead;

And babes there are to men shall grow
Nor ever the face of their fathers know.

And yet in the Land by the River-side
Doth never a thrall or an earl's man bide;

For Hugh the Earl of might and mirth
Hath left the merry days of Earth;

And we live on in the land we love,
And grudge no hallow Heaven above.





THE VOICE OF TOIL


I heard men saying, Leave hope and praying,
All days shall be as all have been;
To-day and to-morrow bring fear and sorrow,
The never-ending toil between.

When Earth was younger mid toil and hunger,
In hope we strove, and our hands were strong;
Then great men led us, with words they fed us,
And bade us right the earthly wrong.

Go read in story their deeds and glory,
Their names amidst the nameless dead;
Turn then from lying to us slow-dying
In that good world to which they led;

Where fast and faster our iron master,
The thing we made, for ever drives,
Bids us grind treasure and fashion pleasure
For other hopes and other lives.

Where home is a hovel and dull we grovel,
Forgetting that the world is fair;
Where no babe we cherish, lest its very soul perish;
Where mirth is crime, and love a snare.

Who now shall lead us, what god shall heed us
As we lie in the hell our hands have won?
For us are no rulers but fools and befoolers,
The great are fallen, the wise men gone.



I heard men saying, Leave tears and praying,
The sharp knife heedeth not the sheep;
Are we not stronger than the rich and the wronger,
When day breaks over dreams and sleep?

Come, shoulder to shoulder ere the world grows older!
Help lies in nought but thee and me;
Hope is before us, the long years that bore us
Bore leaders more than men may be.

Let dead hearts tarry and trade and marry,
And trembling nurse their dreams of mirth,
While we the living our lives are giving
To bring the bright new world to birth.

Come, shoulder to shoulder ere earth grows older!
The Cause spreads over land and sea;
Now the world shaketh, and fear awaketh,
And joy at last for thee and me.





GUNNAR'S HOWE ABOVE THE HOUSE AT LITHEND


Ye who have come o'er the sea
to behold this grey minster of lands,
Whose floor is the tomb of time past,
and whose walls by the toil of dead hands
Show pictures amidst of the ruin
of deeds that have overpast death,
Stay by this tomb in a tomb
to ask of who lieth beneath.
Ah! the world changeth too soon,
that ye stand there with unbated breath,
As I name him that Gunnar of old,
who erst in the haymaking tide
Felt all the land fragrant and fresh,
as amidst of the edges he died.
Too swiftly fame fadeth away,
if ye tremble not lest once again
The grey mound should open and show him
glad-eyed without grudging or pain.
Little labour methinks to behold him
but the tale-teller laboured in vain.
Little labour for ears that may hearken
to hear his death-conquering song,
Till the heart swells to think of the gladness
undying that overcame wrong.
O young is the world yet meseemeth
and the hope of it flourishing green,
When the words of a man unremembered
so bridge all the days that have been,
As we look round about on the land
that these nine hundred years he hath seen.

Dusk is abroad on the grass
of this valley amidst of the hill:
Dusk that shall never be dark
till the dawn hard on midnight shall fill
The trench under Eyiafell's snow,
and the grey plain the sea meeteth grey.
White, high aloft hangs the moon
that no dark night shall brighten ere day,
For here day and night toileth the summer
lest deedless his time pass away.





THE DAY IS COMING


Come hither, lads, and hearken,
for a tale there is to tell,
Of the wonderful days a-coming, when all
shall be better than well.

And the tale shall be told of a country,
a land in the midst of the sea,
And folk shall call it England
in the days that are going to be.

There more than one in a thousand
in the days that are yet to come,
Shall have some hope of the morrow,
some joy of the ancient home.



For then, laugh not, but listen
to this strange tale of mine,
All folk that are in England
shall be better lodged than swine.

Then a man shall work and bethink him,
and rejoice in the deeds of his hand,
Nor yet come home in the even
too faint and weary to stand.

Men in that time a-coming
shall work and have no fear
For to-morrow's lack of earning
and the hunger-wolf anear.

I tell you this for a wonder,
that no man then shall be glad
Of his fellow's fall and mishap
to snatch at the work he had.

For that which the worker winneth
shall then be his indeed,
Nor shall half be reaped for nothing
by him that sowed no seed.

O strange new wonderful justice!
But for whom shall we gather the gain?
For ourselves and for each of our fellows,
and no hand shall labour in vain.

Then all Mine and all Thine shall be Ours,
and no more shall any man crave
For riches that serve for nothing
but to fetter a friend for a slave.

And what wealth then shall be left us
when none shall gather gold
To buy his friend in the market,
and pinch and pine the sold?

Nay, what save the lovely city,
and the little house on the hill,
And the wastes and the woodland beauty,
and the happy fields we till;

And the homes of ancient stories,
the tombs of the mighty dead;
And the wise men seeking out marvels,
and the poet's teeming head;

And the painter's hand of wonder;
and the marvellous fiddle-bow,
And the banded choirs of music:
all those that do and know.

For all these shall be ours and all men's,
nor shall any lack a share
Of the toil and the gain of living
in the days when the world grows fair.



Ah! such are the days that shall be!
But what are the deeds of to-day
In the days of the years we dwell in,
that wear our lives away?

Why, then, and for what are we waiting?
There are three words to speak;
WE WILL IT, and what is the foeman
but the dream-strong wakened and weak?

O why and for what are we waiting?
while our brothers droop and die,
And on every wind of the heavens
a wasted life goes by.

How long shall they reproach us
where crowd on crowd they dwell,
Poor ghosts of the wicked city,
the gold-crushed hungry hell?

Through squalid life they laboured,
in sordid grief they died,
Those sons of a mighty mother,
those props of England's pride.

They are gone; there is none can undo it,
nor save our souls from the curse;
But many a million cometh,
and shall they be better or worse?

It is we must answer and hasten,
and open wide the door
For the rich man's hurrying terror,
and the slow-foot hope of the poor.

Yea, the voiceless wrath of the wretched,
and their unlearned discontent,
We must give it voice and wisdom
till the waiting-tide be spent.



Come, then, since all things call us,
the living and the dead,
And o'er the weltering tangle
a glimmering light is shed.

Come, then, let us cast off fooling,
and put by ease and rest,
For the Cause alone is worthy
till the good days bring the best.

Come, join in the only battle
wherein no man can fail,
Where whoso fadeth and dieth,
yet his deed shall still prevail.

Ah! come, cast off all fooling,
for this, at least, we know:
That the Dawn and the Day is coming,
and forth the Banners go.





EARTH THE HEALER, EARTH THE KEEPER


So swift the hours are moving
Unto the time un-proved:
Farewell my love unloving,
Farewell my love beloved!

What! are we not glad-hearted?
Is there no deed to do?
Is not all fear departed
And Spring-tide blossomed new?

The sails swell out above us,
The sea-ridge lifts the keel;
For They have called who love us,
Who bear the gifts that heal:

A crown for him that winneth,
A bed for him that fails,
A glory that beginneth
In never-dying tales.

Yet now the pain is ended
And the glad hand grips the sword,
Look on thy life amended
And deal out due award.

Think of the thankless morning,
The gifts of noon unused;
Think of the eve of scorning,
The night of prayer refused.

And yet. The life before it,
Dost thou remember aught,
What terrors shivered o'er it
Born from the hell of thought?

And this that cometh after:
How dost thou live, and dare
To meet its empty laughter,
To face its friendless care?

In fear didst thou desire,
At peace dost thou regret,
The wasting of the fire,
The tangling of the net.

Love came and gat fair greeting;
Love went; and left no shame.
Shall both the twilights meeting
The summer sunlight blame?

What! cometh love and goeth
Like the dark night's empty wind,
Because thy folly soweth
The harvest of the blind?

Hast thou slain love with sorrow?
Have thy tears quenched the sun?
Nay even yet to-morrow
Shall many a deed be done.

This twilight sea thou sailest,
Has it grown dim and black
For that wherein thou failest,
And the story of thy lack?

Peace then! for thine old grieving
Was born of Earth the kind,
And the sad tale thou art leaving
Earth shall not leave behind.

Peace! for that joy abiding
Whereon thou layest hold
Earth keepeth for a tiding
For the day when this is old.

Thy soul and life shall perish,
And thy name as last night's wind;
But Earth the deed shall cherish
That thou to-day shalt find.

And all thy joy and sorrow
So great but yesterday,
So light a thing to-morrow,
Shall never pass away.

Lo! lo! the dawn-blink yonder,
The sunrise draweth nigh,
And men forget to wonder
That they were born to die.

Then praise the deed that wendeth
Through the daylight and the mirth!
The tale that never endeth
Whoso may dwell on earth.





ALL FOR THE CAUSE


Hear a word, a word in season,
for the day is drawing nigh,
When the Cause shall call upon us,
some to live, and some to die!

He that dies shall not die lonely,
many an one hath gone before;
He that lives shall bear no burden
heavier than the life they bore.

Nothing ancient is their story,
e'en but yesterday they bled,
Youngest they of earth's beloved,
last of all the valiant dead.

E'en the tidings we are telling
was the tale they had to tell,
E'en the hope that our hearts cherish,
was the hope for which they fell.

In the grave where tyrants thrust them,
lies their labour and their pain,
But undying from their sorrow
springeth up the hope again.

Mourn not therefore, nor lament it,
that the world outlives their life;
Voice and vision yet they give us,
making strong our hands for strife.

Some had name, and fame, and honour,
learn'd they were, and wise and strong;
Some were nameless, poor, unlettered,
weak in all but grief and wrong.

Named and nameless all live in us;
one and all they lead us yet
Every pain to count for nothing,
every sorrow to forget.

Hearken how they cry, "O happy,
happy ye that ye were born
In the sad slow night's departing,
in the rising of the morn.

"Fair the crown the Cause hath for you,
well to die or well to live
Through the battle, through the tangle,
peace to gain or peace to give."

Ah, it may be! Oft meseemeth,
in the days that yet shall be,
When no slave of gold abideth
'twixt the breadth of sea to sea,

Oft, when men and maids are merry,
ere the sunlight leaves the earth,
And they bless the day beloved,
all too short for all their mirth,

Some shall pause awhile and ponder
on the bitter days of old,
Ere the toil of strife and battle
overthrew the curse of gold;

Then 'twixt lips of loved and lover
solemn thoughts of us shall rise;
We who once were fools defeated,
then shall be the brave and wise.

There amidst the world new-builded
shall our earthly deeds abide,
Though our names be all forgotten,
and the tale of how we died.

Life or death then, who shall heed it,
what we gain or what we lose?
Fair flies life amid the struggle,
and the Cause for each shall choose.

Hear a word, a word in season,
for the day is drawing nigh,
When the Cause shall call upon us,
some to live, and some to die!





PAIN AND TIME STRIVE NOT


What part of the dread eternity
Are those strange minutes that I gain,
Mazed with the doubt of love and pain,
When I thy delicate face may see,
A little while before farewell?

What share of the world's yearning-tide
That flash, when new day bare and white
Blots out my half-dream's faint delight,
And there is nothing by my side,
And well remembered is farewell?

What drop in the grey flood of tears
That time, when the long day toiled through,
Worn out, shows nought for me to do,
And nothing worth my labour bears
The longing of that last farewell?

What pity from the heavens above,
What heed from out eternity,
What word from the swift world for me?
Speak, heed, and pity, O tender love,
Who knew'st the days before farewell!





DRAWING NEAR THE LIGHT


Lo, when we wade the tangled wood,
In haste and hurry to be there,
Nought seem its leaves and blossoms good,
For all that they be fashioned fair.

But looking up, at last we see
The glimmer of the open light,
From o'er the place where we would be:
Then grow the very brambles bright.

So now, amidst our day of strife,
With many a matter glad we play,
When once we see the light of life
Gleam through the tangle of to-day.





VERSES FOR PICTURES



DAY

I am Day; I bring again
Life and glory, Love and pain:
Awake, arise! from death to death
Through me the World's tale quickeneth.


SPRING

Spring am I, too soft of heart
Much to speak ere I depart:
Ask the Summer-tide to prove
The abundance of my love.


SUMMER

Summer looked for long am I;
Much shall change or e'er I die.
Prithee take it not amiss
Though I weary thee with bliss.


AUTUMN

Laden Autumn here I stand
Worn of heart, and weak of hand:
Nought but rest seems good to me,
Speak the word that sets me free.


WINTER

I am Winter, that do keep
Longing safe amidst of sleep:
Who shall say if I were dead
What should be remembered?


NIGHT

I am Night: I bring again
Hope of pleasure, rest from pain:
Thoughts unsaid 'twixt Life and Death
My fruitful silence quickeneth.





FOR THE BRIAR ROSE



THE BRIARWOOD

The fateful slumber floats and flows
About the tangle of the rose;
But lo! the fated hand and heart
To rend the slumberous curse apart!


THE COUNCIL ROOM

The threat of war, the hope of peace,
The Kingdom's peril and increase
Sleep on, and bide the latter day,
When Fate shall take her chain away.


THE GARDEN COURT

The maiden pleasance of the land
Knoweth no stir of voice or hand,
No cup the sleeping waters fill,
The restless shuttle lieth still.


THE ROSEBOWER

Here lies the hoarded love, the key
To all the treasure that shall be;
Come fated hand the gift to take,
And smite this sleeping world awake.





ANOTHER FOR THE BRIAR ROSE



O treacherous scent, O thorny sight,
O tangle of world's wrong and right,
What art thou 'gainst my armour's gleam
But dusky cobwebs of a dream?

Beat down, deep sunk from every gleam
Of hope, they lie and dully dream;
Men once, but men no more, that Love
Their waste defeated hearts should move.

Here sleeps the world that would not love!
Let it sleep on, but if He move
Their hearts in humble wise to wait
On his new-wakened fair estate.

O won at last is never late!
Thy silence was the voice of fate;
Thy still hands conquered in the strife;
Thine eyes were light; thy lips were life.





THE WOODPECKER



I once a King and chief
Now am the tree-bark's thief,
Ever 'twixt trunk and leaf
Chasing the prey.





THE LION



The Beasts that be
In wood and waste,
Now sit and see,
Nor ride nor haste.





THE FOREST



PEAR-TREE

By woodman's edge I faint and fail;
By craftsman's edge I tell the tale.


CHESTNUT-TREE

High in the wood, high o'er the hall,
Aloft I rise when low I fall.


OAK-TREE

Unmoved I stand what wind may blow.
Swift, swift before the wind I go.





POMONA



I am the ancient Apple-Queen,
As once I was so am I now.
For evermore a hope unseen,
Betwixt the blossom and the bough.

Ah, where's the river's hidden Gold!
And where the windy grave of Troy?
Yet come I as I came of old,
From out the heart of Summer's joy.





FLORA



I am the handmaid of the earth,
I broider fair her glorious gown,
And deck her on her days of mirth
With many a garland of renown.

And while Earth's little ones are fain
And play about the Mother's hem,
I scatter every gift I gain
From sun and wind to gladden them.





THE ORCHARD



Midst bitten mead and acre shorn,
The world without is waste and worn,

But here within our orchard-close,
The guerdon of its labour shows.

O valiant Earth, O happy year
That mocks the threat of winter near,

And hangs aloft from tree to tree
The banners of the Spring to be.





TAPESTRY TREES



OAK

I am the Roof-tree and the Keel;
I bridge the seas for woe and weal.


FIR

High o'er the lordly oak I stand,
And drive him on from land to land.


ASH

I heft my brother's iron bane;
I shaft the spear, and build the wain.


YEW

Dark down the windy dale I grow,
The father of the fateful Bow.


POPLAR

The war-shaft and the milking-bowl
I make, and keep the hay-wain whole.


OLIVE

The King I bless; the lamps I trim;
In my warm wave do fishes swim.


APPLE-TREE

I bowed my head to Adam's will;
The cups of toiling men I fill.


VINE

I draw the blood from out the earth;
I store the sun for winter mirth.


ORANGE-TREE

Amidst the greenness of my night,
My odorous lamps hang round and bright.


FIG-TREE

I who am little among trees
In honey-making mate the bees.


MULBERRY-TREE

Love's lack hath dyed my berries red:
For Love's attire my leaves are shed.


PEAR-TREE

High o'er the mead-flowers' hidden feet
I bear aloft my burden sweet.


BAY

Look on my leafy boughs, the Crown
Of living song and dead renown!





THE FLOWERING ORCHARD



SILK EMBROIDERY

Lo silken my garden,
and silken my sky,
And silken my apple-boughs
hanging on high;
All wrought by the Worm
in the peasant carle's cot
On the Mulberry leafage
when summer was hot!





THE END OF MAY



How the wind howls this morn
About the end of May,
And drives June on apace
To mock the world forlorn
And the world's joy passed away
And my unlonged-for face!
The world's joy passed away;
For no more may I deem
That any folk are glad
To see the dawn of day
Sunder the tangled dream
Wherein no grief they had.
Ah, through the tangled dream
Where others have no grief
Ever it fares with me
That fears and treasons stream
And dumb sleep slays belief
Whatso therein may be.
Sleep slayeth all belief
Until the hopeless light
Wakes at the birth of June
More lying tales to weave,
More love in woe's despite,
More hope to perish soon.





THE HALF OF LIFE GONE



The days have slain the days,
and the seasons have gone by
And brought me the summer again;
and here on the grass I lie
As erst I lay and was glad
ere I meddled with right and with wrong.
Wide lies the mead as of old,
and the river is creeping along
By the side of the elm-clad bank
that turns its weedy stream;
And grey o'er its hither lip
the quivering rashes gleam.
There is work in the mead as of old;
they are eager at winning the hay,
While every sun sets bright
and begets a fairer day.
The forks shine white in the sun
round the yellow red-wheeled wain,
Where the mountain of hay grows fast;
and now from out of the lane
Comes the ox-team drawing another,
comes the bailiff and the beer,
And thump, thump, goes the farmer's nag
o'er the narrow bridge of the weir.
High up and light are the clouds,
and though the swallows flit
So high o'er the sunlit earth,
they are well a part of it,
And so, though high over them,
are the wings of the wandering herne;
In measureless depths above him
doth the fair sky quiver and burn;
The dear sun floods the land
as the morning falls toward noon,
And a little wind is awake
in the best of the latter June.
They are busy winning the hay,
and the life and the picture they make
If I were as once I was,
I should deem it made for my sake;
For here if one need not work
is a place for happy rest,
While one's thought wends over the world
north, south, and east and west.

There are the men and the maids,
and the wives and the gaffers grey
Of the fields I know so well,
and but little changed are they
Since I was a lad amongst them;
and yet how great is the change!
Strange are they grown unto me;
yea I to myself am strange.
Their talk and their laughter mingling
with the music of the meads
Has now no meaning to me
to help or to hinder my needs,
So far from them have I drifted.
And yet amidst of them goes
A part of myself, my boy,
and of pleasure and pain he knows,
And deems it something strange,
when he is other than glad.
Lo now! the woman that stoops
and kisses the face of the lad,
And puts a rake in his hand
and laughs in his laughing face.
Whose is the voice that laughs
in the old familiar place?
Whose should it be but my love's,
if my love were yet on the earth?
Could she refrain from the fields
where my joy and her joy had birth,
When I was there and her child,
on the grass that knew her feet
'Mid the flowers that led her on
when the summer eve was sweet?

No, no, it is she no longer;
never again can she come
And behold the hay-wains creeping
o'er the meadows of her home;
No more can she kiss her son
or put the rake in his hand
That she handled a while agone
in the midst of the haymaking band.
Her laughter is gone and her life;
there is no such thing on the earth,
No share for me then in the stir,
no share in the hurry and mirth.
Nay, let me look and believe
that all these will vanish away,
At least when the night has fallen,
and that she will be there 'mid the hay,
Happy and weary with work,
waiting and longing for love.
There will she be, as of old,
when the great moon hung above,
And lightless and dead was the village,
and nought but the weir was awake;
There will she rise to meet me,
and my hands will she hasten to take,
And thence shall we wander away,
and over the ancient bridge
By many a rose-hung hedgerow,
till we reach the sun-burnt ridge
And the great trench digged by the Romans:
there then awhile shall we stand,
To watch the dawn come creeping
o'er the fragrant lovely land,
Till all the world awaketh,
and draws us down, we twain,
To the deeds of the field and the fold
and the merry summer's gain.

Ah thus, only thus shall I see her,
in dreams of the day or the night,
When my soul is beguiled of its sorrow
to remember past delight.
She is gone. She was and she is not;
there is no such thing on the earth
But e'en as a picture painted;
and for me there is void and dearth
That I cannot name or measure.
Yet for me and all these she died,
E'en as she lived for awhile,
that the better day might betide.
Therefore I live, and I shall live
till the last day's work shall fail.
Have patience now but a little
and I will tell you the tale
Of how and why she died,
And why I am weak and worn,
And have wandered away to the meadows
and the place where I was born;
But here and to-day I cannot;
for ever my thought will stray
To that hope fulfilled for a little
and the bliss of the earlier day.
Of the great world's hope and anguish
to-day I scarce can think;
Like a ghost, from the lives of the living
and their earthly deeds I shrink.
I will go adown by the water
and over the ancient bridge,
And wend in our footsteps of old
till I come to the sun-burnt ridge,
And the great trench digged by the Romans;
and thence awhile will I gaze,
And see three teeming counties
stretch out till they fade in the haze;
And in all the dwellings of man
that thence mine eyes shall see,
What man as hapless as I am
beneath the sun shall be?

O fool, what words are these?
Thou hast a sorrow to nurse,
And thou hast been bold and happy;
but these, if they utter a curse,
No sting it has and no meaning,
it is empty sound on the air.
Thy life is full of mourning,
and theirs so empty and bare,
That they have no words of complaining;
nor so happy have they been
That they may measure sorrow
or tell what grief may mean.

And thou; thou hast deeds to do,
and toil to meet thee soon;
Depart and ponder on these
through the sun-worn afternoon.





MINE AND THINE

FROM A FLEMISH POEM OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY


Two words about the world we see,
And nought but Mine and Thine they be.
Ah! might we drive them forth and wide
With us should rest and peace abide;
All free, nought owned of goods and gear,
By men and women though it were.
Common to all all wheat and wine
Over the seas and up the Rhine.
No manslayer then the wide world o'er
When Mine and Thine are known no more.
Yea, God, well counselled for our health,
Gave all this fleeting earthly wealth
A common heritage to all,
That men might feed them therewithal,
And clothe their limbs and shoe their feet
And live a simple life and sweet.
But now so rageth greediness
That each desireth nothing less
Than all the world, and all his own;
And all for him and him alone.





THE LAY OF CHRISTINE

TRANSLATED FROM THE ICELANDIC


Of silk my gear was shapen,
Scarlet they did on me,
Then to the sea-strand was I borne
And laid in a bark of the sea.
_O well were I from the World away._

Befell it there I might not drown,
For God to me was good;
The billows bare me up a-land
Where grew the fair green-wood.
_O well were I from the World away._

There came a Knight a-riding
With three swains along the way,
And he took me up, the little-one,
On the sea-sand as I lay.
_O well were I from the World away._

He took me up, and bare me home
To the house that was his own,
And there bode I so long with him
That I was his love alone.
_O well were I from the World away._

But the very first night we lay abed
Befell his sorrow and harm,
That thither came the King's ill men,
And slew him on mine arm.
_O well were I from the World away._

There slew they Adalbright the King,
Two of his swains slew they,
But the third sailed swiftly from the land
Sithence I saw him never a day.
_O well were I from the World away._

O wavering hope of this world's bliss,
How shall men trow in thee?
My Grove of Gems is gone away
For mine eyes no more to see!
_O well were I from the World away._

Each hour the while my life shall last
Remembereth him alone,
Such heavy sorrow have I got
From our meeting long agone.
_O well were I from the World away._

O, early in the morning-tide
Men cry: "Christine the fair,
Art thou well content with that true love
Thou sittest loving there?"
_O well were I from the World away._

"Ah, yea, so well I love him,
And so dear my love shall be,
That the very God of Heaven aloft
Worshippeth him and me.
_O well were I from the World away._

"Ah, all the red gold I have got
Well would I give to-day,
Only for this and nothing else
From the world to win away."
_O well were I from the World away._

"Nay, midst all folk upon the earth
Keep thou thy ruddy gold,
And love withal the mighty lord
That wedded thee of old."
_O well were I from the World away._





HILDEBRAND AND HELLELIL

TRANSLATED FROM THE DANISH


Hellelil sitteth in bower there,
_None knows my grief but God alone,_
And seweth at the seam so fair,
_I never wail my sorrow to any other one._

But there whereas the gold should be
With silk upon the cloth sewed she.

Where she should sew with silken thread
The gold upon the cloth she laid.

So to the Queen the word came in
That Hellelil wild work doth win.

Then did the Queen do furs on her
And went to Hellelil the fair.

"O swiftly sewest thou, Hellelil,
Yet nought but mad is thy sewing still!"

"Well may my sewing be but mad
Such evil hap as I have had.

My father was good king and lord,
Knights fifteen served before his board.

He taught me sewing royally,
Twelve knights had watch and ward of me.

Well served eleven day by day,
To folly the twelfth did me bewray.

And this same was hight Hildebrand,
The King's son of the English Land.

But in bower were we no sooner laid
Than the truth thereof to my father was said.

Then loud he cried o'er garth and hall:
'Stand up, my men, and arm ye all!

'Yea draw on mail and dally not,
Hard neck lord Hildebrand hath got!'

They stood by the door with glaive and spear;
'Hildebrand rise and hasten here!'

Lord Hildebrand stroked my white white cheek:
'O love, forbear my name to speak.

'Yea even if my blood thou see,
Name me not, lest my death thou be.'

Out from the door lord Hildebrand leapt,
And round about his good sword swept.

The first of all that he slew there
Were my seven brethren with golden hair.

Then before him stood the youngest one,
And dear he was in the days agone.

Then I cried out: 'O Hildebrand,
In the name of God now stay thine hand.

'O let my youngest brother live
Tidings hereof to my mother to give!'

No sooner was the word gone forth
Than with eight wounds fell my love to earth.

My brother took me by the golden hair,
And bound me to the saddle there.

There met me then no littlest root,
But it tore off somewhat of my foot.

No littlest brake the wild-wood bore,
But somewhat from my legs it tore.

No deepest dam we came unto
But my brother's horse he swam it through

But when to the castle gate we came,
There stood my mother in sorrow and shame.

My brother let raise a tower high,
Bestrewn with sharp thorns inwardly.

He took me in my silk shirt bare
And cast me into that tower there.

And wheresoe'er my legs I laid
Torment of the thorns I had.

Wheresoe'er on feet I stood
The prickles sharp drew forth my blood.

My youngest brother me would slay,
But my mother would have me sold away.

A great new bell my price did buy
In Mary's Church to hang on high.

But the first stroke that ever it strake
My mother's heart asunder brake."

So soon as her sorrow and woe was said,
_None knows my grief but God alone,_
In the arm of the Queen she sat there dead,
_I never tell my sorrow to any other one._





THE SON'S SORROW

FROM THE ICELANDIC


The King has asked of his son so good,
"Why art thou hushed and heavy of mood?
_O fair it is to ride abroad._
Thou playest not, and thou laughest not;
All thy good game is clean forgot."

"Sit thou beside me, father dear,
And the tale of my sorrow shalt thou hear.

Thou sendedst me unto a far-off land,
And gavest me into a good Earl's hand.

Now had this good Earl daughters seven,
The fairest of maidens under heaven.

One brought me my meat when I should dine,
One cut and sewed my raiment fine.

One washed and combed my yellow hair,
And one I fell to loving there.

Befell it on so fair a day,
We minded us to sport and play.

Down in a dale my horse bound I,
Bound on my saddle speedily.

Bright red she was as the flickering flame
When to my saddle-bow she came.

Beside my saddle-bow she stood,
'To flee with thee to my heart were good.'

Kind was my horse and good to aid,
My love upon his back I laid.

We gat us from the garth away,
And none was ware of us that day.

But as we rode along the sand
Behold a barge lay by the land.

So in that boat did we depart,
And rowed away right glad at heart.

When we came to the dark wood and the shade
To raise the tent my true-love bade.

Three sons my true-love bore me there,
And syne she died who was so dear.

A grave I wrought her with my sword,
With my fair shield the mould I poured.

First in the mould I laid my love,
Then all my sons her breast above.

And I without must lie alone;
So from the place I gat me gone."

No man now shall stand on his feet
To love that love, to woo that sweet:
_O fair it is to ride abroad._





AGNES AND THE HILL-MAN

TRANSLATED FROM THE DANISH


Agnes went through the meadows a-weeping,
_Fowl are a-singing._
There stood the hill-man heed thereof keeping.
_Agnes, fair Agnes!_
"Come to the hill, fair Agnes, with me,
The reddest of gold will I give unto thee!"

Twice went Agnes the hill round about,
Then wended within, left the fair world without.

In the hillside bode Agnes, three years thrice told o'er,
For the green earth sithence fell she longing full sore.

There she sat, and lullaby sang in her singing,
And she heard how the bells of England were ringing.

Agnes before her true-love did stand:
"May I wend to the church of the English Land?"

"To England's Church well mayst thou be gone,
So that no hand thou lay the red gold upon.

"So that when thou art come the churchyard anear,
Thou cast not abroad thy golden hair.

"So that when thou standest the church within,
To thy mother on bench thou never win.

"So that when thou hearest the high God's name,
No knee unto earth thou bow to the same."

Hand she laid on all gold that was there,
And cast abroad her golden hair.

And when the church she stood within,
To her mother on bench straight did she win.

And when she heard the high God's name,
Knee unto earth she bowed to the same.

When all the mass was sung to its end,
Home with her mother dear did she wend.

"Come, Agnes, into the hillside to me,
For thy seven small sons greet sorely for thee!"

"Let them greet, let them greet, as they have will to do;
For never again will I hearken thereto!"

Weird laid he on her, sore sickness he wrought,
_Fowl are a-singing._
That self-same hour to death was she brought.
_Agnes, fair Agnes!_





KNIGHT AAGEN AND MAIDEN ELSE

TRANSLATED FROM THE DANISH


It was the fair knight Aagen
To an isle he went his way,
And plighted troth to Else,
Who was so fair a may.

He plighted troth to Else
All with the ruddy gold,
But or ere that day's moon came again
Low he lay in the black, black mould.

It was the maiden Else,
She was fulfilled of woe
When she heard how the fair knight Aagen
In the black mould lay alow.

Uprose the fair knight Aagen,
Coffin on back took he,
And he's away to her bower,
Sore hard as the work might be.

With that same chest on door he smote,
For the lack of flesh and skin;
"O hearken, maiden Else,
And let thy true-love in!"

Then answered maiden Else,
"Never open I my door,
But and if thou namest Jesu's name
As thou hadst might before."

"O hearken, maiden Else,
And open thou thy door,
For Jesu's name I well may name
As I had might before!"

Then uprose maiden Else,
O'er her cheek the salt tears ran,
Nor spared she into her very bower
To welcome that dead man.

O, she's taken up her comb of gold
And combed adown her hair,
And for every hair she combed adown
There fell a weary tear.

"Hearken thou, knight Aagen,
Hearken, true-love, and tell,
If down-adown in the black, black earth
Thou farest ever well?"

"O whenso thou art joyous,
And the heart is glad in thee,
Then fares it with my coffin
That red roses are with me.

"But whenso thou art sorrowful
And weary is thy mood,
Then all within my coffin
Is it dreadful with dark blood.

"Now is the red cock a-crowing,
To the earth adown must I;
Down to the earth wend all dead folk,
And I wend in company.

"Now is the black cock a-crowing,
To the earth must I adown,
For the gates of Heaven are opening now,
Thereto must I begone."

Uprose the fair knight Aagen,
Coffin on back took he,
And he's away to the churchyard now,
Sore hard as the work might be.

But so wrought maiden Else,
Because of her weary mood,
That she followed after own true love
All through the mirk wild wood.

But when the wood was well passed through,
And in the churchyard they were,
Then was the fair knight Aagen
Waxen wan of his golden hair.

And when therefrom they wended
And were the church within,
Then was the fair knight Aagen
Waxen wan of cheek and chin.

"Hearken thou, maiden Else,
Hearken, true-love, to me,
Weep no more for thine own troth-plight,
However it shall be!

"Look thou up to the heavens aloft,
To the little stars and bright,
And thou shalt see how sweetly
It fareth with the night!"

She looked up to the heavens aloft,
To the little stars bright above.
The dead man sank into his grave,
Ne'er again she saw her love.

Home then went maiden Else,
Mid sorrow manifold,
And ere that night's moon came again
She lay alow in the mould.





HAFBUR AND SIGNY

TRANSLATED FROM THE DANISH.


King Hafbur and King Siward
They needs must stir up strife,
All about the sweetling Signy
Who was so fair a wife.
_O wilt thou win me then,
or as fair a maid as I be?_

It was the King's son Hafbur
Woke up amid the night,
And 'gan to tell of a wondrous dream
In swift words nowise light.

"Me-dreamed I was in heaven
Amid that fair abode,
And my true-love lay upon mine arm
And we fell from cloud to cloud."

As there they sat, the dames and maids
Of his words they took no keep,
Only his mother well-beloved
Heeded his dreamful sleep.

"Go get thee gone to the mountain,
And make no long delay;
To the elve's eldest daughter
For thy dream's areding pray."

So the King's son, even Hafbur,
Took his sword in his left hand,
And he's away to the mountain
To get speech of that Lily-wand.

He beat thereon with hand all bare,
With fingers small and fine,
And there she lay, the elve's daughter,
And well wotted of that sign.

"Bide hail, Elve's sweetest daughter,
As on skins thou liest fair,
I pray thee by the God of Heaven
My dream arede thou clear.

"Me-dreamed I was in heaven,
Yea amid that fair abode,
And my true-love lay upon mine arm
And we fell from cloud to cloud."

"Whereas thou dreamed'st thou wert in heaven,
So shalt thou win that may;
Dreamed'st thou of falling through the clouds,
So falls for her thy life away."

"And if it lieth in my luck
To win to me that may,
In no sorrow's stead it standeth me
For her to cast my life away."

Lord Hafbur lets his hair wax long,
And will have the gear of mays,
And he rideth to King Siward's house
And will well learn weaving ways.

Lord Hafbur all his clothes let shape
In such wise as maidens do,
And thus he rideth over the land
King Siward's daughter to woo.

Now out amid the castle-garth
He cast his cloak aside,
And goeth forth to the high-bower
Where the dames and damsels abide.



Hail, sit ye there, dames and damsels,
Maids and queens kind and fair,
And chiefest of all to the Dane-King's daughter
If she abideth here!

"Hail, sittest thou, sweet King's daughter,
A-spinning the silken twine,
It is King Hafbur sends me hither
To learn the sewing fine."

Hath Hafbur sent thee here to me?
Then art thou a welcome guest,
And all the sewing that I can
Shall I learn thee at my best.

"And all the sewing that I can
I shall learn thee lovingly,
Out of one bowl shalt thou eat with me,
And by my nurse shalt thou lie."

"King's children have I eaten with,
And lain down by their side:
Must I lie abed now with a very nurse?
Then woe is me this tide!"

"Nay, let it pass, fair maiden!
Of me gettest thou no harm,
Out of one bowl shalt thou eat with me
And sleep soft upon mine arm."

There sat they, all the damsels,
And sewed full craftily;
But ever the King's son Hafbur
With nail in mouth sat he.

They sewed the hart, they sewed the hind,
As they run through the wild-wood green,
Never gat Hafbur so big a bowl
But the bottom soon was seen.

In there came the evil nurse
In the worst tide that might be:
"Never saw I fair maiden
Who could sew less craftily.

"Never saw I fair maiden
Seam worse the linen fine,
Never saw I noble maiden
Who better drank the wine."

This withal spake the evil nurse,
The nighest that she durst:
"Never saw I yet fair maiden
Of drink so sore athirst.

"So little a seam as ever she sews
Goes the needle into her mouth,
As big a bowl as ever she gets
Out is it drunk forsooth.

"Ne'er saw I yet in maiden's head
Two eyes so bright and bold,
And those two hands of her withal
Are hard as the iron cold."

"Hearken, sweet nurse, whereso thou art,
Why wilt thou mock me still?
Never cast I one word at thee,
Went thy sewing well or ill.

"Still wilt thou mock, still wilt thou spy;
Nought such thou hast of me,
Whether mine eyes look out or look in
Nought do they deal with thee."

O it was Hafbur the King's son
Began to sew at last;
He sowed the hart, and he sewed the hind,
As they flee from the hound so fast.

He sewed the lily, and he sewed the rose,
And the little fowls of the air;
Then fell the damsels a-marvelling,
For nought had they missed him there.

Day long they sewed till the evening,
And till the long night was deep,
Then up stood dames and maidens
And were fain in their beds to sleep.

So fell on them the evening-tide,
O'er the meads the dew drave down,
And fain was Signy, that sweet thing,
With her folk to bed to be gone.

Therewith asked the King's son Hafbur,
"And whatten a bed for me?"
"O thou shalt sleep in the bower aloft,
And blue shall thy bolster be."

She went before, sweet Signy,
O'er the high-bower's bridge aright,
And after her went Hafbur
Laughing from heart grown light.

Then kindled folk the waxlights,
That were so closely twined,
And after them the ill nurse went
With an ill thought in her mind.

The lights were quenched, the nurse went forth,
They deemed they were alone:
Lord Hafbur drew off his kirtle red,
Then first his sword outshone.

Lord Hafbur mid his longing sore
Down on the bed he sat:
I tell you of my soothfastness,
His byrny clashed thereat.

Then spake the darling Signy,
Out of her heart she said,
"Never saw I so rough a shirt
Upon so fair a maid."

She laid her hand on Hafbur's breast
With the red gold all a-blaze:
"Why wax thy breasts in no such wise
As they wax in other mays?"

"The wont it is in my father's land
For maids to ride to the Thing,
Therefore my breasts are little of growth
Beneath the byrny-ring."


And there they lay through the night so long,
The King's son and the may,
In talk full sweet, but little of sleep,
So much on their minds there lay.

"Hearken, sweet maiden Signy,
As here alone we lie,
Who is thy dearest in the world,
And lieth thine heart most nigh?"

"O there is none in all the world
Who lieth so near to my heart
As doth the bold King Hafbur:
Ne'er in him shall I have a part.

"As doth the bold King Hafbur
That mine eyes shall never know:
Nought but the sound of his gold-wrought horn
As he rides to the Thing and fro."

"O, is it Hafbur the King's son
That thy loved heart holdeth dear?
Turn hither, O my well-beloved,
To thy side I lie so near."

"If thou art the King's son Hafbur,
Why wilt thou shame me, love,
Why ridest thou not to my father's garth
With hound, and with hawk upon glove?"

"Once was I in thy father's garth,
With hound and hawk and all;
And with many mocks he said me nay,
In such wise did our meeting fall."


All the while they talked together
They deemed alone they were,
But the false nurse ever stood close without,
And nought thereof she failed to hear.

O shame befall that evil nurse,
Ill tidings down she drew,
She stole away his goodly sword,
But and his byrny new.

She took to her his goodly sword,
His byrny blue she had away,
And she went her ways to the high bower
Whereas King Siward lay.

"Wake up, wake up, King Siward!
Over long thou sleepest there,
The while the King's son Hafbur
Lies abed by Signy the fair."

"No Hafbur is here, and no King's son,
That thou shouldst speak this word;
He is far away in the east-countries,
Warring with knight and lord.

"Hold thou thy peace, thou evil nurse,
And lay on her no lie,
Or else tomorn ere the sun is up
In the bale-fire shall ye die."

"O hearken to this, my lord and king,
And trow me nought but true;
Look here upon his bright white sword,
But and his byrny blue!"

Then mad of mind waxed Siward,
Over all the house 'gan he cry,
"Rise up, O mighty men of mine,
For a hardy knight is anigh:

"Take ye sword and shield in hand,
And look that they be true;
For Hafbur the King hath guested with us;
Stiffnecked he is, great deeds to do."

So there anigh the high-bower door
They stood with spear and glaive
"Rise up, rise up, Young Hafbur,
Out here we would thee have!"

That heard the goodly Signy,
And she wrang her hands full sore:
"Hearken and heed, O Hafbur,
Who stand without by the door!"

Thank and praise to the King's son Hafbur,
Manly he played and stout!
None might lay hand upon him
While the bed-post yet held out.

But they took him, the King's son Hafbur,
And set him in bolts new wrought;
Then lightly he rent them asunder,
As though they were leaden and nought.

Out and spake the ancient nurse,
And she gave a rede of ill;
"Bind ye him but in Signy's hair.
So shall hand and foot lie still.

"Take ye but one of Signy's hairs
Hafbur's hands to bind,
Ne'er shall he rend them asunder,
His heart to her is so kind."

Then took they two of Signy's hairs
Bonds for his hands to be,
Nor might he rive them asunder,
So dear to his heart was she.

Then spake the sweetling Signy
As the tears fast down her cheek did fall:
"O rend it asunder, Hafbur,
That gift to thee I give withal."


Now sat the-King's son Hafbur
Amidst the castle-hall,
And thronged to behold him man and maid,
But the damsels chiefest of all.

They took him, the King's son Hafbur,
Laid bolts upon him in that place,
And ever went Signy to and fro,
The weary tears fell down apace.

She speaketh to him in sorrowful mood:
"This will I, Hafbur, for thee,
Piteous prayer for thee shall make
My mother's sisters three.

"For my father's mind stands fast in this,
To do thee to hang upon the bough
On the topmost oak in the morning-tide
While the sun is yet but low."

But answered thereto young Hafbur
Out of a wrathful mind:
"Of all heeds I heeded, this was the last,
To be prayed for by womankind.

"But hearken, true-love Signy,
Good heart to my asking turn,
When thou seest me swing on oaken-bough
Then let thy high-bower burn."

Then answered the noble Signy,
So sore as she must moan,
"God to aid, King's son Hafbur,
Well will I grant thy boon."


They followed him, King Hafbur,
Thick thronging from the castle-bent:
And all who saw him needs must greet
And in full piteous wise they went.

But when they came to the fair green mead
Where Hafbur was to die,
He prayed them hold a little while:
For his true-love would he try.

"O hang me up my cloak of red,
That sight or my ending let me see.
Perchance yet may King Siward rue
My hanging on the gallows tree."

Now of the cloak was Signy ware
And sorely sorrow her heart did rive,
She thought: "The ill tale all is told,
No longer is there need to live."

Straightway her damsels did she call
As weary as she was of mind:
"Come, let us go to the bower aloft
Game and glee for a while to find."

Yea and withal spake Signy,
She spake a word of price:
"To-day shall I do myself to death
And meet Hafbur in Paradise.

"And whoso there be in this our house
Lord Hafbur's death that wrought,
Good reward I give them now
To red embers to be brought.

"So many there are in the King's garth
Of Hafbur's death shall be glad;
Good reward for them to lose
The trothplight mays they had."

She set alight to the bower aloft
And it burned up speedily,
And her good love and her great heart
Might all with eyen see.


It was the King's son Hafbur
O'er his shoulder cast his eye,
And beheld how Signy's house of maids
On a red low stood on high.

"Now take ye down my cloak of red.
Let it lie on the earth a-cold;
Had I ten lives of the world for one,
Nought of them all would I hold."

King Siward looked out of his window fair
In fearful mood enow,
For he saw Hafbur hanging on oak
And Signy's bower on a low.

Out then spake a little page
Was clad in kirtle red:
"Sweet Signy burns in her bower aloft,
With all her mays unwed."

Therewithal spake King Siward
From rueful heart unfain;
"Ne'er saw I two King's children erst
Such piteous ending gain.

"But had I wist or heard it told
That love so strong should be,
Ne'er had I held those twain apart
For all Denmark given me.

"O hasten and run to Signy's bower
For the life of that sweet thing;
Hasten and run to the gallows high,
No thief is Hafbur the King."

But when they came to Signy's bower
Low it lay in embers red;
And when they came to the gallows tree,
Hafbur was stark and dead.

They took him the King's son Hafbur,
Swathed him in linen white,
And laid him in the earth of Christ
By Signy his delight.
_O wilt thou win me then,
or as fair a maid as I be?_





GOLDILOCKS AND GOLDILOCKS


It was Goldilocks woke up in the morn
At the first of the shearing of the corn.

There stood his mother on the hearth
And of new-leased wheat was little dearth.

There stood his sisters by the quern,
For the high-noon cakes they needs must earn.

"O tell me Goldilocks my son,
Why hast thou coloured raiment on?"

"Why should I wear the hodden grey
When I am light of heart to-day?"

"O tell us, brother, why ye wear
In reaping-tide the scarlet gear?

Why hangeth the sharp sword at thy side
When through the land 'tis the hook goes wide?"

"Gay-clad am I that men may know
The freeman's son where'er I go.

The grinded sword at side I bear
Lest I the dastard's word should hear."

"O tell me Goldilocks my son,
Of whither away thou wilt be gone?"

"The morn is fair and the world is wide,
And here no more will I abide."

"O Brother, when wilt thou come again?"
"The autumn drought, and the winter rain,

The frost and the snow, and St. David's wind,
All these that were time out of mind,

All these a many times shall be
Ere the Upland Town again I see."

"O Goldilocks my son, farewell,
As thou wendest the world 'twixt home and hell!"

"O brother Goldilocks, farewell,
Come back with a tale for men to tell!"



So 'tis wellaway for Goldilocks,
As he left the land of the wheaten shocks.

He's gotten him far from the Upland Town,
And he's gone by Dale and he's gone by Down.

He's come to the wild-wood dark and drear,
Where never the bird's song doth he hear.

He has slept in the moonless wood and dim
With never a voice to comfort him.

He has risen up under the little light
Where the noon is as dark as the summer night.

Six days therein has he walked alone
Till his scrip was bare and his meat was done.

On the seventh morn in the mirk, mirk wood,
He saw sight that he deemed was good.

It was as one sees a flower a-bloom
In the dusky heat of a shuttered room.

He deemed the fair thing far aloof,
And would go and put it to the proof.

But the very first step he made from the place
He met a maiden face to face.

Face to face, and so close was she
That their lips met soft and lovingly.

Sweet-mouthed she was, and fair he wist;
And again in the darksome wood they kissed.

Then first in the wood her voice he heard,
As sweet as the song of the summer bird.

"O thou fair man with the golden head.
What is the name of thee?" she said.

"My name is Goldilocks," said he;
"O sweet-breathed, what is the name of thee?"

"O Goldilocks the Swain," she said,
"My name is Goldilocks the Maid."

He spake, "Love me as I love thee,
And Goldilocks one flesh shall be."

She said, "Fair man, I wot not how
Thou lovest, but I love thee now.

But come a little hence away,
That I may see thee in the day.

For hereby is a wood-lawn clear
And good for awhile for us it were."

Therewith she took him by the hand
And led him into the lighter land.



There on the grass they sat adown.
Clad she was in a kirtle brown.

In all the world was never maid
So fair, so evilly arrayed.

No shoes upon her feet she had,
And scantly were her shoulders clad;

Through her brown kirtle's rents full wide
Shone out the sleekness of her side.

An old scrip hung about her neck,
Nought of her raiment did she reck.

No shame of all her rents had she;
She gazed upon him eagerly.

She leaned across the grassy space
And put her hands about his face.

She said: "O hunger-pale art thou,
Yet shalt thou eat though I hunger now."

She took him apples from her scrip,
She kissed him, cheek and chin and lip.

She took him cakes of woodland bread:
"Whiles am I hunger-pinched," she said.

She had a gourd and a pilgrim shell;
She took him water from the well.

She stroked his breast and his scarlet gear;
She spake, "How brave thou art and dear!"

Her arms about him did she wind;
He felt her body dear and kind.



"O love," she said, "now two are one,
And whither hence shall we be gone?"

"Shall we fare further than this wood,"
Quoth he, "I deem it dear and good?"

She shook her head, and laughed, and spake;
"Rise up! For thee, not me, I quake.

Had she been minded me to slay
Sure she had done it ere to-day.

But thou: this hour the crone shall know
That thou art come, her very foe.

No minute more on tidings wait,
Lest e'en this minute be too late."

She led him from the sunlit green,
Going sweet-stately as a queen.

There in the dusky wood, and dim,
As forth they went, she spake to him:

"Fair man, few people have I seen
Amidst this world of woodland green:

But I would have thee tell me now
If there be many such as thou."

"Betwixt the mountains and the sea,
O Sweet, be many such," said he.

Athwart the glimmering air and dim
With wistful eyes she looked on him.

"But ne'er an one so shapely made
Mine eyes have looked upon," she said.

He kissed her face, and cried in mirth:
"Where hast thou dwelt then on the earth?"

"Ever," she said, "I dwell alone
With a hard-handed cruel crone.

And of this crone am I the thrall
To serve her still in bower and hall;

And fetch and carry in the wood,
And do whate'er she deemeth good.

But whiles a sort of folk there come
And seek my mistress at her home;

But such-like are they to behold
As make my very blood run cold.

Oft have I thought, if there be none
On earth save these, would all were done!

Forsooth, I knew it was not so,
But that fairer folk on earth did grow.

But fain and full is the heart in me
To know that folk are like to thee."

Then hand in hand they stood awhile
Till her tears rose up beneath his smile.

And he must fold her to his breast
To give her heart a while of rest.

Till sundered she and gazed about,
And bent her brows as one in doubt.

She spake: "The wood is growing thin,
Into the full light soon shall we win.

Now crouch we that we be not seen,
Under yon bramble-bushes green."

Under the bramble-bush they lay
Betwixt the dusk and the open day.



"O Goldilocks my love, look forth
And let me know what thou seest of worth."

He said: "I see a house of stone,
A castle excellently done."

"Yea," quoth she, "There doth the mistress dwell.
What next thou seest shalt thou tell."

"What lookest thou to see come forth?"
"Maybe a white bear of the North."

"Then shall my sharp sword lock his mouth."
"Nay," she said, "or a worm of the South."

"Then shall my sword his hot blood cool."
"Nay, or a whelming poison-pool."

"The trees its swelling flood shall stay,
And thrust its venomed lip away."

"Nay, it may be a wild-fire flash
To burn thy lovely limbs to ash."

"On mine own hallows shall I call,
And dead its flickering flame shall fall."

"O Goldilocks my love, I fear
That ugly death shall seek us here.

Look forth, O Goldilocks my love.
That I thine hardy heart may prove.

What cometh down the stone-wrought stair
That leadeth up to the castle fair?"

"Adown the doorward stair of stone
There cometh a woman all alone."

"Yea, that forsooth shall my mistress be:
O Goldilocks, what like is she?"

"O fair she is of her array,
As hitherward she wends her way."

"Unlike her wont is that indeed:
Is she not foul beneath her weed?"

"O nay, nay! But most wondrous fair
Of all the women earth doth bear."

"O Goldilocks, my heart, my heart!
Woe, woe! for now we drift apart."

But up he sprang from the bramble-side,
And "O thou fairest one!" he cried:

And forth he ran that Queen to meet,
And fell before her gold-clad feet.

About his neck her arms she cast,
And into the fair-built house they passed.

And under the bramble-bushes lay
Unholpen, Goldilocks the may.



Thenceforth a while of time there wore,
And Goldilocks came forth no more.

Throughout that house he wandered wide,
Both up and down, from side to side.

But never he saw an evil crone,
But a full fair Queen on a golden throne.

Never a barefoot maid did he see,
But a gay and gallant company.

He sat upon the golden throne,
And beside him sat the Queen alone.

Kind she was, as she loved him well,
And many a merry tale did tell.

But nought he laughed, nor spake again,
For all his life was waste and vain.

Cold was his heart, and all afraid
To think on Goldilocks the Maid.



Withal now was the wedding dight
When he should wed that lady bright.

The night was gone, and the day was up
When they should drink the bridal cup.

And he sat at the board beside the Queen,
Amidst of a guest-folk well beseen.

But scarce was midmorn on the hall,
When down did the mirk of midnight fall.

Then up and down from the board they ran,
And man laid angry hand on man.

There was the cry, and the laughter shrill,
And every manner word of ill.

Whoso of men had hearkened it,
Had deemed he had woke up over the Pit.

Then spake the Queen o'er all the crowd,
And grim was her speech, and harsh, and loud:

"Hold now your peace, ye routing swine,
While I sit with mine own love over the wine!

For this dusk is the very deed of a foe,
Or under the sun no man I know."

And hard she spake, and loud she cried
Till the noise of the bickering guests had died.

Then again she spake amidst of the mirk,
In a voice like an unoiled wheel at work:

"Whoso would have a goodly gift,
Let him bring aback the sun to the lift.

Let him bring aback the light and the day,
And rich and in peace he shall go his way."

Out spake a voice was clean and clear:
"Lo, I am she to dight your gear;

But I for the deed a gift shall gain,
To sit by Goldilocks the Swain.

I shall sit at the board by the bridegroom's side,
And be betwixt him and the bride.

I shall eat of his dish, and drink of his cup,
Until for the bride-bed ye rise up."

Then was the Queen's word wailing-wild:
"E'en so must it be, thou Angel's child.

Thou shalt sit by my groom till the dawn of night,
And then shalt thou wend thy ways aright."

Said the voice, "Yet shalt thou swear an oath
That free I shall go though ye be loth."

"How shall I swear?" the false Queen spake:
"Wherewith the sure oath shall I make?"

"Thou shalt swear by the one eye left in thine head,
And the throng of the ghosts of the evil dead."

She swore the oath, and then she spake:
"Now let the second dawn awake."

And e'en therewith the thing was done;
There was peace in the hall, and the light of the sun.

And again the Queen was calm and fair,
And courteous sat the guest-folk there.

Yet unto Goldilocks it seemed
As if amidst the night he dreamed;

As if he sat in a grassy place,
While slim hands framed his hungry face;

As if in the clearing of the wood
One gave him bread and apples good;

And nought he saw of the guest-folk gay,
And nought of all the Queen's array.

Yet saw he betwixt board and door,
A slim maid tread the chequered floor.

Her gown of green so fair was wrought,
That clad her body seemed with nought

But blossoms of the summer-tide,
That wreathed her, limbs and breast and side.

And, stepping towards him daintily,
A basket in her hand had she.

And as she went, from head to feet,
Surely was she most dainty-sweet.

Love floated round her, and her eyes
Gazed from her fairness glad and wise;

But babbling-loud the guests were grown;
Unnoted was she and unknown.



Now Goldilocks she sat beside,
But nothing changed was the Queenly bride;

Yea too, and Goldilocks the Swain
Was grown but dull and dazed again.

The Queen smiled o'er the guest-rich board,
Although his wine the Maiden poured;

Though from his dish the Maiden ate,
The Queen sat happy and sedate.

But now the Maiden fell to speak
From lips that well-nigh touched his cheek:

"O Goldilocks, dost thou forget?
Or mindest thou the mirk-wood yet?

Forgettest thou the hunger-pain
And all thy young life made but vain?

How there was nought to help or aid,
But for poor Goldilocks the Maid?"

She murmured, "Each to each we two,
Our faces from the wood-mirk grew.

Hast thou forgot the grassy place,
And love betwixt us face to face?

Hast thou forgot how fair I deemed
Thy face? How fair thy garment seemed?

Thy kisses on my shoulders bare,
Through rents of the poor raiment there?

My arms that loved thee nought unkissed
All o'er from shoulder unto wrist?

Hast thou forgot how brave thou wert,
Thou with thy fathers' weapon girt;

When underneath the bramble-bush
I quaked like river-shaken rash,

Wondering what new-wrought shape of death
Should quench my new love-quickened breath?

Or else: forget'st thou, Goldilocks,
Thine own land of the wheaten shocks?

Thy mother and thy sisters dear,
Thou said'st would bide thy true-love there?

Hast thou forgot? Hast thou forgot?
O love, my love, I move thee not."



Silent the fair Queen sat and smiled,
And heeded nought the Angel's child,

For like an image fashioned fair
Still sat the Swain with empty stare.

These words seemed spoken not, but writ
As foolish tales through night-dreams flit.

Vague pictures passed before his sight,
As in the first dream of the night.



But the Maiden opened her basket fair,
And set two doves on the table there.

And soft they cooed, and sweet they billed
Like man and maid with love fulfilled.

Therewith the Maiden reached a hand
To a dish that on the board did stand;

And she crumbled a share of the spice-loaf brown,
And the Swain upon her hand looked down;

Then unto the fowl his eyes he turned;
And as in a dream his bowels yearned

For somewhat that he could not name;
And into his heart a hope there came.

And still he looked on the hands of the Maid,
As before the fowl the crumbs she laid.

And he murmured low, "O Goldilocks!
Were we but amid the wheaten shocks!"

Then the false Queen knit her brows and laid
A fair white hand by the hand of the Maid.

He turned his eyes away thereat,
And closer to the Maiden sat.



But the queen-bird now the carle-bird fed
Till all was gone of the sugared bread.

Then with wheedling voice for more he craved,
And the Maid a share from the spice-loaf shaved;

And the crumbs within her hollow hand
She held where the creeping doves did stand.

But Goldilocks, he looked and longed,
And saw how the carle the queen-bird wronged.

For when she came to the hand to eat
The hungry queen-bird thence he beat.

Then Goldilocks the Swain spake low:
"Foul fall thee, bird, thou doest now

As I to Goldilocks, my sweet,
Who gave my hungry mouth to eat."

He felt her hand as he did speak,
He felt her face against his cheek.

He turned and stood in the evil hall,
And swept her up in arms withal.

Then was there hubbub wild and strange,
And swiftly all things there 'gan change.

The fair Queen into a troll was grown,
A one-eyed, bow-backed, haggard crone.

And though the hall was yet full fair,
And bright the sunshine streamed in there,

On evil shapes it fell forsooth:
Swine-heads; small red eyes void of ruth;

And bare-boned bodies of vile things,
And evil-feathered bat-felled wings.

And all these mopped and mowed and grinned,
And sent strange noises down the wind.

There stood those twain unchanged alone
To face the horror of the crone;

She crouched against them by the board;
And cried the Maid: "Thy sword, thy sword!

Thy sword, O Goldilocks! For see
She will not keep her oath to me."

Out flashed the blade therewith. He saw
The foul thing sidelong toward them draw,

Holding within her hand a cup
Wherein some dreadful drink seethed up.

Then Goldilocks cried out and smote,
And the sharp blade sheared the evil throat.

The head fell noseling to the floor;
The liquor from the cup did pour,

And ran along a sparkling flame
That nigh unto their footsoles came.

Then empty straightway was the hall,
Save for those twain, and she withal.

So fled away the Maid and Man,
And down the stony stairway ran.



Fast fled they o'er the sunny grass,
Yet but a little way did pass

Ere cried the Maid: "Now cometh forth
The snow-white ice-bear of the North;

Turn, Goldilocks, and heave up sword!"
Then fast he stood upon the sward,

And faced the beast, that whined and cried,
And shook his head from side to side.

But round him the Swain danced and leaped,
And soon the grisly head he reaped.

And then the ancient blade he sheathed,
And ran unto his love sweet-breathed;

And caught her in his arms and ran
Fast from that house, the bane of man.



Yet therewithal he spake her soft
And kissed her over oft and oft,

Until from kissed and trembling mouth
She cried: "The Dragon of the South!"

He set her down and turned about,
And drew the eager edges out.

And therewith scaly coil on coil
Reared 'gainst his face the mouth aboil:

The gaping jaw and teeth of dread
Was dark 'twixt heaven and his head.

But with no fear, no thought, no word,
He thrust the thin-edged ancient sword.

And the hot blood ran from the hairy throat,
And set the summer grass afloat.

Then back he turned and caught her hand,
And never a minute did they stand.

But as they ran on toward the wood,
He deemed her swift feet fair and good.



She looked back o'er her shoulder fair:
"The whelming poison-pool is here;

And now availeth nought the blade:
O if my cherished trees might aid!

But now my feet fail. Leave me then!
And hold my memory dear of men."

He caught her in his arms again;
Of her dear side was he full fain.

Her body in his arms was dear:
"Sweet art thou, though we perish here!"

Like quicksilver came on the flood:
But lo, the borders of the wood!

She slid from out his arms and stayed;
Round a great oak her arms she laid.

"If e'er I saved thee, lovely tree,
From axe and saw, now succour me:

Look how the venom creeps anigh,
Help! lest thou see me writhe and die."

She crouched beside the upheaved root,
The bubbling venom touched her foot;

Then with a sucking gasping sound
It ebbed back o'er the blighted ground.



Up then she rose and took his hand
And never a moment did they stand.

"Come, love," she cried, "the ways I know,
How thick soe'er the thickets grow.

O love, I love thee! O thine heart!
How mighty and how kind thou art!"

Therewith they saw the tree-dusk lit,
Bright grey the great boles gleamed on it.

"O flee," she said, "the sword is nought
Against the flickering fire-flaught."

"But this availeth yet," said he,
"That Hallows All our love may see."

He turned about and faced the glare:
"O Mother, help us, kind and fair!

Now help me, true St. Nicholas,
If ever truly thine I was!"

Therewith the wild-fire waned and paled,
And in the wood the light nigh failed;

And all about 'twas as the night.
He said: "Now won is all our fight,

And now meseems all were but good
If thou mightst bring us from the wood."

She fawned upon him, face and breast;
She said: "It hangs 'twixt worst and best.

And yet, O love, if thou be true,
One thing alone thou hast to do."

Sweetly he kissed her, cheek and chin:
"What work thou biddest will I win."

"O love, my love, I needs must sleep;
Wilt thou my slumbering body keep,

And, toiling sorely, still bear on
The love thou seemest to have won?"

"O easy toil," he said, "to bless
Mine arms with all thy loveliness."

She smiled; "Yea, easy it may seem,
But harder is it than ye deem.

For hearken! Whatso thou mayst see,
Piteous as it may seem to thee,

Heed not nor hearken! bear me forth,
As though nought else were aught of worth.

For all earth's wealth that may be found
Lay me not sleeping on the ground,

To help, to hinder, or to save!
Or there for me thou diggest a grave."



He took her body on his arm,
Her slumbering head lay on his barm.

Then glad he bore her on the way,
And the wood grew lighter with the day.

All still it was, till suddenly
He heard a bitter wail near by.

Yet on he went until he heard
The cry become a shapen word:

"Help me, O help, thou passer by!
Turn from the path, let me not die!

I am a woman; bound and left
To perish; of all help bereft."

Then died the voice out in a moan;
He looked upon his love, his own,

And minding all she spake to him
Strode onward through the wild-wood dim.

But lighter grew the woodland green
Till clear the shapes of things were seen.

And therewith wild halloos he heard,
And shrieks, and cries of one afeard.

Nigher it grew and yet more nigh
Till burst from out a brake near by

A woman bare of breast and limb,
Who turned a piteous face to him

E'en as she ran: for hard at heel
Followed a man with brandished steel,

And yelling mouth. Then the Swain stood
One moment in the glimmering wood

Trembling, ashamed: Yet now grown wise
Deemed all a snare for ears and eyes.

So onward swiftlier still he strode
And cast all thought on his fair load.

And yet in but a little space
Back came the yelling shrieking chase,

And well-nigh gripped now by the man,
Straight unto him the woman ran;

And underneath the gleaming steel
E'en at his very feet did kneel.

She looked up; sobs were all her speech,
Yet sorely did her face beseech.

While o'er her head the chaser stared,
Shaking aloft the edges bared.

Doubted the Swain, and a while did stand
As she took his coat-lap in her hand.

Upon his hand he felt her breath
Hot with the dread of present death.

Sleek was her arm on his scarlet coat,
The sobbing passion rose in his throat.

But e'en therewith he looked aside
And saw the face of the sleeping bride.

Then he tore his coat from the woman's hand,
And never a moment there did stand.

But swiftly thence away he strode
Along the dusky forest road.

And there rose behind him laughter shrill,
And then was the windless wood all still,

He looked around o'er all the place,
But saw no image of the chase.

And as he looked the night-mirk now
O'er all the tangled wood 'gan flow.

Then stirred the sweetling that he bore,
And she slid adown from his arms once more.

Nought might he see her well-loved face;
But he felt her lips in the mirky place.

"'Tis night," she said, "and the false day's gone,
And we twain in the wild-wood all alone.

Night o'er the earth; so rest we here
Until to-morrow's sun is clear.

For overcome is every foe
And home to-morrow shall we go."

So 'neath the trees they lay, those twain,
And to them the darksome night was gain.

But when the morrow's dawn was grey
They woke and kissed whereas they lay.

And when on their feet they came to stand
Swain Goldilocks stretched out his hand.

And he spake: "O love, my love indeed,
Where now is gone thy goodly weed?

For again thy naked feet I see,
And thy sweet sleek arms so kind to me.

Through thy rent kirtle once again
Thy shining shoulder showeth plain."

She blushed as red as the sun-sweet rose:
"My garments gay were e'en of those

That the false Queen dight to slay my heart;
And sore indeed was their fleshly smart.

Yet must I bear them, well-beloved,
Until thy truth and troth was proved

And this tattered coat is now for a sign
That thou hast won me to be thine.

Now wilt thou lead along thy maid
To meet thy kindred unafraid."

As stoops the falcon on the dove
He cast himself about her love.

He kissed her over, cheek and chin,
He kissed the sweetness of her skin.

Then hand in hand they went their way
Till the wood grew light with the outer day.

At last behind them lies the wood,
And before are the Upland Acres good.

On the hill's brow awhile they stay
At midmorn of the merry day.

He sheareth a deal from his kirtle meet,
To make her sandals for her feet.

He windeth a wreath of the beechen tree,
Lest men her shining shoulders see.

And a wreath of woodbine sweet, to hide
The rended raiment of her side;

And a crown of poppies red as wine,
Lest on her head the hot sun shine.

She kissed her love withal and smiled:
"Lead forth, O love, the Woodland Child!

Most meet and right meseems it now
That I am clad with the woodland bough.

For betwixt the oak-tree and the thorn
Meseemeth erewhile was I born.

And if my mother aught I knew,
It was of the woodland folk she grew.

And O that thou art well at ease
To wed the daughter of the trees!"

Now Goldilocks and Goldilocks
Go down amidst the wheaten shocks,

But when anigh to the town they come,
Lo there is the wain a-wending home,

And many a man and maid beside,
Who tossed the sickles up, and cried:

"O Goldilocks, now whither away?
And what wilt thou with the woodland may?"

"O this is Goldilocks my bride,
And we come adown from the wild-wood side,

And unto the Fathers' House we wend
To dwell therein till life shall end."

"Up then on the wain, that ye may see
From afar how thy mother bideth thee.

That ye may see how kith and kin
Abide thee, bridal brave to win."

So Goldilocks and Goldilocks
Sit high aloft on the wheaten shocks,

And fair maids sing before the wain,
For all of Goldilocks are fain.



But when they came to the Fathers' door,
There stood his mother old and hoar.

Yet was her hair with grey but blent,
When forth from the Upland Town he went.

There by the door his sisters stood:
Full fair they were and fresh of blood;

Little they were when he went away;
Now each is meet for a young man's may.

"O tell me, Goldilocks, my son,
What are the deeds that thou hast done?"

"I have wooed me a wife in the forest wild,
And home I bring the Woodland Child."

"A little deed to do, O son,
So long a while as thou wert gone."

"O mother, yet is the summer here
Now I bring aback my true-love dear.

And therewith an Evil Thing have I slain;
Yet I come with the first-come harvest-wain."

"O Goldilocks, my son, my son!
How good is the deed that thou hast done?

But how long the time that is worn away!
Lo! white is my hair that was but grey.

And lo these sisters here, thine own,
How tall, how meet for men-folk grown!

Come, see thy kin in the feasting-hall,
And tell me if thou knowest them all!

O son, O son, we are blithe and fain;
But the autumn drought, and the winter rain,

The frost and the snow, and St. David's wind,
All these that were, time out of mind,

All these a many times have been
Since thou the Upland Town hast seen."



Then never a word spake Goldilocks
Till they came adown from the wheaten shocks.

And there beside his love he stood
And he saw her body sweet and good.

Then round her love his arms he cast:
"The years are as a tale gone past.

But many the years that yet shall be
Of the merry tale of thee and me.

Come, love, and look on the Fathers' Hall,
And the folk of the kindred one and all!

For now the Fathers' House is kind,
And all the ill is left behind.

And Goldilocks and Goldilocks
Shall dwell in the land of the Wheaten Shocks."





LOVE IS ENOUGH

OR

THE FREEING OF PHARAMOND


_DRAMATIS PERSONAE_


GILES,                }         _Peasant-folk._
JOAN, _his Wife_,     }

THE EMPEROR.

THE EMPRESS.

THE MAYOR.


A COUNCILLOR.

MASTER OLIVER, _King Pharamond's Foster-father_.

A NORTHERN LORD.

KING PHARAMOND.

AZALAIS, _his Love_.

KING THEOBALD.

HONORIUS, _the Councillor_.


LOVE.




LOVE IS ENOUGH



ARGUMENT

This story, which is told by way of a morality set before an Emperor
and Empress newly wedded, showeth of a King whom nothing but Love
might satisfy, who left all to seek Love, and, having found it, found
this also, that he had enough, though he lacked all else.


_In the streets of a great town where the people are gathered
together thronging to see the Emperor and Empress pass_.



GILES

Look long, Joan, while I hold you so,
For the silver trumpets come arow.


JOAN

O the sweet sound! the glorious sight!
O Giles, Giles, see this glittering Knight!


GILES

Nay 'tis the Marshalls'-sergeant, sweet--
--Hold, neighbour, let me keep my feet!--
There, now your head is up again;
Thus held up have you aught of pain?


JOAN

Nay, clear I see, and well at ease!
God's body! what fair Kings be these?


GILES

The Emperor's chamberlains, behold
Their silver shoes and staves of gold.
Look, look! how like some heaven come down
The maidens go with girded gown!


JOAN

Yea, yea, and this last row of them
Draw up their kirtles by the hem,
And scatter roses e'en like those
About my father's garden-close.


GILES

Ah! have I hurt you? See the girls
Whose slim hands scatter very pearls.


JOAN

Hold me fast, Giles! here comes one
Whose raiment flashes down the sun.


GILES

O sweet mouth! O fair lids cast down!
O white brow! O the crown, the crown!


JOAN

How near! if nigher I might stand
By one ell, I could touch his hand.


GILES

Look, Joan! if on this side she were
Almost my hand might touch her hair.


JOAN

Ah me! what is she thinking on?


GILES

Is he content now all is won?


JOAN

And does she think as I thought, when
Betwixt the dancing maids and men,
Twixt the porch rose-boughs blossomed red
I saw the roses on my bed?


GILES

Hath he such fear within his heart
As I had, when the wind did part
The jasmine-leaves, and there within
The new-lit taper glimmered thin?



THE MUSIC

(As the EMPEROR and EMPRESS enter.)


_LOVE IS ENOUGH; though the World be a-waning
And the woods have no voice but the voice of complaining,
  Though the sky be too dark for dim eyes to discover
The gold-cups and daisies fair blooming thereunder;
Though the hills be held shadows, and the sea a dark wonder,
  And this day draw a veil over all deeds passed over,
Yet their hands shall not tremble, their feet shall not falter,
The void shall not weary, the fear shall not alter
  These lips and these eyes of the loved and the lover._




THE EMPEROR

The spears flashed by me, and the swords swept round,
And in war's hopeless tangle was I bound,
But straw and stubble were the cold points found,
For still thy hands led down the weary way.


THE EMPRESS

Through hall and street they led me as a queen,
They looked to see me proud and cold of mien,
I heeded not though all my tears were seen,
For still I dreamed of thee throughout the day.


THE EMPEROR

Wild over bow and bulwark swept the sea
Unto the iron coast upon our lee,
Like painted cloth its fury was to me,
For still thy hands led down the weary way.


THE EMPRESS

They spoke to me of war within the land,
They bade me sign defiance and command;
I heeded not though thy name left my hand,
For still I dreamed of thee throughout the day.


THE EMPEROR

But now that I am come, and side by side
We go, and men cry gladly on the bride
And tremble at the image of my pride,
Where is thy hand to lead me down the way?

THE EMPRESS

But now that thou art come, and heaven and earth
Are laughing in the fulness of their mirth,
A shame I knew not in my heart has birth--
--Draw me through dreams unto the end of day!


THE EMPEROR

Behold, behold, how weak my heart is grown
Now all the heat of its desire is known!
Pearl beyond price I fear to call mine own,
Where is thy hand to lead me down the way?


THE EMPRESS

Behold, behold, how little I may move!
Think in thy heart how terrible is Love,
O thou who know'st my soul as God above--
--Draw me through dreams unto the end of day!


_The stage for the play in another part of the street, and the
people thronging all about_.



GILES

Here, Joan, this is so good a place
'Tis worth the scramble and the race!
There is the Empress just sat down,
Her white hands on her golden gown,
While yet the Emperor stands to hear
The welcome of the bald-head Mayor
Unto the show; and you shall see
The player-folk come in presently.
The king of whom is e'en that one,
Who wandering but a while agone
Stumbled upon our harvest-home
That August when you might not come.
Betwixt the stubble and the grass
Great mirth indeed he brought to pass.
But liefer were I to have seen
Your nimble feet tread down the green
In threesome dance to pipe and fife.


JOAN

Thou art a dear thing to my life,
And nought good have I far to seek--
But hearken! for the Mayor will speak.


THE MAYOR

Since your grace bids me speak without stint or sparing
A thing little splendid I pray you to see:
Early is the day yet, for we near the dawning
Drew on chains dear-bought, and gowns done with gold;
So may ye high ones hearken an hour
A tale that our hearts hold worthy and good,
Of Pharamond the Freed, who, a king feared and honoured,
Fled away to find love from his crown and his folk.
E'en as I tell of it somewhat I tremble
Lest we, fearful of treason to the love that fulfils you,
Should seem to make little of the love that ye give us,
Of your lives full of glory, of the deeds that your lifetime
Shall gleam with for ever when we are forgotten.
Forgive it for the greatness of that Love who compels us.--
Hark! in the minster-tower minish the joy-bells,
And all men are hushed now these marvels to hear.


THE EMPEROR (_to the MAYOR_)

We thank your love, that sees our love indeed
Toward you, toward Love, toward life of toil and need:
We shall not falter though your poet sings
Of all defeat, strewing the crowns of kings
About the thorny ways where Love doth wend,
Because we know us faithful to the end
Toward you, toward Love, toward life of war and deed,
And well we deem your tale shall help our need.

(_To the EMPRESS_)

So many hours to pass before the sun
Shall blush ere sleeping, and the day be done!
How thinkest thou, my sweet, shall such a tale
For lengthening or for shortening them avail?


THE EMPRESS

Nay, dreamland has no clocks the wise ones say,
And while our hands move at the break of day
We dream of years: and I am dreaming still
And need no change my cup of joy to fill:
Let them say on, and I shall hear thy voice
Telling the tale, and in its love rejoice.


THE MUSIC

(As the singers enter and stand before the curtain, the player-king
and player-maiden in the midst.)


_LOVE IS ENOUGH: have no thought for to-morrow
  If ye lie down this even in rest from your pain,
Ye who have paid for your bliss with great sorrow:
  For as it was once so it shall be again.
  Ye shall cry out for death as ye stretch forth in vain.

Feeble hands to the hands that would help but they may not,
  Cry out to deaf ears that would hear if they could;
Till again shall the change come, and words your lips say not
  Your hearts make all plain in the best wise they would
  And the world ye thought waning is glorious and good:

And no morning now mocks you and no nightfall is weary,
  The plains are not empty of song and of deed:
The sea strayeth not, nor the mountains are dreary;
  The wind is not helpless for any man's need,
  Nor falleth the rain but for thistle and weed.

O surely this morning all sorrow is hidden,
  All battle is hushed for this even at least;
And no one this noontide may hunger, unbidden
  To the flowers and the singing and the joy of your feast
  Where silent ye sit midst the world's tale increased.

Lo, the lovers unloved that draw nigh for your blessing!
  For your tale makes the dreaming whereby yet they live
The dreams of the day with their hopes of redressing,
  The dreams of the night with the kisses they give,
  The dreams of the dawn wherein death and hope strive.

Ah, what shall we say then, but that earth threatened often
  Shall live on for ever that such things may be,
That the dry seed shall quicken, the hard earth shall soften,
  And the spring-bearing birds flutter north o'er the sea,
  That earth's garden may bloom round my love's feet and me?_



THE EMPEROR

Lo you, my sweet, fair folk are one and all
And with good grace their broidered robes do fall,
And sweet they sing indeed: but he, the King,
Look but a little how his fingers cling
To her's, his love that shall be in the play--
His love that hath been surely ere to-day:
And see, her wide soft eyes cast down at whiles
Are opened not to note the people's smiles
But her love's lips, and dreamily they stare
As though they sought the happy country, where
They two shall be alone, and the world dead.


THE EMPRESS

Most faithful eyes indeed look from the head
The sun has burnt, and wind and rain has beat,
Well may he find her slim brown fingers sweet.
And he--methinks he trembles, lest he find
That song of his not wholly to her mind.
Note how his grey eyes look askance to see
Her bosom heaving with the melody
His heart loves well: rough with the wind and rain
His cheek is, hollow with some ancient pain;
The sun has burned and blanched his crispy hair,
And over him hath swept a world of care
And left him careless, rugged, and her own;
Still fresh desired, still strange and new, though known.


THE EMPEROR

His eyes seem dreaming of the mysteries
Deep in the depths of her familiar eyes,
Tormenting and alluring; does he dream,
As I ofttime this morn, how they would seem
Loved but unloving?--Nay the world's too sweet
That we the ghost of such a pain should meet--
Behold, she goes, and he too, turning round,
Remembers that his love must yet be found,
That he is King and loveless in this story
Wrought long ago for some dead poet's glory.

                [_Exeunt players behind the curtain_.


_Enter before the curtain LOVE crowned as a King_.


LOVE

All hail, my servants! tremble ye, my foes!
A hope for these I have, a fear for those
Hid in this tale of Pharamond the Freed.
To-day, my Faithful, nought shall be your need
Of tears compassionate:--although full oft
The crown of love laid on my bosom soft
Be woven of bitter death and deathless fame,
Bethorned with woe, and fruited thick with shame.
--This for the mighty of my courts I keep,
Lest through the world there should be none to weep
Except for sordid loss; and not to gain
But satiate pleasure making mock of pain.
--Yea, in the heaven from whence my dreams go forth
Are stored the signs that make the world of worth:
There is the wavering wall of mighty Troy
About my Helen's hope and Paris' joy:
There lying neath the fresh dyed mulberry-tree
The sword and cloth of Pyramus I see:
There is the number of the joyless days
Wherein Medea won no love nor praise:
There is the sand my Ariadne pressed;
The footprints of the feet that knew no rest
While o'er the sea forth went the fatal sign:
The asp of Egypt, the Numidian wine,
My Sigurd's sword, my Brynhild's fiery bed,
The tale of years of Gudrun's drearihead,
And Tristram's glaive, and Iseult's shriek are here,
And cloister-gown of joyless Guenevere.

Save you, my Faithful! how your loving eyes
Grow soft and gleam with all these memories!
But on this day my crown is not of death:
My fire-tipped arrows, and my kindling breath
Are all the weapons I shall need to-day.
Nor shall my tale in measured cadence play
About the golden lyre of Gods long gone,
Nor dim and doubtful 'twixt the ocean's moan
Wail out about the Northern fiddle-bow,
Stammering with pride or quivering shrill with woe.
Rather caught up at hazard is the pipe
That mixed with scent of roses over ripe,
And murmur of the summer afternoon,
May charm you somewhat with its wavering tune
'Twixt joy and sadness: whatsoe'er it saith,
I know at least there breathes through it my breath


OF PHARAMOND THE FREED


_Scene: In the Kings Chamber of Audience.

MASTER OLIVER and many LORDS and COUNCILLORS_.



A COUNCILLOR

Fair Master Oliver, thou who at all times
Mayst open thy heart to our lord and master,
Tell us what tidings thou hast to deliver;
For our hearts are grown heavy, and where shall we turn to
If thus the king's glory, our gain and salvation,
Must go down the wind amid gloom and despairing?


MASTER OLIVER

Little may be looked for, fair lords, in my story,
To lighten your hearts of the load lying on them.
For nine days the king hath slept not an hour,
And taketh no heed of soft words or beseeching.
Yea, look you, my lords, if a body late dead
In the lips and the cheeks should gain some little colour,
And arise and wend forth with no change in the eyes,
And wander about as if seeking its soul--
Lo, e'en so sad is my lord and my master;
Yea, e'en so far hath his soul drifted from us.


A COUNCILLOR

What say the leeches? Is all their skill left them?


MASTER OLIVER

Nay, they bade lead him to hunt and to tilting,
To set him on high in the throne of his honour
To judge heavy deeds: bade him handle the tiller,
And drive through the sea with the wind at its wildest;
All things he was wont to hold kingly and good.
So we led out his steed and he straight leapt upon him
With no word, and no looking to right nor to left,
And into the forest we fared as aforetime:
Fast on the king followed, and cheered without stinting
The hounds to the strife till the bear stood at bay;
Then there he alone by the beech-trees alighted;
Barehanded, unarmoured, he handled the spear-shaft,
And blew up the death on the horn of his father;
Yet still in his eyes was no look of rejoicing,
And no life in his lips; but I likened him rather
To King Nimrod carved fair on the back of the high-seat
When the candles are dying, and the high moon is streaming
Through window and luffer white on the lone pavement
Whence the guests are departed in the hall of the palace.--
--Rode we home heavily, he with his rein loose,
Feet hanging free from the stirrups, and staring
At a clot of the bear's blood that stained his green kirtle;--
Unkingly, unhappy, he rode his ways homeward.


A COUNCILLOR

Was this all ye tried, or have ye more tidings?
For the wall tottereth not at first stroke of the ram.


MASTER OLIVER

Nay, we brought him a-board the Great Dragon one dawning,
When the cold bay was flecked with the crests of white billows
And the clouds lay alow on the earth and the sea;
He looked not aloft as they hoisted the sail,
But with hand on the tiller hallooed to the shipmen
In a voice grown so strange, that it scarce had seemed stranger
If from the ship Argo, in seemly wise woven
On the guard-chamber hangings, some early grey dawning
Great Jason had cried, and his golden locks wavered.
Then e'en as the oars ran outboard, and dashed
In the wind-scattered foam and the sails bellied out,
His hand dropped from the tiller, and with feet all uncertain
And dull eye he wended him down to the midship,
And gazing about for the place of the gangway
Made for the gate of the bulwark half open,
And stood there and stared at the swallowing sea,
Then turned, and uncertain went wandering back sternward,
And sat down on the deck by the side of the helmsman,
Wrapt in dreams of despair; so I bade them turn shoreward,
And slowly he rose as the side grated stoutly
'Gainst the stones of the quay and they cast forth the hawser.--
Unkingly, unhappy, he went his ways homeward.


A COUNCILLOR

But by other ways yet had thy wisdom to travel;
How else did ye work for the winning him peace?


MASTER OLIVER

We bade gather the knights for the goodliest tilting,
There the ladies went lightly in glorious array;
In the old arms we armed him whose dints well he knew
That the night dew had dulled and the sea salt had sullied:
On the old roan yet sturdy we set him astride;
So he stretched forth his hand to lay hold of the spear
Neither laughing nor frowning, as lightly his wont was
When the knights are awaiting the voice of the trumpet.
It awoke, and back beaten from barrier to barrier
Was caught up by knights' cries, by the cry of the king.--
--Such a cry as red Mars in the Council-room window
May awake with some noon when the last horn is winded,
And the bones of the world are dashed grinding together.
So it seemed to my heart, and a horror came o'er me,
As the spears met, and splinters flew high o'er the field,
And I saw the king stay when his course was at swiftest,
His horse straining hard on the bit, and he standing
Stiff and stark in his stirrups, his spear held by the midmost,
His helm cast a-back, his teeth set hard together;
E'en as one might, who, riding to heaven, feels round him
The devils unseen: then he raised up the spear
As to cast it away, but therewith failed his fury,
He dropped it, and faintly sank back in the saddle,
And, turning his horse from the press and the turmoil,
Came sighing to me, and sore grieving I took him
And led him away, while the lists were fallen silent
As a fight in a dream that the light breaketh through.--
To the tune of the clinking of his fight-honoured armour
Unkingly, unhappy, he went his ways homeward.


A COUNCILLOR

What thing worse than the worst in the budget yet lieth?


MASTER OLIVER

To the high court we brought him, and bade him to hearken
The pleading of his people, and pass sentence on evil.
His face changed with great pain, and his brow grew all furrowed,
As a grim tale was told there of the griefs of the lowly;
Till he took up the word, mid the trembling of tyrants,
As his calm voice and cold wrought death on ill doers--
--E'en so might King Minos in marble there carven
Mid old dreaming of Crete give doom on the dead,
When the world and its deeds are dead too and buried.--
But lo, as I looked, his clenched hands were loosened,
His lips grew all soft, and his eyes were beholding
Strange things we beheld not about and above him.
So he sat for a while, and then swept his robe round him
And arose and departed, not heeding his people,
The strange looks, the peering, the rustle and whisper;
But or ever he gained the gate that gave streetward,
Dull were his eyes grown, his feet were grown heavy,
His lips crooned complaining, as onward he stumbled;--
Unhappy, unkingly, he went his ways homeward.


A COUNCILLOR

Is all striving over then, fair Master Oliver?


MASTER OLIVER

All mine, lords, for ever! help who may help henceforth
I am but helpless: too surely meseemeth
He seeth me not, and knoweth no more
Me that have loved him. Woe worth the while, Pharamond,
That men should love aught, love always as I loved!
Mother and sister and the sweetling that scorned me,
The wind of the autumn-tide over them sweepeth,
All are departed, but this one, the dear one--
I should die or he died and be no more alone,
But God's hatred hangs round me, and the life and the glory
That grew with my waning life fade now before it,
And leaving no pity depart through the void.


A COUNCILLOR

This is a sight full sorry to see
These tears of an elder! But soft now, one cometh.


MASTER OLIVER

The feet of the king: will ye speak or begone?


A NORTHERN LORD

I will speak at the least, whoever keeps silence,
For well it may be that the voice of a stranger
Shall break through his dreaming better than thine;
And lo now a word in my mouth is a-coming,
That the king well may hearken: how sayst thou, fair master,
Whose name now I mind not, wilt thou have me essay it?


MASTER OLIVER

Try whatso thou wilt, things may not be worser. [_Enter KING._
Behold, how he cometh weighed down by his woe!

(_To the KING_)

All hail, lord and master! wilt thou hearken a little
These lords high in honour whose hearts are full heavy
Because thy heart sickeneth and knoweth no joy?--

(_To the COUNCILLORS_)

Ah, see you! all silent, his eyes set and dreary,
His lips moving a little--how may I behold it?


THE NORTHERN LORD

May I speak, king? dost hearken? many matters I have
To deal with or death. I have honoured thee duly
Down in the north there; a great name I have held thee;
Rough hand in the field, ready righter of wrong,
Reckless of danger, but recking of pity.
But now--is it false what the chapmen have told us,
And are thy fair robes all thou hast of a king?
Is it bragging and lies, that thou beardless and tender
Weptst not when they brought thy slain father before thee,
Trembledst not when the leaguer that lay round thy city
Made a light for these windows, a noise for thy pillow?
Is it lies what men told us of thy singing and laughter
As thou layst in thy lair fled away from lost battle?
Is it lies how ye met in the depths of the mountains,
And a handful rushed down and made nought of an army?
Those tales of your luck, like the tide at its turning,
Trusty and sure howso slowly it cometh,
Are they lies? Is it lies of wide lands in the world,
How they sent thee great men to lie low at thy footstool
In five years thenceforward, and thou still a youth?
Are they lies, these fair tidings, or what see thy lords here--
Some love-sick girl's brother caught up by that sickness,
As one street beggar catches the pest from his neighbour?


KING PHARAMOND

What words are these of lies and love-sickness?
Why am I lonely among all this brawling?
O foster-father, is all faith departed
That this hateful face should be staring upon me?


THE NORTHERN LORD

Lo, now thou awakest; so tell me in what wise
I shall wend back again: set a word in my mouth
To meet the folks' murmur, and give heart to the heavy;
For there man speaks to man that thy measure is full,
And thy five-years-old kingdom is falling asunder.

          [_KING draws his sword_.

Yea, yea, a fair token thy sword were to send them;
Thou dost well to draw it; (_KING brandishes his sword over the
    lord's head, as if to strike him_): soft sound is its whistle;
Strike then, O king, for my wars are well over,
And dull is the way my feet tread to the grave!


KING PHARAMOND (_sheathing his sword_)

Man, if ye have waked me, I bid you be wary
Lest my sword yet should reach you; ye wot in your northland
What hatred he winneth who waketh the shipman
From the sweet rest of death mid the welter of waves;
So with us may it fare; though I know thee full faithful,
Bold in field and in council, most fit for a king.
--Bear with me. I pray you that to none may be meted
Such a measure of pain as my soul is oppressed with.
Depart all for a little, till my spirit grows lighter,
Then come ye with tidings, and hold we fair council,
That my countries may know they have yet got a king.
          [_Exeunt all but OLIVER and KING_.
Come, my foster-father, ere thy visage fade from me,
Come with me mid the flowers some opening to find
In the clouds that cling round me; if thou canst remember
Thine old lovingkindness when I was a king.



THE MUSIC


_
Love is enough; it grew up without heeding
  In the days when ye knew not its name nor its measure
  And its leaflets untrodden by the light feet of pleasure
Had no boast of the blossom, no sign of the seeding,
  As the morning and evening passed over its treasure.

And what do ye say then?--that Spring long departed
  Has brought forth no child to the softness and showers;
  --That we slept and we dreamed through the Summer of flowers;
We dreamed of the Winter, and waking dead-hearted
  Found Winter upon us and waste of dull hours.

Nay, Spring was o'er happy and knew not the reason,
  And Summer dreamed sadly, for she thought all was ended
  In her fulness of wealth that might not be amended;
But this is the harvest and the garnering season,
  And the leaf and the blossom in the ripe fruit are blended.

It sprang without sowing, it grew without heeding,
  Ye knew not its name and ye knew not its measure,
  Ye noted it not mid your hope and your pleasure;
There was pain in its blossom, despair in its seeding,
  But daylong your bosom now nurseth its treasure.
_


_Enter before the curtain LOVE clad as an image-maker_.



LOVE

How mighty and how fierce a king is here
The stayer of falling folks, the bane of fear!
Fair life he liveth, ruling passing well,
Disdaining praise of Heaven and hate of Hell;
And yet how goodly to us Great in Heaven
Are such as he, the waning world that leaven!
How well it were that such should never die!
How well it were at least that memory
Of such should live, as live their glorious deeds!
--But which of all the Gods think ye it needs
To shape the mist of Rumour's wavering breath
Into a golden dream that fears no death?
Red Mars belike?--since through his field is thrust
The polished plough-share o'er the helmets' rust!--
Apollo's beauty?--surely eld shall spare
Smooth skin, and flashing eyes, and crispy hair!--
Nay, Jove himself?--the pride that holds the low
Apart, despised, to mighty tales must grow!--
Or Pallas?--for the world that knoweth nought,
By that great wisdom to the wicket brought,
Clear through the tangle evermore shall see!
--O Faithful, O Beloved, turn to ME!
I am the Ancient of the Days that were
I am the Newborn that To-day brings here,
I am the Life of all that dieth not;
Through me alone is sorrow unforgot.

My Faithful, knowing that this man should live,
I from the cradle gifts to him did give
Unmeet belike for rulers of the earth;
As sorrowful yearning in the midst of mirth,
Pity midst anger, hope midst scorn and hate.
Languor midst labour, lest the day wax late,
And all be wrong, and all be to begin.
Through these indeed the eager life did win
That was the very body to my soul;
Yet, as the tide of battle back did roll
Before his patience: as he toiled and grieved
O'er fools and folly, was he not deceived,
But ever knew the change was drawing nigh,
And in my mirror gazed with steadfast eye.
Still, O my Faithful, seemed his life so fair
That all Olympus might have left him there
Until to bitter strength that life was grown,
And then have smiled to see him die alone,
Had I not been.----Ye know me; I have sent
A pain to pierce his last coat of content:
Now must he tear the armour from his breast
And cast aside all things that men deem best,
And single-hearted for his longing strive
That he at last may save his soul alive.

How say ye then, Beloved? Ye have known
The blossom of the seed these hands have sown;
Shall this man starve in sorrow's thorny brake?
Shall Love the faithful of his heart forsake?



_In the King's Garden.
KING PHARAMOND, MASTER OLIVER_.


MASTER OLIVER

In this quiet place canst thou speak, O my King,
Where nought but the lilies may hearken our counsel?


KING PHARAMOND

What wouldst thou have of me? why came we hither?


MASTER OLIVER

Dear lord, thou wouldst speak of the woe that weighs on thee.


KING PHARAMOND

Wouldst thou bear me aback to the strife and the battle?
Nay, hang up my banner: 'tis all passed and over!


MASTER OLIVER

Speak but a little, lord! have I not loved thee?


KING PHARAMOND

Yea,--thou art Oliver: I saw thee a-lying
A long time ago with the blood on thy face,
When my father wept o'er thee for thy faith and thy valour.


MASTER OLIVER

Years have passed over, but my faith hath not failed me;
Spent is my might, but my love not departed.
Shall not love help--yea, look long in my eyes!
There is no more to see if thou sawest my heart.


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, thou art Oliver, full of all kindness!
Have patience, for now is the cloud passing over--
Have patience and hearken--yet shalt thou be shamed.


MASTER OLIVER

Thou shalt shine through thy shame as the sun through the haze
When the world waiteth gladly the warm day a-coming:
As great as thou seem'st now, I know thee for greater
Than thy deeds done and told of: one day I shall know thee:
Lying dead in my tomb I shall hear the world praising.


KING PHARAMOND

Stay thy praise--let me speak, lest all speech depart from me.
--There is a place in the world, a great valley
That seems a green plain from the brow of the mountains,
But hath knolls and fair dales when adown there thou goest:
There are homesteads therein with gardens about them,
And fair herds of kine and grey sheep a-feeding,
And willow-hung streams wend through deep grassy meadows,
And a highway winds through them from the outer world coming:
Girthed about is the vale by a grey wall of mountains,
Rent apart in three places and tumbled together
In old times of the world when the earth-fires flowed forth:
And as you wend up these away from the valley
You think of the sea and the great world it washes;
But through two you may pass not, the shattered rocks shut them.
And up through the third there windeth a highway,
And its gorge is fulfilled by a black wood of yew-trees.
And I know that beyond, though mine eyes have not seen it,
A city of merchants beside the sea lieth.----
I adjure thee, my fosterer, by the hand of my father,
By thy faith without stain, by the days unforgotten,
When I dwelt in thy house ere the troubles' beginning,
By thy fair wife long dead and thy sword-smitten children,
By thy life without blame and thy love without blemish,
Tell me how, tell me when, that fair land I may come to!
Hide it not for my help, for my honour, but tell me,
Lest my time and thy time be lost days and confusion!


MASTER OLIVER

O many such lands!--O my master, what ails thee?
Tell me again, for I may not remember.
--I prayed God give thee speech, and lo God hath given it--
May God give me death! if I dream not this evil.


KING PHARAMOND

Said I not when thou knew'st it, all courage should fail thee?
But me--my heart fails not, I am Pharamond as ever.
I shall seek and shall find--come help me, my fosterer!
--Yet if thou shouldst ask for a sign from that country
What have I to show thee--I plucked a blue milk-wort
From amidst of the field where she wandered fair-footed--
It was gone when I wakened--and once in my wallet
I set some grey stones from the way through the forest--
These were gone when I wakened--and once as I wandered
A lock of white wool from a thorn-bush I gathered;
It was gone when I wakened--the name of that country--
Nay, how should I know it?--but ever meseemeth
'Twas not in the southlands, for sharp in the sunset
And sunrise the air is, and whiles I have seen it
Amid white drift of snow--ah, look up, foster-father!


MASTER OLIVER

O woe, woe is me that I may not awaken!
Or else, art thou verily Pharamond my fosterling,
The Freed and the Freer, the Wise, the World's Wonder?


KING PHARAMOND

Why fainteth thy great heart? nay, Oliver, hearken,
E'en such as I am now these five years I have been.
Through five years of striving this dreamer and dotard
Has reaped glory from ruin, drawn peace from destruction.


MASTER OLIVER

Woe's me! wit hath failed me, and all the wise counsel
I was treasuring up down the wind is a-drifting--
Yet what wouldst thou have there if ever thou find it?
Are the gates of heaven there? is Death bound there and helpless?


KING PHARAMOND

Nay, thou askest me this not as one without knowledge,
For thou know'st that my love in that land is abiding.


MASTER OLIVER

Yea--woe worth the while--and all wisdom hath failed me:
Yet if thou wouldst tell me of her, I will hearken
Without mocking or mourning, if that may avail thee.


KING PHARAMOND

Lo, thy face is grown kind--Thou rememberest the even
When I first wore the crown after sore strife and mourning?


MASTER OLIVER

Who shall ever forget it? the dead face of thy father,
And thou in thy fight-battered armour above it,
Mid the passion of tears long held back by the battle;
And thy rent banner o'er thee and the ring of men mail-clad,
Victorious to-day, since their ruin but a spear-length
Was thrust away from them.--Son, think of thy glory
And e'en in such wise break the throng of these devils!


KING PHARAMOND

Five years are passed over since in the fresh dawning
On the field of that fight I lay wearied and sleepless
Till slumber came o'er me in the first of the sunrise;
Then as there lay my body rapt away was my spirit,
And a cold and thick mist for a while was about me,
And when that cleared away, lo, the mountain-walled country
'Neath the first of the sunrise in e'en such a spring-tide
As the spring-tide our horse-hoofs that yestereve trampled:
By the withy-wrought gate of a garden I found me
'Neath the goodly green boughs of the apple full-blossomed;
And fulfilled of great pleasure I was as I entered
The fair place of flowers, and wherefore I knew not.
Then lo, mid the birds' song a woman's voice singing.
Five years passed away, in the first of the sunrise.
          [_He is silent, brooding_.


MASTER OLIVER

God help us if God is!--for this man, I deemed him
More a glory of God made man for our helping
Than a man that should die: all the deeds he did surely,
Too great for a man's life, have undone the doer.


KING PHARAMOND (_rousing himself_)

Thou art waiting, my fosterer, till I tell of her singing
And the words that she sang there: time was when I knew them;
But too much of strife is about us this morning,
And whiles I forget and whiles I remember.
          [_Falls a-musing again._


MASTER OLIVER

_But a night's dream undid him, and he died, and his kingdom
By unheard-of deeds fashioned, was tumbled together,
By false men and fools to be fought for and ruined._
Such words shall my ghost see the chronicler writing
In the days that shall be:--ah--what wouldst thou, my fosterling?
Knowest thou not how words fail us awaking
That we seemed to hear plain amid sleep and its sweetness?
Nay, strive not, my son, rest awhile and be silent;
Or sleep while I watch thee: full fair is the garden,
Perchance mid the flowers thy sweet dream may find thee,
And thou shalt have pleasure and peace for a little.--
(_Aside_) And my soul shall depart ere thou wak'st peradventure.


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, thou deemest me mad: a dream thou mayst call it,
But not such a dream as thou know'st of: nay, hearken!
For what manner of dream then is this that remembers
The words that she sang on that morning of glory;--
_O love, set a word in my mouth for our meeting;
Cast thy sweet arms about me to stay my hearts beating!_
Ah, thy silence, thy silence! nought shines on the darkness!
--O close-serried throng of the days that I see not!
          [_Falls a-musing again._


MASTER OLIVER

Thus the worse that shall be, the bad that is, bettereth.
--Once more he is speechless mid evil dreams sunken.


KING PHARAMOND (_speaking very low_).

_Hold silence, love, speak not of the sweet day departed;
Cling close to me, love, lest I waken sad-hearted!_
          [_Louder to OLIVER._
Thou starest, my fosterer: what strange thing beholdst thou?
A great king, a strong man, that thou knewest a child once:
Pharamond the fair babe: Pharamond the warrior;
Pharamond the king, and which hast thou feared yet?
And why wilt thou fear then this Pharamond the lover?
Shall I fail of my love who failed not of my fame?
Nay, nay, I shall live for the last gain and greatest.


MASTER OLIVER

I know not--all counsel and wit is departed,
I wait for thy will; I will do it, my master.


KING PHARAMOND

Through the boughs of the garden I followed the singing
To a smooth space of sward: there the unknown desire
Of my soul I beheld,--wrought in shape of a woman.


MASTER OLIVER

O ye warders of Troy-walls, join hands through the darkness,
Tell us tales of the Downfall, for we too are with you!


KING PHARAMOND

As my twin sister, young of years was she and slender,
Yellow blossoms of spring-tide her hands had been gathering,
But the gown-lap that held them had fallen adown
And had lain round her feet with the first of the singing;
Now her singing had ceased, though yet heaved her bosom
As with lips lightly parted and eyes of one seeking
She stood face to face with the Love that she knew not,
The love that she longed for and waited unwitting;
She moved not, I breathed not--till lo, a horn winded,
And she started, and o'er her came trouble and wonder,
Came pallor and trembling; came a strain at my heartstrings
As bodiless there I stretched hands toward her beauty,
And voiceless cried out, as the cold mist swept o'er me.
Then again clash of arms, and the morning watch calling,
And the long leaves and great twisted trunks of the chesnuts,
As I sprang to my feet and turned round to the trumpets
And gathering of spears and unfolding of banners
That first morn of my reign and my glory's beginning.


MASTER OLIVER

O well were we that tide though the world was against us.


KING PHARAMOND

Hearken yet!--through that whirlwind of danger and battle,
Beaten back, struggling forward, we fought without blemish
On my banner spear-rent in the days of my father,
On my love of the land and the longing I cherished
For a tale to be told when I, laid in the minster,
Might hear it no more; was it easy of winning,
Our bread of those days? Yet as wild as the work was,
Unforgotten and sweet in my heart was that vision,
And her eyes and her lips and her fair body's fashion
Blest all times of rest, rent the battle asunder,
Turned ruin to laughter and death unto dreaming;
And again and thrice over again did I go there
Ere spring was grown winter: in the meadows I met her,
By the sheaves of the corn, by the down-falling apples,
Kind and calm, yea and glad, yet with eyes of one seeking.
--Ah the mouth of one waiting, ere all shall be over!--
But at last in the winter-tide mid the dark forest
Side by side did we wend down the pass: the wind tangled
Mid the trunks and black boughs made wild music about us,
But her feet on the scant snow and the sound of her breathing
Made music much better: the wood thinned, and I saw her,
As we came to the brow of the pass; for the moon gleamed
Bitter cold in the cloudless black sky of the winter.
Then the world drew me back from my love, and departing
I saw her sweet serious look pass into terror
And her arms cast abroad--and lo, clashing of armour,
And a sword in my hand, and my mouth crying loud,
And the moon and cold steel in the doorway burst open
And thy doughty spear thrust through the throat of the foeman
My dazed eyes scarce saw--thou rememberest, my fosterer?


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, Theobald the Constable had watched but unduly;
We were taken unwares, and wild fleeing there was
O'er black rock and white snow--shall such times come again, son?


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, full surely they shall; have thou courage, my fosterer!--
Day came thronging on day, month thrust month aside,
Amid battle and strife and the murder of glory,
And still oft and oft to that land was I led
And still through all longing I young in Love's dealings,
Never called it a pain: though, the battle passed over,
The council determined, back again came my craving:
I knew not the pain, but I knew all the pleasure,
When now, as the clouds o'er my fortune were parting,
I felt myself waxing in might and in wisdom;
And no city welcomed the Freed and the Freer,
And no mighty army fell back before rumour
Of Pharamond's coming, but her heart bid me thither,
And the blithest and kindest of kingfolk ye knew me.
Then came the high tide of deliverance upon us,
When surely if we in the red field had fallen
The stocks and the stones would have risen to avenge us.
--Then waned my sweet vision midst glory's fulfilment,
And still with its waning, hot waxed my desire:
And did ye not note then that the glad-hearted Pharamond
Was grown a stern man, a fierce king, it may be?
Did ye deem it the growth of my manhood, the hardening
Of battle and murder and treason about me?
Nay, nay, it was love's pain, first named and first noted
When a long time went past, and I might not behold her.
--Thou rememberest a year agone now, when the legate
Of the Lord of the Waters brought here a broad letter
Full of prayers for good peace and our friendship thenceforward--
--He who erst set a price on the lost head of Pharamond--
How I bade him stand up on his feet and be merry,
Eat his meat by my side and drink out of my beaker,
In memory of days when my meat was but little
And my drink drunk in haste between saddle and straw.
But lo! midst of my triumph, as I noted the feigning
Of the last foeman humbled, and the hall fell a murmuring,
And blithely the horns blew, _Be glad, spring prevaileth,_
--As I sat there and changed not, my soul saw a vision:
All folk faded away, and my love that I long for
Came with raiment a-rustling along the hall pavement,
Drawing near to the high-seat, with hands held out a little,
Till her hallowed eyes drew me a space into heaven,
And her lips moved to whisper, 'Come, love, for I weary!'
Then she turned and went from me, and I heard her feet falling
On the floor of the hall, e'en as though it were empty
Of all folk but us twain in the hush of the dawning.
Then again, all was gone, and I sat there a smiling
On the faint-smiling legate, as the hall windows quivered
With the rain of the early night sweeping across them.
Nought slept I that night, yet I saw her without sleeping:--
Betwixt midnight and morn of that summer-tide was I
Amidst of the lilies by her house-door to hearken
If perchance in her chamber she turned amid sleeping:
When lo, as the East 'gan to change, and stars faded
Were her feet on the stairs, and the door opened softly,
And she stood on the threshold with the eyes of one seeking,
And there, gathering the folds of her gown to her girdle,
Went forth through the garden and followed the highway,
All along the green valley, and I ever beside her,
Till the light of the low sun just risen was falling
On her feet in the first of the pass--and all faded.
Yet from her unto me had gone forth her intent,
And I saw her face set to the heart of that city,
And the quays where the ships of the outlanders come to,
And I said: She is seeking, and shall I not seek?
The sea is her prison wall; where is my prison?
--Yet I said: Here men praise me, perchance men may love me
If I live long enough for my justice and mercy
To make them just and merciful--one who is master
Of many poor folk, a man pity moveth
Love hath dealt with in this wise, no minstrel nor dreamer.
The deeds that my hand might find for the doing
Did desire undo them these four years of fight?
And now time and fair peace in my heart have begotten
More desire and more pain, is the day of deeds done with?
Lo here for my part my bonds and my prison!--
Then with hands holding praise, yet with fierce heart belike
Did I turn to the people that I had delivered--
And the deeds of this year passed shall live peradventure!
But now came no solace of dreams in the night-tide
From that day thenceforward; yet oft in the council,
Mid the hearkening folk craving for justice or mercy,
Mid the righting of wrongs and the staying of ruin,
Mid the ruling a dull folk, who deemed all my kingship
A thing due and easy as the dawning and sunset
To the day that God made once to deal with no further--
--Mid all these a fair face, a sad face, could I fashion,
And I said, She is seeking, and shall I not seek?
--Tell over the days of the year of hope's waning;
Tell over the hours of the weary days wearing:
Tell over the minutes of the hours of thy waking,
Then wonder he liveth who fails of his longing!


MASTER OLIVER

What wouldst thou have, son, wherein I might help thee?


KING PHARAMOND

Hearken yet:--for a long time no more I beheld her
Till a month agone now at the ending of Maytide;
And then in the first of the morning I found me
Fulfilled of all joy at the edge of the yew-wood;
Then lo, her gown's flutter in the fresh breeze of morning,
And slower and statelier than her wont was aforetime
And fairer of form toward the yew-wood she wended.
But woe's me! as she came and at last was beside me
With sobbing scarce ended her bosom was heaving,
Stained with tears was her face, and her mouth was yet quivering
With torment of weeping held back for a season.
Then swiftly my spirit to the King's bed was wafted
While still toward the sea were her weary feet wending.
--Ah surely that day of all wrongs that I hearkened
Mine own wrongs seemed heaviest and hardest to bear--
Mine own wrongs and hers--till that past year of ruling
Seemed a crime and a folly. Night came, and I saw her
Stealing barefoot, bareheaded amidst of the tulips
Made grey by the moonlight: and a long time Love gave me
To gaze on her weeping--morn came, and I wakened--
I wakened and said: Through the World will I wander,
Till either I find her, or find the World empty.


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, son, wilt thou go? Ah thou knowest from of old time
My words might not stay thee from aught thou wert willing;
And e'en so it must be now. And yet hast thou asked me
To go with thee, son, if aught I might help thee?--
Ah me, if thy face might gladden a little
I should meet the world better and mock at its mocking:
If thou goest to find her, why then hath there fallen
This heaviness on thee? is thy heart waxen feeble?


KING PHARAMOND

O friend, I have seen her no more, and her mourning
Is alone and unhelped--yet to-night or to-morrow
Somewhat nigher will I be to her love and her longing.
Lo, to thee, friend, alone of all folk on the earth
These things have I told: for a true man I deem thee
Beyond all men call true; yea, a wise man moreover
And hardy and helpful; and I know thy heart surely
That thou holdest the world nought without me thy fosterling.
Come, leave all awhile! it may be as time weareth
With new life in our hands we shall wend us back hither.


MASTER OLIVER

Yea; triumph turns trouble, and all the world changeth,
Yet a good world it is since we twain are together.


KING PHARAMOND

Lo, have I not said it?--thou art kinder than all men.
Cast about then, I pray thee, to find us a keel
Sailing who recketh whither, since the world is so wide.
Sure the northlands shall know of the blessings she bringeth,
And the southlands be singing of the tales that foretold her.


MASTER OLIVER

Well I wot of all chapmen--and to-night weighs a dromond
Sailing west away first, and then to the southlands.
Since in such things I deal oft they know me, but know not
King Pharamond the Freed, since now first they sail hither.
So make me thy messenger in a fair-writ broad letter
And thyself make my scrivener, and this very night sail we.--
O surely thy face now is brightening and blesseth me!
Peer through these boughs toward the bay and the haven,
And high masts thou shalt see, and white sails hanging ready.

          [_Exit OLIVER._


KING PHARAMOND

Dost thou weep now, my darling, and are thy feet wandering
On the ways ever empty of what thou desirest?
Nay, nay, for thou know'st me, and many a night-tide
Hath Love led thee forth to a city unknown:
Thou hast paced through this palace from chamber to chamber
Till in dawn and stars' paling I have passed forth before thee:
Thou hast seen thine own dwelling nor known how to name it:
Thine own dwelling that shall be when love is victorious.
Thou hast seen my sword glimmer amidst of the moonlight,
As we rode with hoofs muffled through waylaying murder.
Through the field of the dead hast thou fared to behold me,
Seen me waking and longing by the watch-fires' flicker;
Thou hast followed my banner amidst of the battle
And seen my face change to the man that they fear,
Yet found me not fearful nor turned from beholding:
Thou hast been at my triumphs, and heard the tale's ending
Of my wars, and my winning through days evil and weary:
For this eve hast thou waited, and wilt be peradventure
By the sea-strand to-night, for thou wottest full surely
That the word is gone forth, and the world is a-moving.
--Abide me, beloved! to-day and to-morrow
Shall be little words in the tale of our loving,
When the last morn ariseth, and thou and I meeting
From lips laid together tell tales of these marvels.



THE MUSIC


_Love is enough: draw near and behold me
  Ye who pass by the way to your rest and your laughter,
  And are full of the hope of the dawn coming after;
For the strong of the world have bought me and sold me
  And my house is all wasted from threshold to rafter.
  --Pass by me, and hearken, and think of me not!

Cry out and come near; for my ears may not hearken,
  And my eyes are grown dim as the eyes of the dying.
  Is this the grey rack o'er the sun's face a-flying?
Or is it your faces his brightness that darken?
  Comes a wind from the sea, or is it your sighing?
  --Pass by me, and hearken, and pity me not!

Ye know not how void is your hope and your living:
  Depart with your helping lest yet ye undo me!
  Ye know not that at nightfall she draweth near to me,
There is soft speech between us and words of forgiving
  Till in dead of the midnight her kisses thrill through me.
  --Pass by me, and hearken, and waken me not!

Wherewith will ye buy it, ye rich who behold me?
  Draw out from your coffers your rest and your laughter,
  And the fair gilded hope of the dawn coming after!
Nay this I sell not,--though ye bought me and sold me,--
  For your house stored with such things from threshold to rafter.
  --Pass by me, I hearken, and think of you not!_


_Enter before the curtain LOVE clad as a maker of Pictured
Cloths_.


LOVE

That double life my faithful king has led
My hand has untwined, and old days are dead
As in the moon the sails run up the mast.
Yea, let this present mingle with the past,
And when ye see him next think a long tide
Of days are gone by; for the world is wide,
And if at last these hands, these lips shall meet,
What matter thorny ways and weary feet?

A faithful king, and now grown wise in love:
Yet from of old in many ways I move
The hearts that shall be mine: him by the hand
Have I led forth, and shown his eyes the land
Where dwells his love, and shown him what she is:
He has beheld the lips that he shall kiss,
The eyes his eyes shall soften, and the cheek
His voice shall change, the limbs he maketh weak:
--All this he hath as in a picture wrought--
But lo you, 'tis the seeker and the sought:
For her no marvels of the night I make,
Nor keep my dream-smiths' drowsy heads awake;
Only about her have I shed a glory
Whereby she waiteth trembling for a story
That she shall play in,--and 'tis not begun:
Therefore from rising sun to setting sun
There flit before her half-formed images
Of what I am, and in all things she sees
Something of mine: so single is her heart
Filled with the worship of one set apart
To be my priestess through all joy and sorrow;
So sad and sweet she waits the certain morrow.
--And yet sometimes, although her heart be strong,
You may well think I tarry over-long:
The lonely sweetness of desire grows pain,
The reverent life of longing void and vain:
Then are my dream-smiths mindful of my lore:
They weave a web of sighs and weeping sore,
Of languor, and of very helplessness,
Of restless wandering, lonely dumb distress,
Till like a live thing there she stands and goes,
Gazing at Pharamond through all her woes.
Then forth they fly, and spread the picture out
Before his eyes, and how then may he doubt
She knows his life, his deeds, and his desire?
How shall he tremble lest her heart should tire?
--It is not so; his danger and his war,
His days of triumph, and his years of care,
She knows them not--yet shall she know some day
The love that in his lonely longing lay.

What, Faithful--do I lie, that overshot
My dream-web is with that which happeneth not?
Nay, nay, believe it not!--love lies alone
In loving hearts like fire within the stone:
Then strikes my hand, and lo, the flax ablaze!
--Those tales of empty striving, and lost days
Folk tell of sometimes--never lit my fire
Such ruin as this; but Pride and Vain-desire,
My counterfeits and foes, have done the deed.
Beware, beloved! for they sow the weed
Where I the wheat: they meddle where I leave,
Take what I scorn, cast by what I receive,
Sunder my yoke, yoke that I would dissever,
Pull down the house my hands would build for ever.


_Scene: In a Forest among the Hills of a Foreign Land.

KING PHARAMOND, MASTER OLIVER_.



KING PHARAMOND

Stretch forth thine hand, foster-father, I know thee,
And fain would be sure I am yet in the world:
Where am I now, and what things have befallen?
Why am I so weary, and yet have wrought nothing?


MASTER OLIVER

Thou hast been sick, lord, but thy sickness abateth.


KING PHARAMOND

Thou art sad unto weeping: sorry rags are thy raiment,
For I see thee a little now: where am I lying?


MASTER OLIVER


On the sere leaves thou liest, lord, deep in the wild wood


KING PHARAMOND

What meaneth all this? was I not Pharamond,
A worker of great deeds after my father,
Freer of my land from murder and wrong,
Fain of folks' love, and no blencher in battle?


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, thou wert king and the kindest under heaven.


KING PHARAMOND

Was there not coming a Queen long desired,
From a land over sea, my life to fulfil?


MASTER OLIVER

Belike it was so--but thou leftst it untold of.


KING PHARAMOND

Why weepest thou more yet? O me, which are dreams,
Which are deeds of my life mid the things I remember?


MASTER OLIVER

Dost thou remember the great council chamber,
O my king, and the lords there gathered together
With drawn anxious faces one fair morning of summer,
And myself in their midst, who would move thee to speech?


KING PHARAMOND

A brawl I remember, some wordy debating,
Whether my love should be brought to behold me.
Sick was I at heart, little patience I had.


MASTER OLIVER

Hast thou memory yet left thee, how an hour thereafter
We twain lay together in the midst of the pleasance
'Neath the lime-trees, nigh the pear-tree, beholding the conduit?


KING PHARAMOND

Fair things I remember of a long time thereafter--
Of thy love and thy faith and our gladness together


MASTER OLIVER

And the thing that we talked of, wilt thou tell me about it?


KING PHARAMOND

We twain were to wend through the wide world together
Seeking my love--O my heart! is she living?


MASTER OLIVER

God wot that she liveth as she hath lived ever.


KING PHARAMOND

Then soon was it midnight, and moonset, as we wended
Down to the ship, and the merchant-folks' babble.
The oily green waves in the harbour mouth glistened,
Windless midnight it was, but the great sweeps were run out,
As the cable came rattling mid rich bales on the deck,
And slow moved the black side that the ripple was lapping,
And I looked and beheld a great city behind us
By the last of the moon as the stars were a-brightening,
And Pharamond the Freed grew a tale of a singer,
With the land of his fathers and the fame he had toiled for.
Yet sweet was the scent of the sea-breeze arising;
And I felt a chain broken, a sickness put from me
As the sails drew, and merchant-folk, gathered together
On the poop or the prow, 'gan to move and begone,
Till at last 'neath the far-gazing eyes of the steersman
By the loitering watch thou and I were left lonely,
And we saw by the moon the white horses arising
Where beyond the last headland the ocean abode us,
Then came the fresh breeze and the sweep of the spray,
And the beating of ropes, and the empty sails' thunder,
As we shifted our course toward the west in the dawning;
Then I slept and I dreamed in the dark I was lying,
And I heard her sweet breath and her feet falling near me,
And the rustle of her raiment as she sought through the darkness,
Sought, I knew not for what, till her arms clung about me
With a cry that was hers, that was mine as I wakened.


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, a sweet dream it was, as thy dreams were aforetime.


KING PHARAMOND

Nay not so, my fosterer: thy hope yet shall fail thee
If thou lookest to see me turned back from my folly,
Lamenting and mocking the life of my longing.
Many such have I had, dear dreams and deceitful,
When the soul slept a little from all but its search,
And lied to the body of bliss beyond telling;
Yea, waking had lied still but for life and its torment.
Not so were those dreams of the days of my kingship,
Slept my body--or died--but my soul was not sleeping,
It knew that she touched not this body that trembled
At the thought of her body sore trembling to see me;
It lied of no bliss as desire swept it onward,
Who knows through what sundering space of its prison;
It saw, and it heard, and it hoped, and was lonely,
Had no doubt and no joy, but the hope that endureth.
--Woe's me I am weary: wend we forward to-morrow?


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, well it may be if thou wilt but be patient,
And rest thee a little, while time creepeth onward.


KING PHARAMOND

But tell me, has the fourth year gone far mid my sickness?


MASTER OLIVER

Nay, for seven days only didst thou lie here a-dying,
As full often I deemed: God be thanked it is over!
But rest thee a little, lord; gather strength for the striving.


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, for once again sleep meseems cometh to struggle
With the memory of times past: come tell thou, my fosterer,
Of the days we have fared through, that dimly before me
Are floating, as I look on thy face and its trouble.


MASTER OLIVER

Rememberest thou aught of the lands where we wended?


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, many a thing--as the moonlit warm evening
When we stayed by the trees in the Gold-bearing Land,
Nigh the gate of the city, where a minstrel was singing
That tale of the King and his fate, o'er the cradle
Foretold by the wise of the world; that a woman
Should win him to love and to woe, and despairing
In the last of his youth, the first days of his manhood.


MASTER OLIVER

I remember the evening; but clean gone is the story:
Amid deeds great and dreadful, should songs abide by me?


KING PHARAMOND

They shut the young king in a castle, the tale saith,
Where never came woman, and never should come,
And sadly he grew up and stored with all wisdom,
Not wishing for aught in his heart that he had not,
Till the time was come round to his twentieth birthday.
Then many fair gifts brought his people unto him,
Gold and gems, and rich cloths, and rare things and dear-bought,
And a book fairly written brought a wise man among them,
Called the Praising of Prudence; wherein there was painted
The image of Prudence:--and that, what but a woman,
E'en she forsooth that the painter found fairest;--
Now surely thou mindest what needs must come after?


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, somewhat indeed I remember the misery
Told in that tale, but all mingled it is
With the manifold trouble that met us full often,
E'en we ourselves. Of nought else hast thou memory?


KING PHARAMOND

Of many such tales that the Southland folk told us,
Of many a dream by the sunlight and moonlight;
Of music that moved me, of hopes that my heart had;
The high days when my love and I held feast together.
--But what land is this, and how came we hither?


MASTER OLIVER

Nay, hast thou no memory of our troubles that were many?
How thou criedst out for Death and how near Death came to thee?
How thou needs must dread war, thou the dreadful in battle?
Of the pest in the place where that tale was told to us;
And how we fled thence o'er the desert of horror?
How weary we wandered when we came to the mountains,
All dead but one man of those who went with us?
How we came to the sea of the west, and the city,
Whose Queen would have kept thee her slave and her lover,
And how we escaped by the fair woman's kindness,
Who loved thee, and cast her life by for thy welfare?
Of the waste of thy life when we sailed from the Southlands,
And the sea-thieves fell on us and sold us for servants
To that land of hard gems, where thy life's purchase seemed
Little better than mine, and we found to our sorrow
Whence came the crown's glitter, thy sign once of glory:
Then naked a king toiled in sharp rocky crannies,
And thy world's fear was grown but the task-master's whip,
And thy world's hope the dream in the short dead of night?
And hast thou forgotten how again we fled from it,
And that fight of despair in the boat on the river,
And the sea-strand again and white bellying sails;
And the sore drought and famine that on ship-board fell on us,
Ere the sea was o'erpast, and we came scarcely living
To those keepers of sheep, the poor folk and the kind?
Dost thou mind not the merchants who brought us thence northward,
And this land that we made in the twilight of dawning?
And the city herein where all kindness forsook us,
And our bitter bread sought we from house-door to house-door.


KING PHARAMOND

As the shadow of clouds o'er the summer sea sailing
Is the memory of all now, and whiles I remember
And whiles I forget; and nought it availeth
Remembering, forgetting; for a sleep is upon me
That shall last a long while:--there thou liest, my fosterer,
As thou lay'st a while since ere that twilight of dawning;
And I woke and looked forth, and the dark sea, long changeless,
Was now at last barred by a dim wall that swallowed
The red shapeless moon, and the whole sea was rolling,
Unresting, unvaried, as grey as the void is,
Toward that wall 'gainst the heavens as though rest were behind it.
Still onward we fared and the moon was forgotten,
And colder the sea grew and colder the heavens,
And blacker the wall grew, and grey, green-besprinkled,
And the sky seemed to breach it; and lo at the last
Many islands of mountains, and a city amongst them.
White clouds of the dawn, not moving yet waning,
Wreathed the high peaks about; and the sea beat for ever
'Gainst the green sloping hills and the black rocks and beachless.
--Is this the same land that I saw in that dawning?
For sure if it is thou at least shalt hear tidings,
Though I die ere the dark: but for thee, O my fosterer,
Lying there by my side, I had deemed the old vision
Had drawn forth the soul from my body to see her.
And with joy and fear blended leapt the heart in my bosom,
And I cried, "The last land, love; O hast thou abided?"
But since then hath been turmoil, and sickness, and slumber,
And my soul hath been troubled with dreams that I knew not.
And such tangle is round me life fails me to rend it,
And the cold cloud of death rolleth onward to hide me.--
--O well am I hidden, who might not be happy!
I see not, I hear not, my head groweth heavy.
          [_Falls back as if sleeping_.


MASTER OLIVER

--O Son, is it sleep that upon thee is fallen?
Not death, O my dear one!--speak yet but a little!


KING PHARAMOND (_raising himself again_)

O be glad, foster-father! and those troubles past over,--
Be thou thereby when once more I remember
And sit with my maiden and tell her the story,
And we pity our past selves as a poet may pity
The poor folk he tells of amid plentiful weeping.
Hush now! as faint noise of bells over water
A sweet sound floats towards me, and blesses my slumber:
If I wake never more I shall dream and shall see her. [_Sleeps._


MASTER OLIVER

Is it swooning or sleeping? in what wise shall he waken?
--Nay, no sound I hear save the forest wind wailing.
Who shall help us to-day save our yoke-fellow Death?
Yet fain would I die mid the sun and the flowers;
For a tomb seems this yew-wood ere yet we are dead.
And its wailing wind chilleth my yearning for time past,
And my love groweth cold in this dusk of the daytime.
What will be? is worse than death drawing anear us?
Flit past, dreary day! come, night-tide and resting!
Come, to-morrow's uprising with light and new tidings!
--Lo, Lord, I have borne all with no bright love before me;
Wilt thou break all I had and then give me no blessing?



THE MUSIC


_LOVE IS ENOUGH: through the trouble and tangle
  From yesterdays dawning to yesterday's night
I sought through the vales where the prisoned winds wrangle,
  Till, wearied and bleeding, at end of the light
  I met him, and we wrestled, and great was my might.

O great was my joy, though no rest was around me,
  Though mid wastes of the world were we twain all alone,
For methought that I conquered and he knelt and he crowned me,
  And the driving rain ceased, and the wind ceased to moan,
  And through clefts of the clouds her planet outshone.

O through clefts of the clouds 'gan the world to awaken,
  And the bitter wind piped, and down drifted the rain,
And I was alone--and yet not forsaken,
  For the grass was untrodden except by my pain:
  With a Shadow of the Night had I wrestled in vain.

And the Shadow of the Night and not Love was departed;
  I was sore, I was weary, yet Love lived to seek;
So I scaled the dark mountains, and wandered sad-hearted
  Over wearier wastes, where e'en sunlight was bleak,
  With no rest of the night for my soul waxen weak._

_With no rest of the night; for I waked mid a story
  Of a land wherein Love is the light and the lord,
Where my tale shall be heard, and my wounds gain a glory,
  And my tears be a treasure to add to the hoard
  Of pleasure laid up for his people's reward.

Ah, pleasure laid up! haste thou onward and listen,
  For the wind of the waste has no music like this,
And not thus do the rocks of the wilderness glisten:
  With the host of his faithful through sorrow and bliss
  My Lord goeth forth now, and knows me for his._


_Enter before the curtain LOVE, with a cup of bitter drink and his
hands bloody_.



LOVE

O Pharamond, I knew thee brave and strong,
And yet how might'st thou live to bear this wrong?
--A wandering-tide of three long bitter years,
Solaced at whiles by languor of soft tears,
By dreams self-wrought of night and sleep and sorrow,
Holpen by hope of tears to be to-morrow:
Yet all, alas, but wavering memories;
No vision of her hands, her lips, her eyes,
Has blessed him since he seemed to see her weep,
No wandering feet of hers beset his sleep.

Woe's me then! am I cruel, or am I grown
The scourge of Fate, lest men forget to moan?
What!--is there blood upon these hands of mine?
Is venomed anguish mingled with my wine?
--Blood there may be, and venom in the cup;
But see, Beloved, how the tears well up
From my grieved heart my blinded eyes to grieve,
And in the kindness of old days believe!
So after all then we must weep to-day--
--We, who behold at ending of the way,
These lovers tread a bower they may not miss
Whose door my servant keepeth, Earthly Bliss:
There in a little while shall they abide,
Nor each from each their wounds of wandering hide,
But kiss them, each on each, and find it sweet,
That wounded so the world they may not meet.
--Ah, truly mine! since this your tears may move,
The very sweetness of rewarded love!
Ah, truly mine, that tremble as ye hear
The speech of loving lips grown close and dear;
--Lest other sounds from other doors ye hearken,
Doors that the wings of Earthly Anguish darken.


_Scene: On a Highway in a Valley near the last, with a Mist over all
things._

_KING PHARAMOND, MASTER OLIVER_.



KING PHARAMOND

Hold a while, Oliver! my limbs are grown weaker
Than when in the wood I first rose to my feet.
There was hope in my heart then, and now nought but sickness;
There was sight in my eyes then, and now nought but blindness.
Good art thou, hope, while the life yet tormenteth,
But a better help now have I gained than thy goading.
Farewell, O life, wherein once I was merry!
O dream of the world, I depart now, and leave thee
A little tale added to thy long-drawn-out story.
Cruel wert thou, O Love, yet have thou and I conquered.
--Come nearer, O fosterer, come nearer and kiss me,
Bid farewell to thy fosterling while the life yet is in me,
For this farewell to thee is my last word meseemeth.
          [_He lies down and sleeps_.


MASTER OLIVER

O my king, O my son! Ah, woe's me for my kindness,
For the day when thou drew'st me and I let thee be drawn
Into toils I knew deadly, into death thou desiredst!
And woe's me that I die not! for my body made hardy
By the battles of old days to bear every anguish!
--Speak a word and forgive me, for who knows how long yet
Are the days of my life, and the hours of my loathing!
He speaks not, he moves not; yet he draweth breath softly:
I have seen men a-dying, and not thus did the end come.
Surely God who made all forgets not love's rewarding,
Forgets not the faithful, the guileless who fear not.
Oh, might there be help yet, and some new life's beginning!
--Lo, lighter the mist grows: there come sounds through its dulness,
The lowing of kine, or the whoop of a shepherd,
The bell-wether's tinkle, or clatter of horse-hoofs.
A homestead is nigh us: I will fare down the highway
And seek for some helping: folk said simple people
Abode in this valley, and these may avail us--
If aught it avail us to live for a little.
--Yea, give it us, God!--all the fame and the glory
We fought for and gained once; the life of well-doing,
Fair deed thrusting on deed, and no day forgotten;
And due worship of folk that his great heart had holpen;--
All I prayed for him once now no longer I pray for.
Let it all pass away as my warm breath now passeth
In the chill of the morning mist wherewith thou hidest
Fair vale and grey mountain of the land we are come to!
Let it all pass away! but some peace and some pleasure
I pray for him yet, and that I may behold it.
A prayer little and lowly,--and we in the old time
When the world lay before us, were we hard to the lowly?
Thou know'st we were kind, howso hard to be beaten;
Wilt thou help us this last time? or what hast thou hidden
We know not, we name not, some crown for our striving?
--O body and soul of my son, may God keep thee!
For, as lone as thou liest in a land that we see not
When the world loseth thee, what is left for its losing?
          [_Exit_ OLIVER.



THE MUSIC


_LOVE IS ENOUGH: cherish life that abideth,
  Lest ye die ere ye know him, and curse and misname him;
For who knows in what ruin of all hope he hideth,
On what wings of the terror of darkness he rideth?
  And what is the joy of man's life that ye blame him
    For his bliss grown a sword, and his rest grown a fire?

Ye who tremble for death, or the death of desire,
  Pass about the cold winter-tide garden and ponder
On the rose in his glory amidst of June's fire,
  On the languor of noontide that gathered the thunder,
  On the morn and its freshness, the eve and its wonder;
    Ye may wake it no more--shall Spring come to awaken?

Live on, for Love liveth, and earth shall be shaken
  By the wind of his wings on the triumphing morning,
When the dead, and their deeds that die not shall awaken,
  And the world's tale shall sound in your trumpet of warning,
  And the sun smite the banner called Scorn of the Scorning,
    And dead pain ye shall trample, dead fruitless desire,
    As ye wend to pluck out the new world from the fire._


_Enter before the curtain, LOVE clad as a Pilgrim._



LOVE

Alone, afar from home doth Pharamond lie,
Drawn near to death, ye deem--or what draws nigh?
Afar from home--and have ye any deeming
How far may be that country of his dreaming?
Is it not time, is it not time, say ye,
That we the day-star in the sky should see?

Patience, Beloved; these may come to live
A life fulfilled of all I have to give,
But bare of strife and story; and ye know well
How wild a tale of him might be to tell
Had I not snatched away the sword and crown;
Yea, and she too was made for world's renown,
And should have won it, had my bow not been;
These that I love were very king and queen;
I have discrowned them, shall I not crown too?
Ye know, Beloved, what sharp bitter dew,
What parching torment of unresting day
Falls on the garden of my deathless bay:
Hands that have gathered it and feet that came
Beneath its shadow have known flint and flame;
Therefore I love them; and they love no less
Each furlong of the road of past distress.
--Ah, Faithful, tell me for what rest and peace,
What length of happy days and world's increase,
What hate of wailing, and what love of laughter,
What hope and fear of worlds to be hereafter,
Would ye cast by that crown of bitter leaves?

And yet, ye say, our very heart it grieves
To see him lying there: how may he save
His life and love if he more pain must have?
And she--how fares it with her? is not earth
From winter's sorrow unto summer's mirth
Grown all too narrow for her yearning heart?
We pray thee, Love, keep these no more apart.

Ye say but sooth: not long may he endure:
And her heart sickeneth past all help or cure
Unless I hasten to the helping--see,
Am I not girt for going speedily?
--The journey lies before me long?--nay, nay,
Upon my feet the dust is lying grey,
The staff is heavy in my hand.--Ye too,
Have ye not slept? or what is this ye do,
Wearying to find the country ye are in?

    [_The curtain draws up and shows the same scene
      as the last, with the mist clearing, and
      PHARAMOND lying there as before._

Look, look! how sun and morn at last do win
Upon the shifting waves of mist! behold
That mountain-wall the earth-fires rent of old,
Grey toward the valley, sun-gilt at the side!
See the black yew-wood that the pass doth hide!
Search through the mist for knoll, and fruited tree,
And winding stream, and highway white--and see,
See, at my feet lies Pharamond the Freed!
A happy journey have we gone indeed!

Hearken, Beloved, over-long, ye deem,
I let these lovers deal with hope and dream
Alone unholpen.--Somewhat sooth ye say:
But now her feet are on this very way
That leadeth from the city: and she saith
One beckoneth her back hitherward--even Death--
And who was that, Beloved, but even I?
Yet though her feet and sunlight are drawn nigh
The cold grass where he lieth like the dead,
To ease your hearts a little of their dread
I will abide her coming, and in speech
He knoweth, somewhat of his welfare teach.


_LOVE goes on to the Stage and stands at PHARAMOND's head_.



LOVE

HEARKEN, O Pharamond, why camest thou hither?


KING PHARAMOND

I came seeking Death; I have found him belike.


LOVE

In what land of the world art thou lying, O Pharamond?


KING PHARAMOND

In a land 'twixt two worlds: nor long shall I dwell there.


LOVE

Who am I, Pharamond, that stand here beside thee?


KING PHARAMOND

The Death I have sought--thou art welcome; I greet thee.


LOVE

Such a name have I had, but another name have I.


KING PHARAMOND

Art thou God then that helps not until the last season?


LOVE

Yea, God am I surely: yet another name have I.


KING PHARAMOND

Methinks as I hearken, thy voice I should wot of.


LOVE

I called thee, and thou cam'st from thy glory and kingship.


KING PHARAMOND

I was King Pharamond, and love overcame me.


LOVE

Pharamond, thou say'st it.--I am Love and thy master.


KING PHARAMOND

Sooth didst thou say when thou call'dst thyself Death.


LOVE

Though thou diest, yet thy love and thy deeds shall I quicken.


KING PHARAMOND

Be thou God, be thou Death, yet I love thee and dread not.


LOVE

Pharamond, while thou livedst what thing wert thou loving?


KING PHARAMOND

A dream and a lie--and my death--and I love it.


LOVE

Pharamond, do my bidding, as thy wont was aforetime.


KING PHARAMOND

What wilt thou have of me, for I wend away swiftly?


LOVE

Open thine eyes, and behold where thou liest!


KING PHARAMOND

It is little--the old dream, the old lie is about me.


LOVE

Why faintest thou, Pharamond? is love then unworthy?


KING PHARAMOND

Then hath God made no world now, nor shall make hereafter.


LOVE

Wouldst thou live if thou mightst in this fair world, O Pharamond?


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, if she and truth were; nay, if she and truth were not.


LOVE

O long shalt thou live: thou art here in the body,
Where nought but thy spirit I brought in days bygone.
Ah, thou hearkenest!--and where then of old hast thou heard it?
          [_Music outside, far off_.


KING PHARAMOND

O mock me not, Death; or, Life, hold me no longer!
For that sweet strain I hear that I heard once a-dreaming:
Is it death coming nigher, or life come back that brings it?
Or rather my dream come again as aforetime?


LOVE

Look up, O Pharamond! canst thou see aught about thee?


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, surely: all things as aforetime I saw them:
The mist fading out with the first of the sunlight,
And the mountains a-changing as oft in my dreaming,
And the thornbrake anigh blossomed thick with the May-tide.
          [_Music again._
O my heart!--I am hearkening thee whereso thou wanderest!


LOVE

Put forth thine hand, feel the dew on the daisies!


KING PHARAMOND

So their freshness I felt in the days ere hope perished.
--O me, me, my darling! how fair the world groweth!
Ah, shall I not find thee, if death yet should linger,
Else why grow I so glad now when life seems departing?
What pleasure thus pierceth my heart unto fainting?
--O me, into words now thy melody passeth.


MUSIC _with singing (from without)_

      _Dawn talks to-day
        Over dew-gleaming flowers,
      Night flies away
        Till the resting of hours:
      Fresh are thy feet
        And with dreams thine eyes glistening.
      Thy still lips are sweet
        Though the world is a-listening.
O Love, set a word in my mouth for our meeting,
Cast thine arms round about me to stay my heart's beating!
  O fresh day, O fair day, O long day made ours_!


LOVE

What wilt thou say now of the gifts Love hath given?


KING PHARAMOND

Stay thy whispering, O wind of the morning--she speaketh.


THE MUSIC (_coming nearer_)

      _Morn shall meet noon
        While the flower-stems yet move,
      Though the wind dieth soon
        And the clouds fade above.
      Loved lips are thine
        As I tremble and hearken;
      Bright thine eyes shine,
        Though the leaves thy brow darken.
O Love, kiss me into silence, lest no word avail me,
Stay my head with thy bosom lest breath and life fail me!
  O sweet day, O rich day, made long for our love_!


LOVE

Was Love then a liar who fashioned thy dreaming?


KING PHARAMOND

O fair-blossomed tree, stay thy rustling--I hearken.


THE MUSIC (_coming nearer_)

      _Late day shall greet eve,
        And the full blossoms shake,
      For the wind will not leave
        The tall trees while they wake.
      Eyes soft with bliss,
        Come nigher and nigher!
      Sweet mouth I kiss,
        Tell me all thy desire!
Let us speak, love, together some words of our story,
That our lips as they part may remember the glory!
  O soft day, O calm day, made clear for our sake_!


LOVE

What wouldst thou, Pharamond? why art thou fainting?


KING PHARAMOND

And thou diest, fair daylight, now she draweth near me!


THE MUSIC (_close outside_)

      _Eve shall kiss night,
        And the leaves stir like rain
      As the wind stealeth light
        O'er the grass of the plain.
      Unseen are thine eyes
        Mid the dreamy night's sleeping,
      And on my mouth there lies
        The dear rain of thy weeping.
Hold, silence, love, speak not of the sweet day departed,
Cling close to me, love, lest I waken sad-hearted!
  O kind day, O dear day, short day, come again_!


LOVE

Sleep then, O Pharamond, till her kiss shall awake thee,
For, lo, here comes the sun o'er the tops of the mountains,
And she with his light in her hair comes before him,
As solemn and fair as the dawn of the May-tide
On some isle of mid-ocean when all winds are sleeping.
O worthy is she of this hour that awaits her,
And the death of all doubt, and beginning of gladness
Her great heart shall embrace without fear or amazement.
--He sleeps, yet his heart's beating measures her footfalls;
And her heart beateth too, as her feet bear her onward:
Breathe gently between them, O breeze of the morning!
Wind round them unthought of, sweet scent of the blossoms!
Treasure up every minute of this tide of their meeting,
O flower-bedecked Earth! with such tales of my triumph
Is your life still renewed, and spring comes back for ever
From that forge of all glory that brought forth my blessing.
O welcome, Love's darling: Shall this day ever darken,
Whose dawn I have dight for thy longing triumphant?
          [_Exit LOVE. Enter AZALAIS._


AZALAIS

A song in my mouth, then? my heart full of gladness?
My feet firm on the earth, as when youth was beginning?
And the rest of my early days come back to bless me?--
Who hath brought me these gifts in the midst of the May-tide?
What!--three days agone to the city I wandered,
And watched the ships warped to the Quay of the Merchants;
And wondered why folk should be busy and anxious;
For bitter my heart was, and life seemed a-waning,
With no story told, with sweet longing turned torment,
Love turned to abasement, and rest gone for ever.
And last night I awoke with a pain piercing through me,
And a cry in my ears, and Death passed on before,
As one pointing the way, and I rose up sore trembling,
And by cloud and by night went before the sun's coming,
As one goeth to death,--and lo here the dawning!
And a dawning therewith of a dear joy I know not.
I have given back the day the glad greeting it gave me;
And the gladness it gave me, that too would I give
Were hands held out to crave it----Fair valley, I greet thee,
And the new-wakened voices of all things familiar.
--Behold, how the mist-bow lies bright on the mountain,
Bidding hope as of old since no prison endureth.
Full busy has May been these days I have missed her,
And the milkwort is blooming, and blue falls the speedwell.
--Lo, here have been footsteps in the first of the morning,
Since the moon sank all red in the mist now departed.
--Ah! what lieth there by the side of the highway?
Is it death stains the sunlight, or sorrow or sickness?

          [_Going up to PHARAMOND_.

--Not death, for he sleepeth; but beauty sore blemished
By sorrow and sickness, and for all that the sweeter.
I will wait till he wakens and gaze on his beauty,
Lest I never again in the world should behold him.
--Maybe I may help him; he is sick and needs tending,
He is poor, and shall scorn not our simpleness surely.
Whence came he to us-ward--what like has his life been--
Who spoke to him last--for what is he longing?
--As one hearkening a story I wonder what cometh,
And in what wise my voice to our homestead shall bid him.
O heart, how thou faintest with hope of the gladness
I may have for a little if there he abide.
Soft there shalt thou sleep, love, and sweet shall thy dreams be,
And sweet thy awaking amidst of the wonder
Where thou art, who is nigh thee--and then, when thou seest
How the rose-boughs hang in o'er the little loft window,
And the blue bowl with roses is close to thine hand,
And over thy bed is the quilt sewn with lilies,
And the loft is hung round with the green Southland hangings,
And all smelleth sweet as the low door is opened,
And thou turnest to see me there standing, and holding
Such dainties as may be, thy new hunger to stay--
Then well may I hope that thou wilt not remember
Thine old woes for a moment in the freshness and pleasure,
And that I shall be part of thy rest for a little.
And then---who shall say--wilt thou tell me thy story,
And what thou hast loved, and for what thou hast striven?
--Thou shalt see me, and my love and my pity, as thou speakest,
And it may be thy pity shall mingle with mine.
--And meanwhile--Ah, love, what hope may my heart hold?
For I see that thou lovest, who ne'er hast beheld me.
And how should thy love change, howe'er the world changeth?
Yet meanwhile, had I dreamed of the bliss of this minute,
How might I have borne to live weary and waiting!

Woe's me! do I fear thee? else should I not wake thee,
For tending thou needest--If my hand touched thy hand
          [_Touching him._
I should fear thee the less.--O sweet friend, forgive it,
My hand and my tears, for faintly they touched thee!
He trembleth, and waketh not: O me, my darling!
Hope whispers that thou hear'st me through sleep, and wouldst waken,
But for dread that thou dreamest and I should be gone.
Doth it please thee in dreaming that I tremble and dread thee,
That these tears are the tears of one praying vainly,
Who shall pray with no word when thou hast awakened?
--Yet how shall I deal with my life if he love not,
As how should he love me, a stranger, unheard of?
--O bear witness, thou day that hast brought my love hither!
Thou sun that burst out through the mist o'er the mountains,
In that moment mine eyes met the field of his sorrow--
Bear witness, ye fields that have fed me and clothed me,
And air I have breathed, and earth that hast borne me--
Though I find you but shadows, and wrought but for fading,
Though all ye and God fail me,--my love shall not fail!
Yea, even if this love, that seemeth such pleasure
As earth is unworthy of, turneth to pain;
If he wake without memory of me and my weeping,
With a name on his lips not mine--that I know not:
If thus my hand leave his hand for the last time,
And no word from his lips be kind for my comfort--
If all speech fail between us, all sight fail me henceforth,
If all hope and God fail me--my love shall not fail.

--Friend, I may not forbear: we have been here together:
My hand on thy hand has been laid, and thou trembledst.
Think now if this May sky should darken above us,
And the death of the world in this minute should part us--
Think, my love, of the loss if my lips had not kissed thee.
And forgive me my hunger of no hope begotten! [_She kisses him._


KING PHARAMOND (_awaking_)

Who art thou? who art thou, that my dream I might tell thee?
How with words full of love she drew near me, and kissed me.
O thou kissest me yet, and thou clingest about me!
Ah, kiss me and wake me into death and deliverance!


AZALAIS (_drawing away from him_)

Speak no rough word, I pray thee, for a little, thou loveliest!
But forgive me, for the years of my life have been lonely,
And thou art come hither with the eyes of one seeking.


KING PHARAMOND

Sweet dream of old days, and her very lips speaking
The words of my lips and the night season's longing.
How might I have lived had I known what I longed for!


AZALAIS

I knew thou wouldst love, I knew all thy desire--
Am I she whom thou seekest? may I draw nigh again?


KING PHARAMOND

Ah, lengthen no more the years of my seeking,
For thou knowest my love as thy love lies before me.


AZALAIS (_coming near to him again_)

O Love, there was fear in thine eyes as thou wakenedst;
Thy first words were of dreaming and death--but we die not.


KING PHARAMOND

In thine eyes was a terror as thy lips' touches faded,
Sore trembled thine arms as they fell away from me;
And thy voice was grown piteous with words of beseeching,
So that still for a little my search seemed unended.
--Ah, enending, unchanging desire fulfils me!
I cry out for thy comfort as thou clingest about me.
O joy hard to bear, but for memory of sorrow,
But for pity of past days whose bitter is sweet now!
_Let us speak, love, together some word of our story,
That our lips as they part may remember the glory._


AZALAIS

_O Love, kiss me into silence lest no word avail me;
Stay my head with thy bosom lest breath and life fail me_.



THE MUSIC

_LOVE IS ENOUGH: while ye deemed him a-sleeping,
  There were signs of his coming and sounds of his feet;
His touch it was that would bring you to weeping,
  When the summer was deepest and music most sweet:
    In his footsteps ye followed the day to its dying,
  Ye went forth by his gown-skirts the morning to meet:
    In his place on the beaten-down orchard-grass lying,
    Of the sweet ways ye pondered yet left for life's trying.

Ah, what was all dreaming of pleasure anear you,
  To the time when his eyes on your wistful eyes turned,
And ye saw his lips move, and his head bend to hear you,
  As new-born and glad to his kindness ye yearned?
    Ah, what was all dreaming of anguish and sorrow,
  To the time when the world in his torment was burned,
    And no god your heart from its prison might borrow,
    And no rest was left, no to-day, no to-morrow?

All wonder of pleasure, all doubt of desire,
  All blindness, are ended, and no more ye feel
If your feet tread his flowers or the flames of his fire,
  If your breast meet his balms or the edge of his steel.
    Change is come, and past over, no more strife, no more learning:
  Now your lips and your forehead are sealed with his seal,
    Look backward and smile at the thorns and the burning.
    --Sweet rest, O my soul, and no fear of returning!_

_Enter before the curtain LOVE, clad still as a Pilgrim_.



LOVE

How is it with the Fosterer then, when he
Comes back again that rest and peace to see,
And God his latest prayer has granted now?--
Why, as the winds whereso they list shall blow,
So drifts the thought of man, and who shall say
To-morrow shall my thought be as to-day?
--My fosterling is happy, and I too;
Yet did we leave behind things good to do,
Deeds good to tell about when we are dead.
Here is no pain, but rest, and easy bread;
Yet therewith something hard to understand
Dulls the crowned work to which I set my hand.
Ah, patience yet! his longing is well won,
And I shall die at last and all be done.--
Such words unspoken the best man on earth
Still bears about betwixt the lover's mirth;
And now he hath what he went forth to find,
This Pharamond is neither dull nor blind,
And looking upon Oliver, he saith:--
My friend recked nothing of his life or death,
Knew not my anguish then, nor now my pleasure,
And by my crowned joy sets his lessened treasure.
Is risk of twenty days of wind and sea,
Of new-born feeble headless enmity,
I should have scorned once, too great gift to give
To this most faithful man that he may live?

--Yea, was that all? my faithful, you and I,
Still craving, scorn the world too utterly,
The world we want not--yet, our one desire
Fulfilled at last, what next shall feed the fire?
--I say not this to make my altar cold;
Rather that ye, my happy ones, should hold
Enough of memory and enough of fear
Within your hearts to keep its flame full clear;
Rather that ye, still dearer to my heart,
Whom words call hapless, yet should praise your part,
Wherein the morning and the evening sun
Are bright about a story never done;
That those for chastening, these for joy should cling
About the marvels that my minstrels sing.

Well, Pharamond fulfilled of love must turn
Unto the folk that still he deemed would yearn
To see his face, and hear his voice once more;
And he was mindful of the days passed o'er,
And fain had linked them to these days of love;
And he perchance was fain the world to move
While love looked on; and he perchance was fain
Some pleasure of the strife of old to gain.
Easy withal it seemed to him to land,
And by his empty throne awhile to stand
Amid the wonder, and then sit him down
While folk went forth to seek the hidden crown.

Or else his name upon the same wind borne
As smote the world with winding of his horn,
His hood pulled back, his banner flung abroad,
A gleam of sunshine on his half-drawn sword.
--Well, he and you and I have little skill
To know the secret of Fate's worldly will;
Yet can I guess, and you belike may guess,
Yea, and e'en he mid all his lordliness,
That much may be forgot in three years' space
Outside my kingdom.--Gone his godlike face,
His calm voice, and his kindness, half akin
Amid a blind folk to rebuke of sin,
Men 'gin to think that he was great and good,
But hindered them from doing as they would,
And ere they have much time to think on it
Between their teeth another has the bit,
And forth they run with Force and Fate behind.
--Indeed his sword might somewhat heal the blind,
Were I not, and the softness I have given;
With me for him have hope and glory striven
In other days when my tale was beginning;
But sweet life lay beyond then for the winning,
And now what sweetness?--blood of men to spill
Who once believed him God to heal their ill:
To break the gate and storm adown the street
Where once his coming flower-crowned girls did greet:
To deem the cry come from amidst his folk
When his own country tongue should curse his stroke--
Nay, he shall leave to better men or worse
His people's conquered homage and their curse.

So forth they go, his Oliver and he,
One thing at least to learn across the sea,
That whatso needless shadows life may borrow
Love is enough amidst of joy or sorrow.

Love is enough--My Faithful, in your eyes
I see the thought, Our Lord is overwise
Some minutes past in what concerns him not,
And us no more: is all his tale forgot?
--Ah, Well-beloved, I fell asleep e'en now,
And in my sleep some enemy did show
Sad ghosts of bitter things, and names unknown
For things I know--a maze with shame bestrown
And ruin and death; till e'en myself did seem
A wandering curse amidst a hopeless dream.
--Yet see! I live, no older than of old,
What tales soe'er of changing Time has told.
And ye who cling to all my hand shall give,
Sorrow or joy, no less than I shall live.


_Scene: Before KING PHARAMOND'S Palace._



KING PHARAMOND

A long time it seems since this morn when I met them,
The men of my household and the great man they honour:
Better counsel in king-choosing might I have given
Had ye bided my coming back hither, my people:
And yet who shall say or foretell what Fate meaneth?
For that man there, the stranger, Honorius men called him,
I account him the soul to King Theobald's body,
And the twain are one king; and a goodly king may be
For this people, who grasping at peace and good days,
Careth little who giveth them that which they long for.
Yet what gifts have I given them; I who this even
Turn away with grim face from the fight that should try me?
It is just then, I have lost: lie down, thou supplanter,
In thy tomb in the minster when thy life is well over,
And the well-carven image of latten laid o'er thee
Shall live on as thou livedst, and be worthy the praising
Whereby folk shall remember the days of thy plenty.
Praising Theobald the Good and the peace that he brought them,
But I--I shall live too, though no graven image
On the grass of the hillside shall brave the storms' beating;
Though through days of thy plenty the people remember
As a dim time of war the past days of King Pharamond;
Yet belike as time weareth, and folk turn back a little
To the darkness where dreams lie and live on for ever,
Even there shall be Pharamond who failed not in battle,
But feared to overcome his folk who forgot him,
And turned back and left them a tale for the telling,
A song for the singing, that yet in some battle
May grow to remembrance and rend through the ruin
As my sword rent it through in the days gone for ever.
So, like Enoch of old, I was not, for God took me.
--But lo, here is Oliver, all draws to an ending--
                                 [_Enter OLIVER._
Well met, my Oliver! the clocks strike the due minute,
What news hast thou got?--thou art moody of visage.


MASTER OLIVER

In one word, 'tis battle; the days we begun with
Must begin once again with the world waxen baser.


KING PHARAMOND

Ah! battle it may be: but surely no river
Runneth back to its springing: so the world has grown wiser
And Theobald the Constable is king in our stead,
And contenteth the folk who cried, "Save us, King Pharamond!"


MASTER OLIVER

Hast thou heard of his councillor men call Honorius?
Folk hold him in fear, and in love the tale hath it.


KING PHARAMOND.

Much of him have I heard: nay, more, I have seen him
With the men of my household, and the great man they honour.
They were faring afield to some hunt or disporting,
Few faces were missing, and many I saw there
I was fain of in days past at fray or at feasting;
My heart yearned towards them--but what--days have changed them,
They must wend as they must down the way they are driven.


MASTER OLIVER

Yet e'en in these days there remaineth a remnant
That is faithful and fears not the flap of thy banner.


KING PHARAMOND

And a fair crown is faith, as thou knowest, my father;
Fails the world, yet that faileth not; love hath begot it,
Sweet life and contentment at last springeth from it;
No helping these need whose hearts still are with me,
Nay, rather they handle the gold rod of my kingdom.


MASTER OLIVER

Yet if thou leadest forth once more as aforetime
In faith of great deeds will I follow thee, Pharamond,
And thy latter end yet shall be counted more glorious
Than thy glorious beginning; and great shall my gain be
If e'en I must die ere the day of thy triumph.


KING PHARAMOND

Dear is thy heart mid the best and the brightest,
Yet not against these my famed blade will I bare.


MASTER OLIVER

Nay, what hast thou heard of their babble and baseness?


KING PHARAMOND

Full enough, friend--content thee, my lips shall not speak it,
The same hour wherein they have said that I love thee.
Suffice it, folk need me no more: the deliverance,
Dear bought in the days past, their hearts have forgotten,
But faintly their dim eyes a feared face remember,
Their dull ears remember a stern voice they hated.
What then, shall I waken their fear and their hatred,
And then wait till fresh terror their memory awaketh,
With the semblance of love that they have not to give me?
Nay, nay, they are safe from my help and my justice,
And I--I am freed, and fresh waxeth my manhood.


MASTER OLIVER

It may not be otherwise since thou wilt have it,
Yet I say it again, if thou shake out thy banner,
Some brave men will be borne unto earth peradventure,
Many dastards go trembling to meet their due doom,
And then shall come fair days and glory upon me
And on all men on earth for thy fame, O King Pharamond.


KING PHARAMOND

Yea, I was king once; the songs sung o'er my cradle,
Were ballads of battle and deeds of my fathers:
Yea, I was King Pharamond; in no carpeted court-room
Bore they the corpse of my father before me;
But on grass trodden grey by the hoofs of the war-steeds
Did I kneel to his white lips and sword-cloven bosom,
As from clutch of dead fingers his notched sword I caught;
For a furlong before us the spear-wood was glistening.
I was king of this city when here where we stand now
Amidst a grim silence I mustered all men folk
Who might yet bear a weapon; and no brawl of kings was it
That brought war on the city, and silenced the markets
And cumbered the haven with crowd of masts sailless,
But great countries arisen for our ruin and downfall.
I was king of the land, when on all roads were riding
The legates of proud princes to pray help and give service--
Yea, I was a great king at last as I sat there,
Peace spread far about me, and the love of all people
To my palace gates wafted by each wind of the heavens.
--And where sought I all this? with what price did I buy it?
Nay, for thou knowest that this fair fame and fortune
Came stealing soft-footed to give their gifts to me:
And shall I, who was king once, grow griping and weary
In unclosing the clenched fists of niggards who hold them,
These gifts that I had once, and, having, scarce heeded?
Nay, one thing I have sought, I have sought and have found it,
And thou, friend, hast helped me and seest me made happy.


MASTER OLIVER

Farewell then the last time, O land of my fathers!
Farewell, feeble hopes that I once held so mighty.
Yet no more have I need of but this word that thou sayest,
And nought have I to do but to serve thee, my master.
In what land of the world shall we dwell now henceforward?


KING PHARAMOND

In the land where my love our returning abideth,
The poor land and kingless of the shepherding people,
There is peace there, and all things this land are unlike to.


MASTER OLIVER

Before the light waneth will I seek for a passage,
Since for thee and for me the land groweth perilous:
Yea, o'er sweet smell the flowers, too familiar the folk seem,
Fain I grow of the salt seas, since all things are over here.


KING PHARAMOND

I am fain of one hour's farewell in the twilight,
To the times I lament not: times worser than these times,
To the times that I blame not, that brought on times better--
Let us meet in our hostel--be brave mid thy kindness,
Let thy heart say, as mine saith, that fair life awaits us.


MASTER OLIVER

Yea, no look in thy face is of ruin, O my master;
Thou art king yet, unchanged yet, nor is my heart changing;
The world hath no chances to conquer thy glory.
                                           [_Exit OLIVER_


KING PHARAMOND

Full fair were the world if such faith were remembered.
If such love as thy love had its due, O my fosterer.
Forgive me that giftless from me thou departest,
With thy gifts in my hands left. I might not but take them;
Thou wilt not begrudge me, I will not forget thee.--
--Long fall the shadows and night draws on apace now,
Day sighs as she sinketh back on to her pillow,
And her last waking breath is full sweet with the rose.
--In such wise depart thou, O daylight of life,
Loved once for the shadows that told of the dreamtide;
Loved still for the longing whereby I remember
That I was lone once in the world of thy making;
Lone wandering about on thy blind way's confusion,
The maze of thy paths that yet led me to love.
All is passed now, and passionless, faint are ye waxen,
Ye hours of blind seeking full of pain clean forgotten.
If it were not that e'en now her eyes I behold not.
That the way lieth long to her feet that would find me,
That the green seas delay yet her fair arms enfolding,
That the long leagues of air will not bear the cry hither
Wherewith she is crying. Come, love, for I love thee.
                                       [_A trumpet sounds_.
Hark! O days grown a dream of the dream ye have won me,
Do ye draw forth the ghosts of old deeds that were nothing,
That the sound of my trumpet floats down on the even?
What shows will ye give me to grace my departure?
Hark!--the beat of the horse-hoofs, the murmur of men folk!
Am I riding from battle amidst of my faithful,
Wild hopes in my heart of the days that are coming;
Wild longing unsatisfied clinging about me;
Full of faith that the summer sun elsewhere is ripening
The fruit grown a pain for my parched lips to think of?
--Come back, thou poor Pharamond! come back for my pity!
Far afield must thou fare before the rest cometh;
In far lands are they raising the walls of thy prison,
Forging wiles for waylaying, and fair lies for lulling,
The faith and the fire of the heart the world hateth.
In thy way wax streams fordless, and choked passes pathless,
Fever lurks in the valley, and plague passeth over
The sand of the plain, and with venom and fury
Fulfilled are the woods that thou needs must wend through:
In the hollow of the mountains the wind is a-storing
Till the keel that shall carry thee hoisteth her sail;
War is crouching unseen round the lands thou shalt come to,
With thy sword cast away and thy cunning forgotten.
Yea, and e'en the great lord, the great Love of thy fealty,
He who goadeth thee on, weaveth nets to cast o'er thee.
--And thou knowest it all, as thou ridest there lonely,
With the tangles and toils of to-morrow's uprising
Making ready meanwhile for more days of thy kingship.
Faithful heart hadst thou, Pharamond, to hold fast thy treasure!
I am fain of thee: surely no shame hath destained thee;
Come hither, for thy face all unkissed would I look on!
--Stand we close, for here cometh King Theobald from the hunting.


_Enter KING THEOBALD, HONORIUS, and the people._


KING THEOBALD

A fair day, my folk, have I had in your fellowship,
And as fair a day cometh to-morrow to greet us,
When the lord of the Golden Land bringeth us tribute:
Grace the gifts of my good-hap with your presence, I pray you.


THE PEOPLE

God save Theobald the Good, the king of his people!


HONORIUS (_aside_)

Yea, save him! and send the Gold lords away satisfied,
That the old sword of Pharamond, lying asleep there
In the new golden scabbard, will yet bite as aforetime!
                    [_They pass away into the palace court._


KING PHARAMOND

Troop past in the twilight, O pageant that served me,
Pour through the dark archway to the light that awaits you
In the chamber of daïs where I once sat among you!
Like the shadows ye are to the shadowless glory
Of the banquet-hall blazing with gold and light go ye:
There blink for a little at your king in his bravery,
Then bear forth your faith to the blackness of night-tide,
And fall asleep fearless of memories of Pharamond,
And in dim dreams dream haply that ye too are kings
--For your dull morrow cometh that is as to-day is.

Pass on in contentment, O king, I discerned not
Through the cloak of your blindness that saw nought beside thee,
That feared for no pain and craved for no pleasure!
Pass on, dead-alive, to thy place! thou art worthy:
Nor shalt thou grow wearier than well-worshipped idol
That the incense winds round in the land of the heathen,
While the early and latter rains fall as God listeth,
And on earth that God loveth the sun riseth daily.
--Well art thou: for wert thou the crown of all rulers,
No field shouldst thou ripen, free no frost-bounden river,
Loose no heart from its love, turn no soul to salvation,
Thrust no tempest aside, stay no plague in mid ocean,
Yet grow unto thinking that thou wert God's brother,
Till loveless death gripped thee unloved, unlamented.
--Pass forth, weary King, bear thy crown high to-night!
Then fall asleep, fearing no cry from times bygone,
But in dim dreams dream haply that thou art desired,--
--For thy dull morrow cometh, and is as to-day is.

Ah, hold! now there flashes a link in the archway,
And its light falleth full on thy face, O Honorius,
And I know thee the land's lord, and far away fadeth
My old life of a king at the sight, O thou stranger!
For I know thee full surely the foe the heart hateth
For that barren fulfilment of all that it lacketh.
I may turn away praising that those days long departed
Departed without thee--how long had I piped then
Or e'er thou hadst danced, how long were my weeping
Ere thou hadst lamented!--What dear thing desired
Would thy heart e'er have come to know why I craved for!
To what crime I could think of couldst thou be consenting?
Yet thou--well I know thee most meet for a ruler--
--Thou lovest not mercy, yet shalt thou be merciful;
Thou joy'st not in justice, yet just shall thy dooms be;
No deep hell thou dreadest, nor dream'st of high heaven;
No gleam of love leads thee: no gift men may give thee;
For no kiss, for no comfort the lone way thou wearest,
A blind will without life, lest thou faint ere the end come.
--Yea, folly it was when I called thee my foeman;
From thee may I turn now with sword in the scabbard
Without shame or misgiving, because God hath made thee
A ruler for manfolk: pass on then unpitied!
There is darkness between us till the measure's fulfilment.
Amidst singing thou hear'st not, fair sights that thou seest not,
Think this eve on the deeds thou shalt set in men's hands
To bring fair days about for which thou hast no blessing.
Then fall asleep fearless of dead days that return not;
Yet dream if thou may'st that thou yet hast a hope!
--For thy dull morrow cometh and is as to-day is.

O sweet wind of the night, wherewith now ariseth
The red moon through the garden boughs frail, overladen,
O faint murmuring tongue of the dream-tide triumphant,
That wouldst tell me sad tales in the times long passed over,
If somewhat I sicken and turn to your freshness,
From no shame it is of earth's tangle and trouble,
And deeds done for nought, and change that forgetteth;
But for hope of the lips that I kissed on the sea-strand,
But for hope of the hands that clung trembling about me,--
And the breast that was heaving with words driven backward,
By longing I longed for, by pain of departing,
By my eyes that knew her pain, my pain that might speak not--
Yea, for hope of the morn when the sea is passed over,
And for hope of the next moon the elm-boughs shall tangle;
And fresh dawn, and fresh noon, and fresh night of desire
Still following and changing, with nothing forgotten;
For hope of new wonder each morn, when I, waking
Behold her awaking eyes turning to seek me;
For hope of fresh marvels each time the world changing
Shall show her feet moving in noontide to meet me;
For hope of fresh bliss, past all words, half forgotten,
When her voice shall break through the hushed blackness of night.
--O sweet wind of the summer-tide, broad moon a-whitening,
Bear me witness to Love, and the world he has fashioned!
It shall change, we shall change, as through rain and through sunshine
The green rod of the rose-bough to blossoming changeth:
Still lieth in wait with his sweet tale untold of
Each long year of Love, and the first scarce beginneth,
Wherein I have hearkened to the word God hath whispered,
Why the fair world was fashioned mid wonders uncounted.
Breathe soft, O sweet wind, for surely she speaketh:
_Weary I wax, and my life is a-waning;
Life lapseth fast, and I faint for thee, Pharamond,_
_What are thou lacking if Love no more sufficeth?_
--Weary not, sweet, as I weary to meet thee;
Look not on the long way but my eyes that were weeping
Faint not in love as thy Pharamond fainteth!--
--Yea, Love were enough if thy lips were not lacking.


THE MUSIC



_LOVE IS ENOUGH: ho ye who seek saving,
  Go no further; come hither; there have been who have found it,
And these know the House of Fulfilment of Craving;
  These know the Cup with the roses around it;
  _These know the World's Wound and the balm that hath bound it:
Cry out, the World heedeth not, "Love, lead us home!"

He leadeth, He hearkeneth, He cometh to you-ward;
  Set your faces as steel to the fears that assemble
Round his goad for the faint, and his scourge for the froward:
  Lo his lips, how with tales of last kisses they tremble!
  Lo his eyes of all sorrow that may not dissemble!
Cry out, for he heedeth, "O Love, lead us home!"

O hearken the words of his voice of compassion:
  "Come cling round about me, ye faithful who sicken
Of the weary unrest and the world's passing fashion!
  As the rain in mid-morning your troubles shall thicken,
  But surely within you some Godhead doth quicken,
As ye cry to me heeding, and leading you home._

"Come--pain ye shall have, and be blind to the ending!
  Come--fear ye shall have, mid the sky's overcasting!
Come--change ye shall have, for far are ye wending!
  Come--no crown ye shall have for your thirst and your fasting,
  But the kissed lips of Love and fair life everlasting!
Cry out, for one heedeth, who leadeth you home!"

Is he gone? was he with us?--ho ye who seek savings
  Go no further; come hither; for have we not found it?
Here is the House of Fulfilment of Craving;
  Here is the Cup with the roses around it;
  The World's Wound well healed, and the balm that hath bound it:
Cry out! for he heedeth, fair Love that led home._


_Enter before the curtain, LOVE, holding a crown and
palm-branch._



LOVE

If love be real, if I whom ye behold
Be aught but glittering wings and gown of gold,
Be aught but singing of an ancient song
Made sweet by record of dead stingless wrong,
How shall we part at that sad garden's end
Through which the ghosts of mighty lovers wend?
How shall ye faint and fade with giftless hands
Who once held fast the life of all the lands?
--Beloved, if so much as this I say,
I know full well ye need it not to-day,
As with full hearts and glorious hope ablaze
Through the thick veil of what shall be ye gaze,
And lacking words to name the things ye see
Turn back with yearning speechless mouths to me.--
--Ah, not to-day--and yet the time has been
When by the bed my wings have waved unseen
Wherein my servant lay who deemed me dead;
My tears have dropped anigh the hapless head
Deep buried in the grass and crying out
For heaven to fall, and end despair or doubt:
Lo, for such days I speak and say, believe
That from these hands reward ye shall receive.
--Reward of what?--Life springing fresh again.--
Life of delight?--I say it not--Of pain?
It may be--Pain eternal?--Who may tell?
Yet pain of Heaven, beloved, and not of Hell.
--What sign, what sign, ye cry, that so it is?
The sign of Earth, its sorrow and its bliss,
Waxing and waning, steadfastness and change;
Too full of life that I should think it strange
Though death hang over it; too sure to die
But I must deem its resurrection nigh.
--In what wise, ah, in what wise shall it be?
How shall the bark that girds the winter tree
Babble about the sap that sleeps beneath,
And tell the fashion of its life and death?
How shall my tongue in speech man's longing wrought
Tell of the things whereof he knoweth nought?
Should I essay it might ye understand
How those I love shall share my promised land!
Then must I speak of little things as great,
Then must I tell of love and call it hate,
Then must I bid you seek what all men shun,
Reward defeat, praise deeds that were not done.

Have faith, and crave and suffer, and all ye
The many mansions of my house shall see
In all content: cast shame and pride away,
Let honour gild the world's eventless day,
Shrink not from change, and shudder not at crime,
Leave lies to rattle in the sieve of Time!
Then, whatsoe'er your workday gear shall stain,
Of me a wedding-garment shall ye gain
No God shall dare cry out at, when at last
Your time of ignorance is overpast;
A wedding garment, and a glorious seat
Within my household, e'en as yet be meet.

Fear not, I say again; believe it true
That not as men mete shall I measure you:
This calm strong soul, whose hidden tale found out
Has grown a spell to conquer fear and doubt,
Is he not mine? yea, surely--mine no less
This well mocked clamourer out of bitterness:
The strong one's strength, from me he had it not;
Let the world keep it that his love forgot;
The weak one's weakness was enough to save,
Let the world hide it in his honour's grave!
For whatso folly is, or wisdom was
Across my threshold naked all must pass.

Fear not; no vessel to dishonour born
Is in my house; there all shall well adorn
The walls whose stones the lapse of Time has laid.
Behold again; this life great stories made;
All cast aside for love, and then and then
Love filched away; the world an adder-den,
And all folk foes: and one, the one desire--
--How shall we name it?--grown a poisoned fire,
God once, God still, but God of wrong and shame
A lying God, a curse without a name.
So turneth love to hate, the wise world saith.
--Folly--I say 'twixt love and hate lies death,
They shall not mingle: neither died this love,
But through a dreadful world all changed must move
With earthly death and wrong, and earthly woe
The only deeds its hand might find to do.
Surely ye deem that this one shall abide
Within the murmuring palace of my pride.

But lo another, how shall he have praise?
Through flame and thorns I led him many days
And nought he shrank, but smiled and followed close,
Till in his path the shade of hate arose
'Twixt him and his desire: with heart that burned
For very love back through the thorns he turned,
His wounds, his tears, his prayers without avail
Forgotten now, nor e'en for him a tale;
Because for love's sake love he cast aside.
--Lo, saith the World, a heart well satisfied
With what I give, a barren love forgot--
--Draw near me, O my child, and heed them not!
The world thou lovest, e'en my world it is,
Thy faithful hands yet reach out for my bliss,
Thou seest me in the night and in the day
Thou canst not deem that I can go astray.

No further, saith the world 'twixt Heaven and Hell
Than 'twixt these twain.--My faithful, heed it well!
For on the great day when the hosts are met
On Armageddon's plain by spears beset,
This is my banner with my sign thereon,
That is my sword wherewith my deeds are done.
But how shall tongue of man tell all the tale
Of faithful hearts who overcome or fail,
But at the last fail nowise to be mine.
In diverse ways they drink the fateful wine
Those twain drank mid the lulling of the storm
Upon the Irish Sea, when love grown warm
Kindled and blazed, and lit the days to come,
The hope and joy and death that led them home.
--In diverse ways; yet having drunk, be sure
The flame thus lighted ever shall endure,
So my feet trod the grapes whereby it glowed.

Lo, Faithful, lo, the door of my abode
Wide open now, and many pressing in
That they the lordship of the World may win!
Hark to the murmuring round my bannered car,
And gird your weapons to you for the war!
For who shall say how soon the day shall be
Of that last fight that swalloweth up the sea?
Fear not, be ready! forth the banners go,
And will not turn again till every foe
Is overcome as though they had not been.
Then, with your memories ever fresh and green,
Come back within the House of Love to dwell;
For ye--the sorrow that no words might tell,
Your tears unheeded, and your prayers made nought
Thus and no otherwise through all have wrought,
That if, the while ye toiled and sorrowed most
The sound of your lamenting seemed all lost,
And from my land no answer came again,
It was because of that your care and pain
A house was building, and your bitter sighs
Came hither as toil-helping melodies,
And in the mortar of our gem-built wall
Your tears were mingled mid the rise and fall
Of golden trowels tinkling in the hands
Of builders gathered wide from all the lands.--
--Is the house finished? Nay, come help to build
Walls that the sun of sorrow once did gild
Through many a bitter morn and hopeless eve,
That so at last in bliss ye may believe;
Then rest with me, and turn no more to tears,
For then no more by days and months and years,
By hours of pain come back, and joy passed o'er
We measure time that was--and is no more.


JOAN

The afternoon is waxen grey
Now these fair shapes have passed away;
And I, who should be merry now
A-thinking of the glorious show,
Feel somewhat sad, and wish it were
To-morrow's mid-morn fresh and fair
About the babble of our stead.


GILES

Content thee, sweet, for nowise dead
Within our hearts the story is;
It shall come back to better bliss
On many an eve of happy spring,
Or midst of summer's flourishing.
Or think--some noon of autumn-tide
Thou wandering on the turf beside
The chestnut-wood may'st find thy song
Fade out, as slow thou goest along,
Until at last thy feet stay there
As though thou bidedst something fair,
And hearkenedst for a coming foot;
While down the hole unto the root
The long leaves flutter loud to thee
The fall of spiky nuts shall be,
And creeping wood-wale's noise above;
For thou wouldst see the wings of Love.


JOAN

Or some November eve belike
Thou wandering back with bow and tyke
From wolf-chase on the wind-swept hill
Shall find that narrow vale and still,
And Pharamond and Azalais
Amidmost of that grassy place
Where we twain met last year, whereby
Red-shafted pine-trunks rise on high,
And changeless now from year to year,
What change soever brought them there,
Great rocks are scattered all around:
--Wouldst thou be frightened at the sound
Of their soft speech? So long ago
It was since first their love did grow.


GILES

Maybe: for e'en now when he turned,
His heart's scorn and his hate outburned,
And love the more for that ablaze,
I shuddered, e'en as in the place
High up the mountains, where men say
Gods dwelt in time long worn away.


JOAN

At Love's voice did I tremble too,
And his bright wings, for all I knew
He was a comely minstrel-lad,
In dainty golden raiment clad.


GILES

Yea, yea; for though to-day he spake
Words measured for our pleasure's sake,
From well-taught mouth not overwise,
Yet did that fount of speech arise
In days that ancient folk called old.
O long ago the tale was told
To mighty men of thought and deed,
Who kindled hearkening their own need,
Set forth by long-forgotten men,
E'en as we kindle: praise we then
Tales of old time, whereby alone
The fairness of the world is shown.


JOAN

A longing yet about me clings,
As I had hearkened half-told things;
And better than the words make plain
I seem to know these lovers twain.
Let us go hence, lest there should fall
Something that yet should mar it all.


GILES

Hist--Master Mayor is drawn anigh;
The Empress speaketh presently.


THE MAYOR

May it please you, your Graces, that I be forgiven,
Over-bold, over-eager to bear forth my speech,
In which yet there speaketh the Good Town, beseeching
That ye tell us of your kindness if ye be contented
With this breath of old tales, and shadowy seemings
Of old times departed.--Overwise for our pleasure
May the rhyme be perchance; but rightly we knew not
How to change it and fashion it fresh into fairness.
And once more, your Graces, we pray your forgiveness
For the boldness Love gave us to set forth this story;
And again, that I say, all that Pharamond sought for,
Through sick dreams and weariness, now have ye found,
Mid health and in wealth, and in might to uphold us;
Midst our love who shall deem you our hope and our treasure.
Well all is done now; so forget ye King Pharamond,
And Azalais his love, if we set it forth foully,
That fairly set forth were a sweet thing to think of
In the season of summer betwixt labour and sleeping.


THE EMPEROR

Fair Master Mayor, and City well beloved,
Think of us twain as folk no little moved
By this your kindness; and believe it not
That Pharamond the Freed shall be forgot,
By us at least: yea, more than ye may think,
This summer dream into our hearts shall sink.
Lo, Pharamond longed and toiled, nor toiled in vain,
But fame he won: he longed and toiled again,
And Love he won: 'twas a long time ago,
And men did swiftly what we now do slow,
And he, a great man full of gifts and grace,
Wrought out a twofold life in ten years' space.
Ah, fair sir, if for me reward come first,
Yet will I hope that ye have seen the worst
Of that my kingcraft, that I yet shall earn
Some part of that which is so long to learn.
Now of your gentleness I pray you bring
This knife and girdle, deemed a well-wrought thing;
And a king's thanks, whatso they be of worth,
To him who Pharamond this day set forth
In worthiest wise, and made a great man live,
Giving me greater gifts than I may give.


THE EMPRESS

And therewithal I pray you, Master Mayor,
Unto the seeming Azalais to bear
This chain, that she may wear it for my sake,
The memory of my pleasure to awake.           [_Exit MAYOR_.


THE EMPEROR

Gifts such as kings give, sweet! Fain had I been
To see him face to face and his fair Queen,
And thank him friendly; asking him maybe
How the world looks to one with love left free:
It may not be, for as thine eyes say, sweet,
Few folk as friends shall unfreed Pharamond meet.
So is it: we are lonelier than those twain,
Though from their vale they ne'er depart again.


THE EMPRESS

Shall I lament it, love, since thou and I
By all the seeming pride are drawn more nigh?
Lo, love, our toil-girthed garden of desire,
How of its changeless sweetness may we tire,
While round about the storm is in the boughs
And careless change amid the turmoil ploughs
The rugged fields we needs must stumble o'er,
Till the grain ripens that shall change no more.


THE EMPEROR

Yea, and an omen fair we well may deem
This dreamy shadowing of ancient dream,
Of what our own hearts long for on the day
When the first furrow cleaves the fallow grey.


THE EMPRESS

O fair it is! let us go forth, my sweet,
And be alone amid the babbling street;
Yea, so alone that scarce the hush of night
May add one joy unto our proved delight.


GILES

Fair lovers were they: I am fain
To see them both ere long again;
Yea, nigher too, if it might be.


JOAN

Too wide and dim, love, lies the sea,
That we should look on face to face
This Pharamond and Azalais.
Those only from the dead come back
Who left behind them what they lack.


GILES

Nay, I was asking nought so strange,
Since long ago their life did change:
The seeming King and Queen I meant.
And e'en now 'twas my full intent
To bid them home to us straightway,
And crown the joyance of to-day.
He may be glad to see my face,
He first saw mid that waggon race
When the last barley-sheaf came home.


JOAN

A great joy were it, should they come.
They are dear lovers, sure enough.
He deems the summer air too rough
To touch her kissed cheek, howsoe'er
Through winter mountains they must fare,
He would bid spring new flowers to make
Before her feet, that oft must ache
With flinty driftings of the waste.
And sure is she no more abased
Before the face of king and lord,
Than if the very Pharamond's sword
Her love amid the hosts did wield
Above the dinted lilied shield:
O bid them home with us, and we
Their scholars for a while will be
In many a lesson of sweet lore
To learn love's meaning more and more.


GILES

And yet this night of all the year
Happier alone perchance they were,
And better so belike would seem
The glorious lovers of the dream:
So let them dream on lip to lip:
Yet will I gain his fellowship
Ere many days be o'er my head,
And they shall rest them in our stead;
And there we four awhile shall dwell
As though the world were nought but well,
And that old time come back again
When nought in all the earth had pain.
The sun through lime-boughs where we dine
Upon my father's cup shall shine;
The vintage of the river-bank,
That ten years since the sunbeams drank,
Shall fill the mazer bowl carved o'er
With naked shepherd-folk of yore.
Dainty should seem worse fare than ours
As o'er the close-thronged garden flowers
The wind comes to us, and the bees
Complain overhead mid honey-trees.


JOAN

Wherewith shall we be garlanded?


GILES

For thee the buds of roses red.


JOAN

For her white roses widest blown.


GILES

The jasmine boughs for Pharamond's crown.


JOAN

And sops-in-wine for thee, fair love.


GILES

Surely our feast shall deeper move
The kind heart of the summer-tide
Than many a day of pomp and pride;
And as by moon and stars well lit
Our kissing lips shall finish it,
Full satisfied our hearts shall be
With that well-won felicity.


JOAN

Ah, sweetheart, be not all so sure:
Love, who beyond all worlds shall dure,
Mid pleading sweetness still doth keep
A goad to stay his own from sleep;
And I shall long as thou shalt long
For unknown cure of unnamed wrong
As from our happy feast we pass
Along the rose-strewn midnight grass--
--Praise Love who will not be forgot!


GILES

Yea, praise we Love who sleepeth not!
--Come, o'er much gold mine eyes have seen,
And long now for the pathway green,
And rose-hung ancient walls of grey
Yet warm with sunshine gone away.


JOAN

Yea, full fain would I rest thereby,
And watch the flickering martins fly
About the long eave-bottles red
And the clouds lessening overhead:
E'en now meseems the cows are come
Unto the grey gates of our home,
And low to hear the milking-pail:
The peacock spreads abroad his tail
Against the sun, as down the lane
The milkmaids pass the moveless wain,
And stable door, where the roan team
An hour agone began to dream
Over the dusty oats.--
                      Come, love,
Noises of river and of grove
And moving things in field and stall
And night-birds' whistle shall be all
Of the world's speech that we shall hear
By then we come the garth anear:
For then the moon that hangs aloft
These thronged streets, lightless now and soft,
Unnoted, yea, e'en like a shred
Of yon wide white cloud overhead,
Sharp in the dark star-sprinkled sky
Low o'er the willow boughs shall lie;
And when our chamber we shall gain
Eastward our drowsy eyes shall strain
If yet perchance the dawn may show.
--O Love, go with us as we go,
And from the might of thy fair hand
Cast wide about the blooming land
The seed of such-like tales as this!
--O Day, change round about our bliss,
Come, restful night, when day is done!
Come, dawn, and bring a fairer one!



       *       *       *       *       *


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co.

Edinburgh & London












End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems By The Way & Love Is Enough
by William Morris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS BY THE WAY & LOVE IS ENOUGH ***

***** This file should be named 15311.txt or 15311.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/3/1/15311/

Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Carol David and Lynn Bornath
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. Page images
were generously made available by The Internet Archive.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***


ï»¿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Chants for Socialists, by William Morris


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Chants for Socialists


Author: William Morris



Release Date: October 26, 2014  [eBook #3170]
[This file was first posted on January 30, 2001]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHANTS FOR SOCIALISTS***


Transcribed from the 1885 Socialist League Office edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org

                       [Picture: Decorative header]





                          CHANTS FOR SOCIALISTS


                                    BY
                             WILLIAM MORRIS.

                                * * * * *

                                CONTENTS:

The Day is Coming.                  No Master.

The Voice of Toil.                  All for the Cause.

The Message of the March Wind.      The March of the Workers.
                       Down Among the Dead Men.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                         Socialist League Office,
                13 FARRINGDON ROAD, HOLBORN VIADUCT, E.C.
                                  1885.

                            _PRICE ONE PENNY_.

                                * * * * *

I have looked at this claim by the light of history and my own
conscience, and it seems to me so looked at to be a most just claim, and
that resistance to it means nothing short of a denial of the hope of
civilisation.

This then is the claim:â

_It is right and necessary that all men should have work to do which
shall be worth doing_, _and be of itself pleasant to do_; _and which
should be done under such conditions as would make it neither
over-wearisome nor over-anxious_.

Turn that claim about as I may, think of it as long as I can, I cannot
find that it is an exorbitant claim; yet again I say if Society would or
could admit it, the face of the world would be changed; discontent and
strife and dishonesty would be ended.  To feel that we were doing work
useful to others and pleasant to ourselves, and that such work and its
due reward _could_ not fail us!  What serious harm could happen to us
then?  And the price to be paid for so making the world happy is
Revolution.




THE DAY IS COMING.


   COME hither lads, and hearken, for a tale there is to tell,
   Of the wonderful days a-coming when all shall be better than well.

   And the tale shall be told of a country, a land in the midst of the
   sea,
   And folk shall call it England in the days that are going to be.

   There more than one in a thousand in the days that are yet to come,
   Shall have some hope of the morrow, some joy of the ancient home.

   For thenâlaugh not, but listen, to this strange tale of mineâ
   All folk that are in England shall be better lodged than swine.

   Then a man shall work and bethink him, and rejoice in the deeds of his
   hand,
   Nor yet come home in the even too faint and weary to stand.

   Men in that time a-coming shall work and have no fear
   For to-morrowâs lack of earning and the hunger-wolf anear.

   I tell you this for a wonder, that no man then shall be glad
   Of his fellowâs fall and mishap to snatch at the work he had.

   For that which the worker winneth shall then be his indeed,
   Nor shall half be reaped for nothing by him that sowed no seed.

   O strange new wonderful justice!  But for whom shall we gather the
   gain?
   For ourselves and for each of our fellows, and no hand shall labour in
   vain.

   Then all _mine_ and all _thine_ shall be _ours_, and no more shall any
   man crave
   For riches that serve for nothing but to fetter a friend for a slave.

   And what wealth then shall be left us when none shall gather gold
   To buy his friend in the market, and pinch and pine the sold?

   Nay, what save the lovely city, and the little house on the hill,
   And the wastes and the woodland beauty, and the happy fields we till.

   And the homes of ancient stories, the tombs of the mighty dead;
   And the wise men seeking out marvels, and the poetâs teeming head;

   And the painterâs hand of wonder; and the marvellous fiddle-bow,
   And the banded choirs of music:âall those that do and know.

   For all these shall be ours and all menâs, nor shall any lack a share
   Of the toil and the gain of living in the days when the world grows
   fair.

   Ah! such are the days that shall be!  But what are the deeds of
   to-day,
   In the days of the years we dwell in, that wear our lives away?

   Why, then, and for what are we waiting?  There are three words to
   speak.
   WE WILL IT, and what is the foeman but the dream-strong wakened and
   weak?

   O why and for what are we waiting? while our brothers droop and die,
   And on every wind of the heavens a wasted life goes by.

   How long shall they reproach us where crowd on crowd they dwell,
   Poor ghosts of the wicked city, the gold-crushed hungry hell?

   Through squalid life they laboured, in sordid grief they died,
   Those sons of a mighty mother, those props of Englandâs pride.

   They are gone; there is none can undo it, nor save our souls from the
   curse;
   But many a million cometh, and shall they be better or worse?

   It is we must answer and hasten, and open wide the door
   For the rich manâs hurrying terror, and the slow-foot hope of the
   poor.

   Yea, the voiceless wrath of the wretched, and their unlearned
   discontent,
   We must give it voice and wisdom till the waiting-tide be spent.

   Come, then, since all things call us, the living and the dead
   And oâer the weltering tangle a glimmering light is shed.

   Come, then, let us cast off fooling, and put by ease and rest
   For the CAUSE alone is worthy till the good days bring the best

   Come, join in the only battle wherein no man can fail,
   Where whoso fadeth and dieth, yet his deed shall still prevail.

   Ah! come, cast off all fooling, for this, at least we know:
   That the Dawn and the Day is coming, and forth the Banners go.




THE VOICE OF TOIL.


   I heard men saying, Leave hope and praying,
      All days shall be as all have been;
   To-day and to-morrow bring fear and sorrow
      The never-ending toil between.

   When Earth was younger mid toil and hunger,
      In hope we strove, and our hands were strong
   Then great men led us, with words they fed us,
      And bade us right the earthly wrong.

   Go read in story their deeds and glory,
      Their names amidst the nameless dead;
   Turn then from lying to us slow-dying
      In that good world to which they led;

   Where fast and faster our iron master,
      The thing we made, for ever drives,
   Bids us grind treasure and fashion pleasure
      For other hopes and other lives.

   Where home is a hovel and dull we grovel,
      Forgetting that the world is fair;
   Where no babe we cherish, lest its very soul perish
      Where our mirth is crime, our love a snare

   Who now shall lead us, what god shall heed us
      As we lie in the hell our hands have won
   For us are no rulers but fools and befoolers,
      The great are fallen, the wise men gone

   I heard men saying, Leave tears and praying,
      The sharp knife heedeth not the sheep;
   Are we not stronger than the rich and the wronger,
      When day breaks over dreams and sleep?

   Come, shoulder to shoulder ere the world grows older!
      Help lies in nought but thee and me;
   Hope is before us, the long years that bore us,
      Bore leaders more than men may be.

   Let dead hearts tarry and trade and marry,
      And trembling nurse their dreams of mirth,
   While we the living our lives are giving
      To bring the bright new world to birth.

   Come, shoulder to shoulder ere earth grows older!
      The Cause spreads over land and sea;
   Now the world shaketh, and fear awaketh,
      And joy at last for thee and me.




ALL FOR THE CAUSE.


   HEAR a word, a word in season, for the day is drawing nigh,
   When the Cause shall call upon us, some to live, and some to die!

   He that dies shall not die lonely, many an one hath gone before,
   He that lives shall bear no burden heavier than the life they bore.

   Nothing ancient is their story, eâen but yesterday they bled,
   Youngest they of earthâs belovÃ«d, last of all the valiant dead.

   Eâen the tidings we are telling was the tale they had to tell,
   Eâen the hope that our hearts cherish, was the hope for which they
   fell.

   In the grave where tyrants thrust them, lies their labour and their
   pain,
   But undying from their sorrow springeth up the hope again.

   Mourn not therefore, nor lament it that the world outlives their life;
   Voice and vision yet they give us, making strong our hands for strife.

   Some had name, and fame, and honour, learnâd they were, and wise and
   strong;
   Some were nameless, poor, unlettered, weak in all but grief and wrong.

   Named and nameless all live in us; one and all they lead us yet
   Every pain to count for nothing, every sorrow to forget.

   Hearken how they cry, âO happy, happy ye that ye were born
   In the sad slow nightâs departing, in the rising of the morn.

   âFair the crown the Cause hath for you, well to die or well to live
   Through the battle, through the tangle, peace to gain or peace to
   give.â

   Ah, it may be!  Oft meseemeth, in the days that yet shall be,
   When no slave of gold abideth âtwixt the breadth of sea to sea,

   Oft, when men and maids are merry, ere the sunlight leaves the earth,
   And they bless the day belovÃ«d, all too short for all their mirth,

   Some shall pause awhile and ponder on the bitter days of old,
   Ere the toil of strife and battle overthrew the curse of gold;

   Then âtwixt lips of loved and lover solemn thoughts of us shall rise;
   We who once were fools and dreamers, then shall be the brave and wise.

   There amidst the world new-builded shall our earthly deeds abide,
   Though our names be all forgotten, and the tale of how we died.

   Life or death then, who shall heed it, what we gain or what we lose?
   Fair flies life amid the struggle, and the Cause for each shall
   choose.

   Hear a word, a word in season, for the day is drawing nigh,
   When the Cause shall call upon us, some to live and some to die!




NO MASTER.


                       (AIR: âThe Hardy Norseman.â)

                                   âoâ

   SAITH man to man, Weâve heard and known
      That we no master need
   To live upon this earth, our own,
      In fair and manly deed.
   The grief of slaves long passed away
      For us hath forged the chain,
   Till now each workerâs patient day
      Builds up the House of Pain.

   And we, shall we too, crouch and quail,
      Ashamed, afraid of strife,
   And lest our lives untimely fail
      Embrace the Death in Life?
   Nay, cry aloud, and have no fear,
      We few against the world;
   Awake, arise! the hope we bear
      Against the curse is hurled.

   It grows and growsâare we the same,
      The feeble band, the few?
   Or what are these with eyes aflame,
      And hands to deal and do?
   This is the host that bears the word,
      âNO MASTER HIGH OR LOWââ
   A lightning flame, a shearing sword,
      A storm to overthrow.




THE MARCH OF THE WORKERS.


                           (AIR: âJohn Brown.â)

   WHAT is this, the sound and rumour?  What is this that all men hear,
   Like the wind in hollow valleys when the storm is drawing near,
   Like the rolling on of ocean in the eventide of fear?
               âTis the people marching on.

   Whither go they, and whence come they?  What are these of whom ye
   tell?
   In what country are they dwelling âtwixt the gates of heaven and hell?
   Are they mine or thine for money?  Will they serve a master well?
               Still the rumourâs marching on.

         Hark the rolling of the thunder!
         Lo the sun! and lo thereunder
         Riseth wrath, and hope, and wonder,
               And the host comes marching on.

   Forth they come from grief and torment; on they wend toward health and
   mirth,
   All the wide world is their dwelling, every corner of the earth.
   Buy them, sell them for thy service!  Try the bargain what âtis worth,
               For the days are marching on.

   These are they who build thy houses, weave thy raiment, win thy wheat,
   Smooth the rugged, fill the barren, turn the bitter into sweet,
   All for thee this dayâand ever.  What reward for them is meet?
               Till the host comes marching on.

         Hark the rolling, etc.

   Many a hundred years passed over have they laboured deaf and blind;
   Never tidings reached their sorrow, never hope their toil might find.
   Now at last theyâve heard and hear it, and the cry comes down the
   wind,
               And their feet are marching on.

   O ye rich men hear and tremble! for with words the sound is rife:
   âOnce for you and death we laboured; changed henceforward is the
   strife.
   We are men, and we shall battle for the world of men and life;
               And our host is marching on.â

         Hark the rolling, etc.

   âIs it war, then?  Will ye perish as the dry wood in the fire?
   Is it peace?  Then be ye of us, let your hope be our desire.
   Come and live! for life awaketh, and the world shall never tire;
               And hope is marching on.â

   âOn we march then, we the workers, and the rumour that ye hear
   Is the blended sound of battle and delivârance drawing near;
   For the hope of every creature is the banner that we bear,
               And the world is marching on.â

         Hark the rolling of the thunder!
         Lo the sun! and lo thereunder
         Riseth wrath, and hope, and wonder,
               And the host comes marching on.




THE MESSAGE OF THE MARCH WIND.


   FAIR now is the springtide, now earth lies beholding
      With the eyes of a lover, the face of the sun;
   Long lasteth the daylight, and hope is enfolding
      The green-growing acres with increase begun.

   Now sweet, sweet it is through the land to be straying
      âMid the birds and the blossoms and the beasts of the field;
   Love mingles with love, and no evil is weighing
      On thy heart or mine, where all sorrow is healed.

   From township to township, oâer down and by tillage
      Far, far have we wandered and long was the day,
   But now cometh eve at the end of the village,
      Where over the grey wall the church riseth grey.

   There is wind in the twilight; in the white road before us
      The straw from the ox-yard is blowing about;
   The moonâs rim is rising, a star glitters oâer us,
      And the vane on the spire-top is swinging in doubt.

   Down there dips the highway, toward the bridge crossing over
      The brook that runs on to the Thames and the sea.
   Draw closer, my sweet, we are lover and lover;
      This eve art thou given to gladness and me.

   Shall we be glad always?  Come closer and hearken:
      Three fields further on, as they told me down there,
   When the young moon has set, if the March sky should darken,
      We might see from the hill-top the great cityâs glare.

   Hark, the wind in the elm-boughs!  From London it bloweth,
      And telleth of gold, and of hope and unrest;
   Of power that helps not; of wisdom that knoweth,
      But teacheth not aught of the worst and the best.

   Of the rich men it telleth, and strange is the story
      How they have, and they hanker, and grip far and wide;
   And they live and they die, and the earth and its glory
      Has been but a burden they scarce might abide.

   Hark! the March wind again of a people is telling;
      Of the life that they live there, so haggard and grim,
   That if we and our love amidst them had been dwelling
      My fondness had faltered, thy beauty grown dim.

   This land we have loved in our love and our leisure
      For them hangs in heaven, high out of their reach;
   The wide hills oâer the sea-plain for them have no pleasure,
      The grey homes of their fathers no story to teach.

   The singers have sung and the builders have builded,
      The painters have fashioned their tales of delight;
   For what and for whom hath the worldâs book been gilded,
      When all is for these but the blackness of night?

   How long, and for what is their patience abiding?
      How oft and how oft shall their story be told,
   While the hope that none seeketh in darkness is hiding,
      And in grief and in sorrow the world groweth old?

                                * * * * *

   Come back to the inn, love, and the lights and the fire,
      And the fiddlerâs old tune and the shuffling of feet;
   For there in a while shall be rest and desire,
      And there shall the morrowâs uprising be sweet.

   Yet, love, as we wend, the wind bloweth behind us,
      And beareth the last tale it telleth to-night,
   How here in the spring-tide the message shall find us;
      For the hope that none seeketh is coming to light.

   Like the seed of midwinter, unheeded, unperished,
      Like the autumn-sown wheat âneath the snow lying green,
   Like the love that oâertook us, unawares and uncherished,
      Like the babe âneath thy girdle that groweth unseen.

   So the hope of the people now buddeth and growethâ
      Rest fadeth before it, and blindness and fear;
   It biddeth us learn all the wisdom it knoweth;
      It hath found us and held us, and biddeth us hear:

   For it beareth the message: âRise up on the morrow
      And go on your ways toward the doubt and the strife;
   Join hope to our hope and blend sorrow with sorrow,
      And seek for menâs love in the short days of life.â

   But lo, the old inn, and the lights, and the fire,
      And the fiddlerâs old tune and the shuffling of feet;
   Soon for us shall be quiet and rest and desire,
      And to-morrowâs uprising to deeds shall be sweet.




DOWN AMONG THE DEAD MEN.


   COME, comrades, come, your glasses clink;
   Up with your hands a health to drink,
   The health of all that workers be,
   In every land, on every sea.
            And he that will this health deny,
            Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
            Down, down, down, down,
            Down among the dead men let him lie!

   Well done! now drink another toast,
   And pledge the gathâring of the host,
   The people armed in brain and hand,
   To claim their rights in every land.
            And he that will, etc.

   Thereâs liquor left; come, letâs be kind,
   And drink the rich a better mind,
   That when we knock upon the door,
   They may be off and say no more.
            And he that will, etc.

   Now, comrades, let the glass blush red,
   Drink we the unforgotten dead
   That did their deeds and went away,
   Before the bright sun brought the day.
            And he that will, etc.

   The Day?  Ah, friends, late grows the night;
   Drink to the glimmering spark of light,
   The herald of the joy to be,
   The battle-torch of thee and me!
            And he that will, etc.

   Take yet another cup in hand
   And drink in hope our little band;
   Drink strife in hope while lasteth breath,
   And brotherhood in life and death;
            And he that will, etc.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHANTS FOR SOCIALISTS***


******* This file should be named 3170-0.txt or 3170-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/1/7/3170


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Earthly Paradise, by William Morris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Earthly Paradise
       A Poem

Author: William Morris

Release Date: October 25, 2009 [EBook #30332]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EARTHLY PARADISE ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Henry Craig, Stephanie Eason,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.









  THE
  EARTHLY PARADISE

  A POEM.

  BY

  WILLIAM MORRIS
  Author of the Life and Death of Jason.

  Part II.

  _ELEVENTH IMPRESSION_

  LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
  39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
  NEW YORK AND BOMBAY
  1903




CONTENTS.

                                          PAGE

_MAY_                                        2

  _The Story of Cupid and Psyche_            5

  _The Writing on the Image_                98

_JUNE_                                     112

  _The Love of Alcestis_                   114

  _The Lady of the Land_                   164

_JULY_                                     186

  _The Son of Croesus_                     188

  _The Watching of the Falcon_             210

_AUGUST_                                   244

  _Pygmalion and the Image_                246

  _Ogier the Dane_                         275




THE EARTHLY PARADISE.

MAY, JUNE, JULY, AUGUST.




MAY.


    O love, this morn when the sweet nightingale
  Had so long finished all he had to say,
  That thou hadst slept, and sleep had told his tale;
  And midst a peaceful dream had stolen away
  In fragrant dawning of the first of May,
  Didst thou see aught? didst thou hear voices sing
  Ere to the risen sun the bells 'gan ring?

    For then methought the Lord of Love went by
  To take possession of his flowery throne,
  Ringed round with maids, and youths, and minstrelsy;
  A little while I sighed to find him gone,
  A little while the dawning was alone,
  And the light gathered; then I held my breath,
  And shuddered at the sight of Eld and Death.

    Alas! Love passed me in the twilight dun,
  His music hushed the wakening ousel's song;
  But on these twain shone out the golden sun,
  And o'er their heads the brown bird's tune was strong,
  As shivering, twixt the trees they stole along;
  None noted aught their noiseless passing by,
  The world had quite forgotten it must die.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now must these men be glad a little while
  That they had lived to see May once more smile
  Upon the earth; wherefore, as men who know
  How fast the bad days and the good days go,
  They gathered at the feast: the fair abode
  Wherein they sat, o'erlooked, across the road
  Unhedged green meads, which willowy streams passed through,
  And on that morn, before the fresh May dew
  Had dried upon the sunniest spot of grass,
  From bush to bush did youths and maidens pass
  In raiment meet for May apparelled,
  Gathering the milk-white blossoms and the red;
  And now, with noon long past, and that bright day
  Growing aweary, on the sunny way
  They wandered, crowned with flowers, and loitering,
  And weary, yet were fresh enough to sing
  The carols of the morn, and pensive, still
  Had cast away their doubt of death and ill,
  And flushed with love, no more grew red with shame.

    So to the elders as they sat, there came,
  With scent of flowers, the murmur of that folk
  Wherethrough from time to time a song outbroke,
  Till scarce they thought about the story due;
  Yet, when anigh to sun-setting it grew,
  A book upon the board an elder laid,
  And turning from the open window said,
  "Too fair a tale the lovely time doth ask,
  For this of mine to be an easy task,
  Yet in what words soever this is writ,
  As for the matter, I dare say of it
  That it is lovely as the lovely May;
  Pass then the manner, since the learned say
  No written record was there of the tale,
  Ere we from our fair land of Greece set sail;
  How this may be I know not, this I know
  That such-like tales the wind would seem to blow
  From place to place, e'en as the feathery seed
  Is borne across the sea to help the need
  Of barren isles; so, sirs, from seed thus sown,
  This flower, a gift from other lands has grown.




THE STORY OF CUPID AND PSYCHE.

ARGUMENT.

Psyche, a king's daughter, by her exceeding beauty caused the people to
    forget Venus; therefore the goddess would fain have destroyed her:
    nevertheless she became the bride of Love, yet in an unhappy moment
    lost him by her own fault, and wandering through the world suffered
    many evils at the hands of Venus, for whom she must accomplish fearful
    tasks. But the gods and all nature helped her, and in process of time
    she was reunited to Love, forgiven by Venus, and made immortal by the
    Father of gods and men.


  In the Greek land of old there was a King
  Happy in battle, rich in everything;
  Most rich in this, that he a daughter had
  Whose beauty made the longing city glad.
  She was so fair, that strangers from the sea
  Just landed, in the temples thought that she
  Was Venus visible to mortal eyes,
  New come from Cyprus for a world's surprise.
  She was so beautiful that had she stood
  On windy Ida by the oaken wood,
  And bared her limbs to that bold shepherd's gaze,
  Troy might have stood till now with happy days;
  And those three fairest, all have left the land
  And left her with the apple in her hand.

    And Psyche is her name in stories old,
  As ever by our fathers we were told.

    All this beheld Queen Venus from her throne,
  And felt that she no longer was alone
  In beauty, but, if only for a while,
  This maiden matched her god-enticing smile;
  Therefore, she wrought in such a wise, that she,
  If honoured as a goddess, certainly
  Was dreaded as a goddess none the less,
  And midst her wealth, dwelt long in loneliness.
    Two sisters had she, and men deemed them fair,
  But as King's daughters might be anywhere,
  And these to men of name and great estate
  Were wedded, while at home must Psyche wait.
  The sons of kings before her silver feet
  Still bowed, and sighed for her; in measures sweet
  The minstrels to the people sung her praise,
  Yet must she live a virgin all her days.

    So to Apollo's fane her father sent,
  Seeking to know the dreadful Gods' intent,
  And therewith sent he goodly gifts of price
  A silken veil, wrought with a paradise,
  Three golden bowls, set round with many a gem,
  Three silver robes, with gold in every hem,
  And a fair ivory image of the god
  That underfoot a golden serpent trod;
  And when three lords with these were gone away,
  Nor could return until the fortieth day,
  Ill was the King at ease, and neither took
  Joy in the chase, or in the pictured book
  The skilled Athenian limner had just wrought,
  Nor in the golden cloths from India brought.
    At last the day came for those lords' return,
  And then 'twixt hope and fear the King did burn,
  As on his throne with great pomp he was set,
  And by him Psyche, knowing not as yet
  Why they had gone: thus waiting, at noontide
  They in the palace heard a voice outside,
  And soon the messengers came hurrying,
  And with pale faces knelt before the King,
  And rent their clothes, and each man on his head
  Cast dust, the while a trembling courtier read
  This scroll, wherein the fearful answer lay,
  Whereat from every face joy passed away.


THE ORACLE.

    O father of a most unhappy maid,
  O King, whom all the world henceforth shall know
  As wretched among wretches, be afraid
  To ask the gods thy misery to show,
  But if thou needs must hear it, to thy woe
  Take back thy gifts to feast thine eyes upon,
  When thine own flesh and blood some beast hath won.

    "For hear thy doom, a rugged rock there is
  Set back a league from thine own palace fair,
  There leave the maid, that she may wait the kiss
  Of the fell monster that doth harbour there:
  This is the mate for whom her yellow hair
  And tender limbs have been so fashioned,
  This is the pillow for her lovely head.

    "O what an evil from thy loins shall spring,
  For all the world this monster overturns,
  He is the bane of every mortal thing,
  And this world ruined, still for more he yearns;
  A fire there goeth from his mouth that burns
  Worse than the flame of Phlegethon the red--
  To such a monster shall thy maid be wed.

    "And if thou sparest now to do this thing,
  I will destroy thee and thy land also,
  And of dead corpses shalt thou be the King,
  And stumbling through the dark land shalt thou go,
  Howling for second death to end thy woe;
  Live therefore as thou mayst and do my will,
  And be a King that men may envy still."

    What man was there, whose face changed not for grief
  At hearing this? Psyche, shrunk like the leaf
  The autumn frost first touches on the tree,
  Stared round about with eyes that could not see,
  And muttered sounds from lips that said no word,
  And still within her ears the sentence heard
  When all was said and silence fell on all
  'Twixt marble columns and adorned wall.
    Then spoke the King, bowed down with misery:
  "What help is left! O daughter, let us die,
  Or else together fleeing from this land,
  From town to town go wandering hand in hand
  Thou and I, daughter, till all men forget
  That ever on a throne I have been set,
  And then, when houseless and disconsolate,
  We ask an alms before some city gate,
  The gods perchance a little gift may give,
  And suffer thee and me like beasts to live."
    Then answered Psyche, through her bitter tears,
  "Alas! my father, I have known these years
  That with some woe the gods have dowered me,
  And weighed 'gainst riches infelicity;
  Ill is it then against the gods to strive;
  Live on, O father, those that are alive
  May still be happy; would it profit me
  To live awhile, and ere I died to see
  Thee perish, and all folk who love me well,
  And then at last be dragged myself to hell
  Cursed of all men? nay, since all things must die,
  And I have dreamed not of eternity,
  Why weepest thou that I must die to-day?
  Why weepest thou? cast thought of shame away.
  The dead are not ashamed, they feel no pain;
  I have heard folk who spoke of death as gain--
  And yet--ah, God, if I had been some maid,
  Toiling all day, and in the night-time laid
  Asleep on rushes--had I only died
  Before this sweet life I had fully tried,
  Upon that day when for my birth men sung,
  And o'er the feasting folk the sweet bells rung."

    And therewith she arose and gat away,
  And in her chamber, mourning long she lay,
  Thinking of all the days that might have been,
  And how that she was born to be a queen,
  The prize of some great conqueror of renown,
  The joy of many a country and fair town,
  The high desire of every prince and lord,
  One who could fright with careless smile or word
  The hearts of heroes fearless in the war,
  The glory of the world, the leading-star
  Unto all honour and all earthly fame--
  --Round goes the wheel, and death and deadly shame
  Shall be her lot, while yet of her men sing
  Unwitting that the gods have done this thing.
  Long time she lay there, while the sunbeams moved
  Over her body through the flowers she loved;
  And in the eaves the sparrows chirped outside,
  Until for weariness she grew dry-eyed,
  And into an unhappy sleep she fell.

    But of the luckless King now must we tell,
  Who sat devising means to 'scape that shame,
  Until the frightened people thronging came
  About the palace, and drove back the guards,
  Making their way past all the gates and wards;
  And, putting chamberlains and marshals by,
  Surged round the very throne tumultuously.
  Then knew the wretched King all folk had heard
  The miserable sentence, and the word
  The gods had spoken; and from out his seat
  He rose, and spoke in humble words, unmeet
  For a great King, and prayed them give him grace,
  While 'twixt his words the tears ran down his face
  On to his raiment stiff with golden thread.
    But little heeded they the words he said,
  For very fear had made them pitiless;
  Nor cared they for the maid and her distress,
  But clashed their spears together and 'gan cry:
  "For one man's daughter shall the people die,
  And this fair land become an empty name,
  Because thou art afraid to meet the shame
  Wherewith the gods reward thy hidden sin?
  Nay, by their glory do us right herein!"
    "Ye are in haste to have a poor maid slain,"
  The King said; "but my will herein is vain,
  For ye are many, I one aged man:
  Let one man speak, if for his shame he can."
    Then stepped a sturdy dyer forth, who said,--
  "Fear of the gods brings no shame, by my head.
  Listen; thy daughter we would have thee leave
  Upon the fated mountain this same eve;
  And thither must she go right well arrayed
  In marriage raiment, loose hair as a maid,
  And saffron veil, and with her shall there go
  Fair maidens bearing torches, two and two;
  And minstrels, in such raiment as is meet
  The god-ordainéd fearful spouse to greet.
  So shalt thou save our wives and little ones,
  And something better than a heap of stones,
  Dwelt in by noisesome things, this town shall be,
  And thou thyself shalt keep thy sovereignty;
  But if thou wilt not do the thing I say,
  Then shalt thou live in bonds from this same day,
  And we will bear thy maid unto the hill,
  And from the dread gods save the city still."
    Then loud they shouted at the words he said,
  And round the head of the unhappy maid,
  Dreaming uneasily of long-past joys,
  Floated the echo of that dreadful noise,
  And changed her dreams to dreams of misery.
  But when the King knew that the thing must be,
  And that no help there was in this distress,
  He bade them have all things in readiness
  To take the maiden out at sun-setting,
  And wed her to the unknown dreadful thing.
  So through the palace passed with heavy cheer
  Her women gathering the sad wedding gear,
  Who lingering long, yet at the last must go,
  To waken Psyche to her bitter woe.
  So coming to her bower, they found her there,
  From head to foot rolled in her yellow hair,
  As in the saffron veil she should be soon
  Betwixt the setting sun and rising moon;
  But when above her a pale maiden bent
  And touched her, from her heart a sigh she sent,
  And waking, on their woeful faces stared,
  Sitting upright, with one white shoulder bared
  By writhing on the bed in wretchedness.
  Then suddenly remembering her distress,
  She bowed her head and 'gan to weep and wail
  But let them wrap her in the bridal veil,
  And bind the sandals to her silver feet,
  And set the rose-wreath on her tresses sweet:
  But spoke no word, yea, rather, wearily
  Turned from the yearning face and pitying eye
  Of any maid who seemed about to speak.
    Now through the garden trees the sun 'gan break,
  And that inevitable time drew near;
  Then through the courts, grown cruel, strange, and drear,
  Since the bright morn, they led her to the gate.
  Where she beheld a golden litter wait.
  Whereby the King stood, aged and bent to earth,
  The flute-players with faces void of mirth,
  The down-cast bearers of the ivory wands,
  The maiden torch-bearers' unhappy bands.

    So then was Psyche taken to the hill,
  And through the town the streets were void and still;
  For in their houses all the people stayed,
  Of that most mournful music sore afraid.
  But on the way a marvel did they see,
  For, passing by, where wrought of ivory,
  There stood the Goddess of the flowery isle,
  All folk could see the carven image smile.
    But when anigh the hill's bare top they came,
  Where Psyche must be left to meet her shame,
  They set the litter down, and drew aside
  The golden curtains from the wretched bride,
  Who at their bidding rose and with them went
  Afoot amidst her maids with head down-bent,
  Until they came unto the drear rock's brow;
  And there she stood apart, not weeping now,
  But pale as privet blossom is in June.
  There as the quivering flutes left off their tune,
  In trembling arms the weeping, haggard King
  Caught Psyche, who, like some half-lifeless thing,
  Took all his kisses, and no word could say,
  Until at last perforce he turned away;
  Because the longest agony has end,
  And homeward through the twilight did they wend.

    But Psyche, now faint and bewildered,
  Remembered little of her pain and dread;
  Her doom drawn nigh took all her fear away,
  And left her faint and weary; as they say
  It haps to one who 'neath a lion lies,
  Who stunned and helpless feels not ere he dies
  The horror of the yellow fell, the red
  Hot mouth, and white teeth gleaming o'er his head;
  So Psyche felt, as sinking on the ground
  She cast one weary vacant look around,
  And at the ending of that wretched day
  Swooning beneath the risen moon she lay.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Now backward must our story go awhile
  And unto Cyprus the fair flowered isle,
  Where hid away from every worshipper
  Was Venus sitting, and her son by her
  Standing to mark what words she had to say,
  While in his dreadful wings the wind did play:
  Frowning she spoke, in plucking from her thigh
  The fragrant flowers that clasped it lovingly.
    "In such a town, O son, a maid there is
  Whom any amorous man this day would kiss
  As gladly as a goddess like to me,
  And though I know an end to this must be,
  When white and red and gold are waxen grey
  Down on the earth, while unto me one day
  Is as another; yet behold, my son,
  And go through all my temples one by one
  And look what incense rises unto me;
  Hearken the talk of sailors from the sea
  Just landed, ever will it be the same,
  'Hast thou then seen her?'--Yea, unto my shame
  Within the temple that is calléd mine,
  As through the veil I watched the altar shine
  This happed; a man with outstretched hand there stood,
  Glittering in arms, of smiling joyous mood,
  With crisp, black hair, and such a face one sees
  But seldom now, and limbs like Hercules;
  But as he stood there in my holy place,
  Across mine image came the maiden's face,
  And when he saw her, straight the warrior said
  Turning about unto an earthly maid,
  'O, lady Venus, thou art kind to me
  After so much of wandering on the sea
  To show thy very body to me here,'
  But when this impious saying I did hear,
  I sent them a great portent, for straightway
  I quenched the fire, and no priest on that day
  Could light it any more for all his prayer.
    "So must she fall, so must her golden hair
  Flash no more through the city, or her feet
  Be seen like lilies moving down the street;
  No more must men watch her soft raiment cling
  About her limbs, no more must minstrels sing
  The praises of her arms and hidden breast.
  And thou it is, my son, must give me rest
  From all this worship wearisomely paid
  Unto a mortal who should be afraid
  To match the gods in beauty; take thy bow
  And dreadful arrows, and about her sow
  The seeds of folly, and with such an one
  I pray thee cause her mingle, fair my son,
  That not the poorest peasant girl in Greece
  Would look on for the gift of Jason's fleece.
  Do this, and see thy mother glad again,
  And free from insult, in her temples reign
  Over the hearts of lovers in the spring."

    "Mother," he said, "thou askest no great thing,
  Some wretch too bad for death I soon shall find,
  Who round her perfect neck his arms shall wind.
  She shall be driven from the palace gate
  Where once her crowd of worshippers would wait
  From earliest morning till the dew was dry
  On chance of seeing her gold gown glancing by;
  There through the storm of curses shall she go
  In evil raiment midst the winter snow,
  Or in the summer in rough sheepskins clad.
  And thus, O mother, shall I make thee glad
  Remembering all the honour thou hast brought
  Unto mine altars; since as thine own thought
  My thought is grown, my mind as thy dear mind."

    Then straight he rose from earth and down the wind
  Went glittering 'twixt the blue sky and the sea,
  And so unto the place came presently
  Where Psyche dwelt, and through the gardens fair
  Passed seeking her, and as he wandered there
  Had still no thought but to do all her will,
  Nor cared to think if it were good or ill:
  So beautiful and pitiless he went,
  And toward him still the blossomed fruit-trees leant,
  And after him the wind crept murmuring,
  And on the boughs the birds forgot to sing.

    Withal at last amidst a fair green close,
  Hedged round about with woodbine and red rose,
  Within the flicker of a white-thorn shade
  In gentle sleep he found the maiden laid
  One hand that held a book had fallen away
  Across her body, and the other lay
  Upon a marble fountain's plashing rim,
  Among whose broken waves the fish showed dim,
  But yet its wide-flung spray now woke her not,
  Because the summer day at noon was hot,
  And all sweet sounds and scents were lulling her.
    So soon the rustle of his wings 'gan stir
  Her looser folds of raiment, and the hair
  Spread wide upon the grass and daisies fair,
  As Love cast down his eyes with a half smile
  Godlike and cruel; that faded in a while,
  And long he stood above her hidden eyes
  With red lips parted in a god's surprise.

    Then very Love knelt down beside the maid
  And on her breast a hand unfelt he laid,
  And drew the gown from off her dainty feet,
  And set his fair cheek to her shoulder sweet,
  And kissed her lips that knew of no love yet,
  And wondered if his heart would e'er forget
  The perfect arm that o'er her body lay.

    But now by chance a damsel came that way,
  One of her ladies, and saw not the god,
  Yet on his shafts cast down had well-nigh trod
  In wakening Psyche, who rose up in haste
  And girded up her gown about her waist,
  And with that maid went drowsily away.

    From place to place Love followed her that day
  And ever fairer to his eyes she grew,
  So that at last when from her bower he flew,
  And underneath his feet the moonlit sea
  Went shepherding his waves disorderly,
  He swore that of all gods and men, no one
  Should hold her in his arms but he alone;
  That she should dwell with him in glorious wise
  Like to a goddess in some paradise;
  Yea, he would get from Father Jove this grace
  That she should never die, but her sweet face
  And wonderful fair body should endure
  Till the foundations of the mountains sure
  Were molten in the sea; so utterly
  Did he forget his mother's cruelty.

    And now that he might come to this fair end,
  He found Apollo, and besought him lend
  His throne of divination for a while,
  Whereby he did the priestess there beguile,
  To give the cruel answer ye have heard
  Unto those lords, who wrote it word by word,
  And back unto the King its threatenings bore,
  Whereof there came that grief and mourning sore,
  Of which ye wot; thereby is Psyche laid
  Upon the mountain-top; thereby, afraid
  Of some ill yet, within the city fair
  Cower down the people that have sent her there.

    Withal did Love call unto him the Wind
  Called Zephyrus, who most was to his mind,
  And said, "O rainy wooer of the spring,
  I pray thee, do for me an easy thing;
  To such a hill-top go, O gentle Wind,
  And there a sleeping maiden shalt thou find;
  Her perfect body in thine arms with care
  Take up, and unto the green valley bear
  That lies before my noble house of gold;
  There leave her lying on the daisies cold."
    Then, smiling, toward the place the fair Wind went
  While 'neath his wing the sleeping lilies bent,
  And flying 'twixt the green earth and the sea
  Made the huge anchored ships dance merrily,
  And swung round from the east the gilded vanes
  On many a palace, and from unhorsed wains
  Twitched off the wheat-straw in his hurried flight;
  But ere much time had passed he came in sight
  Of Psyche laid in swoon upon the hill,
  And smiling, set himself to do Love's will;
  For in his arms he took her up with care,
  Wondering to see a mortal made so fair,
  And came into the vale in little space,
  And set her down in the most flowery place;
  And then unto the plains of Thessaly
  Went ruffling up the edges of the sea.

    Now underneath the world the moon was gone,
  But brighter shone the stars so left alone,
  Until a faint green light began to show
  Far in the east, whereby did all men know,
  Who lay awake either with joy or pain,
  That day was coming on their heads again;
  Then widening, soon it spread to grey twilight,
  And in a while with gold the east was bright;
  The birds burst out a-singing one by one,
  And o'er the hill-top rose the mighty sun.
    Therewith did Psyche open wide her eyes,
  And rising on her arm, with great surprise
  Gazed on the flowers wherein so deep she lay,
  And wondered why upon that dawn of day
  Out in the fields she had lift up her head
  Rather than in her balmy gold-hung bed.
  Then, suddenly remembering all her woes,
  She sprang upon her feet, and yet arose
  Within her heart a mingled hope and dread
  Of some new thing: and now she raised her head,
  And gazing round about her timidly,
  A lovely grassy valley could she see,
  That steep grey cliffs upon three sides did bound,
  And under these, a river sweeping round,
  With gleaming curves the valley did embrace,
  And seemed to make an island of that place;
  And all about were dotted leafy trees,
  The elm for shade, the linden for the bees,
  The noble oak, long ready for the steel
  Which in that place it had no fear to feel;
  The pomegranate, the apple, and the pear,
  That fruit and flowers at once made shift to bear,
  Nor yet decayed therefor, and in them hung
  Bright birds that elsewhere sing not, but here sung
  As sweetly as the small brown nightingales
  Within the wooded, deep Laconian vales.
    But right across the vale, from side to side,
  A high white wall all further view did hide,
  But that above it, vane and pinnacle
  Rose up, of some great house beyond to tell,
  And still betwixt these, mountains far away
  Against the sky rose shadowy, cold, and grey.

    She, standing in the yellow morning sun,
  Could scarcely think her happy life was done,
  Or that the place was made for misery;
  Yea, some lone heaven it rather seemed to be,
  Which for the coming band of gods did wait;
  Hope touched her heart; no longer desolate,
  Deserted of all creatures did she feel,
  And o'er her face sweet colour 'gan to steal,
  That deepened to a flush, as wandering thought
  Desires before unknown unto her brought,
  So mighty was the God, though far away.
    But trembling midst her hope, she took her way
  Unto a little door midmost the wall,
  And still on odorous flowers her feet did fall,
  And round about her did the strange birds sing,
  Praising her beauty in their carolling.
  Thus coming to the door, when now her hand
  First touched the lock, in doubt she needs must stand,
  And to herself she said, "Lo, here the trap!
  And yet, alas! whatever now may hap,
  How can I 'scape the ill which waiteth me?
  Let me die now!" and herewith, tremblingly,
  She raised the latch, and her sweet sinless eyes
  Beheld a garden like a paradise,
  Void of mankind, fairer than words can say,
  Wherein did joyous harmless creatures play
  After their kind, and all amidst the trees
  Were strange-wrought founts and wondrous images;
  And glimmering 'twixt the boughs could she behold
  A house made beautiful with beaten gold,
  Whose open doors in the bright sun did gleam;
  Lonely, but not deserted did it seem.
    Long time she stood debating what to do,
  But at the last she passed the wicket through,
  Which, shutting clamorously behind her, sent
  A pang of fear throughout her as she went;
  But when through all that green place she had passed
  And by the palace porch she stood at last,
  And saw how wonderfully the wall was wrought,
  With curious stones from far-off countries brought,
  And many an image and fair history
  Of what the world has been, and yet shall be,
  And all set round with golden craftsmanship,
  Well-wrought as some renowned cup's royal lip,
  She had a thought again to turn aside:
  And yet again, not knowing where to bide,
  She entered softly, and with trembling hands
  Holding her gown; the wonder of all lands
  Met there the wonders of the land and sea.

    Now went she through the chambers tremblingly,
  And oft in going would she pause and stand,
  And drop the gathered raiment from her hand,
  Stilling the beating of her heart for fear
  As voices whispering low she seemed to hear,
  But then again the wind it seemed to be
  Moving the golden hangings doubtfully,
  Or some bewildered swallow passing close
  Unto the pane, or some wind-beaten rose.
    Soon seeing that no evil thing came near,
  A little she began to lose her fear,
  And gaze upon the wonders of the place,
  And in the silver mirrors saw her face
  Grown strange to her amidst that loneliness,
  And stooped to feel the web her feet did press,
  Wrought by the brown slim-fingered Indian's toil
  Amidst the years of war and vain turmoil;
  Or she the figures of the hangings felt,
  Or daintily the unknown blossoms smelt,
  Or stood and pondered what new thing might mean
  The images of knight and king and queen
  Wherewith the walls were pictured here and there,
  Or touched rich vessels with her fingers fair,
  And o'er her delicate smooth cheek would pass
  The long-fixed bubbles of strange works of glass:
  So wandered she amidst these marvels new
  Until anigh the noontide now it grew.
    At last she came unto a chamber cool
  Paved cunningly in manner of a pool,
  Where red fish seemed to swim through floating weed
  And at the first she thought it so indeed,
  And took the sandals quickly from her feet,
  But when the glassy floor these did but meet
  The shadow of a long-forgotten smile
  Her anxious face a moment did beguile;
  And crossing o'er, she found a table spread
  With dainty food, as delicate white bread
  And fruits piled up and covered savoury meat,
  As though a king were coming there to eat,
  For the worst vessel was of beaten gold.
    Now when these dainties Psyche did behold
  She fain had eaten, but did nowise dare,
  Thinking she saw a god's feast lying there.
  But as she turned to go the way she came
  She heard a low soft voice call out her name,
  Then she stood still, and trembling gazed around,
  And seeing no man, nigh sank upon the ground,
  Then through the empty air she heard the voice.

    "O, lovely one, fear not! rather rejoice
  That thou art come unto thy sovereignty:
  Sit now and eat, this feast is but for thee,
  Yea, do whatso thou wilt with all things here,
  And in thine own house cast away thy fear,
  For all is thine, and little things are these
  So loved a heart as thine, awhile to please.
    "Be patient! thou art loved by such an one
  As will not leave thee mourning here alone,
  But rather cometh on this very night;
  And though he needs must hide him from thy sight
  Yet all his words of love thou well mayst hear,
  And pour thy woes into no careless ear.
    "Bethink thee then, with what solemnity
  Thy folk, thy father, did deliver thee
  To him who loves thee thus, and void of dread
  Remember, sweet, thou art a bride new-wed."

    Now hearing this, did Psyche, trembling sore
  And yet with lighter heart than heretofore,
  Sit down and eat, till she grew scarce afeard;
  And nothing but the summer noise she heard
  Within the garden, then, her meal being done,
  Within the window-seat she watched the sun
  Changing the garden-shadows, till she grew
  Fearless and happy, since she deemed she knew
  The worst that could befall, while still the best
  Shone a fair star far off: and mid the rest
  This brought her after all her grief and fear,
  She said, "How sweet it would be, could I hear,
  Soft music mate the drowsy afternoon,
  And drown awhile the bees' sad murmuring tune
  Within these flowering limes." E'en as she spoke,
  A sweet-voiced choir of unknown unseen folk
  Singing to words that match the sense of these
  Hushed the faint music of the linden trees.


SONG.

    O pensive, tender maid, downcast and shy,
  Who turnest pale e'en at the name of love,
  And with flushed face must pass the elm-tree by
  Ashamed to hear the passionate grey dove
  Moan to his mate, thee too the god shall move,
  Thee too the maidens shall ungird one day,
  And with thy girdle put thy shame away.

    What then, and shall white winter ne'er be done
  Because the glittering frosty morn is fair?
  Because against the early-setting sun
  Bright show the gilded boughs though waste and bare?
  Because the robin singeth free from care?
  Ah! these are memories of a better day
  When on earth's face the lips of summer lay.

    Come then, beloved one, for such as thee
  Love loveth, and their hearts he knoweth well,
  Who hoard their moments of felicity,
  As misers hoard the medals that they tell,
  Lest on the earth but paupers they should dwell:
  "We hide our love to bless another day;
  The world is hard, youth passes quick," they say.

    Ah, little ones, but if ye could forget
  Amidst your outpoured love that you must die,
  Then ye, my servants, were death's conquerors yet,
  And love to you should be eternity
  How quick soever might the days go by:
  Yes, ye are made immortal on the day
  Ye cease the dusty grains of time to weigh.

    Thou hearkenest, love? O, make no semblance then
  That thou art loved, but as thy custom is
  Turn thy grey eyes away from eyes of men,
  With hands down-dropped, that tremble with thy bliss,
  With hidden eyes, take thy first lover's kiss;
  Call this eternity which is to-day,
  Nor dream that this our love can pass away.

    They ceased, and Psyche pondering o'er their song,
  Not fearing now that aught would do her wrong,
  About the chambers wandered at her will,
  And on the many marvels gazed her fill,
  Where'er she passed still noting everything,
  Then in the gardens heard the new birds sing
  And watched the red fish in the fountains play,
  And at the very faintest time of day
  Upon the grass lay sleeping for a while
  Midst heaven-sent dreams of bliss that made her smile;
  And when she woke the shades were lengthening,
  So to the place where she had heard them sing
  She came again, and through a little door
  Entered a chamber with a marble floor,
  Open a-top unto the outer air,
  Beneath which lay a bath of water fair,
  Paved with strange stones and figures of bright gold,
  And from the steps thereof could she behold
  The slim-leaved trees against the evening sky
  Golden and calm, still moving languidly.
    So for a time upon the brink she sat,
  Debating in her mind of this and that,
  And then arose and slowly from her cast
  Her raiment, and adown the steps she passed
  Into the water, and therein she played,
  Till of herself at last she grew afraid,
  And of the broken image of her face,
  And the loud splashing in that lonely place.
  So from the bath she gat her quietly,
  And clad herself in whatso haste might be;
  And when at last she was apparelled
  Unto a chamber came, where was a bed
  Of gold and ivory, and precious wood
  Some island bears where never man has stood;
  And round about hung curtains of delight,
  Wherein were interwoven Day and Night
  Joined by the hands of Love, and round their wings
  Knots of fair flowers no earthly May-time brings.
  Strange for its beauty was the coverlet,
  With birds and beasts and flowers wrought over it;
  And every cloth was made in daintier wise
  Than any man on earth could well devise:
  Yea, there such beauty was in everything,
  That she, the daughter of a mighty king,
  Felt strange therein, and trembled lest that she,
  Deceived by dreams, had wandered heedlessly
  Into a bower for some fair goddess made.
  Yet if perchance some man had thither strayed,
  It had been long ere he had noted aught
  But her sweet face, made pensive by the thought
  Of all the wonders that she moved in there.
    But looking round, upon a table fair
  She saw a book wherein old tales were writ,
  And by the window sat, to read in it
  Until the dusk had melted into night,
  When waxen tapers did her servants light
  With unseen hands, until it grew like day.
    And so at last upon the bed she lay,
  And slept a dreamless sleep for weariness,
  Forgetting all the wonder and distress.

    But at the dead of night she woke, and heard
  A rustling noise, and grew right sore afeard,
  Yea, could not move a finger for affright;
  And all was darker now than darkest night.

    Withal a voice close by her did she hear.
  "Alas, my love! why tremblest thou with fear,
  While I am trembling with new happiness?
  Forgive me, sweet, thy terror and distress:
  Not otherwise could this our meeting be.
  O loveliest! such bliss awaiteth thee,
  For all thy trouble and thy shameful tears.
  Such nameless honour, and such happy years,
  As fall not unto women of the earth.
  Loved as thou art, thy short-lived pains are worth
  The glory and the joy unspeakable
  Wherein the Treasure of the World shall dwell:
  A little hope, a little patience yet,
  Ere everything thou wilt, thou may'st forget,
  Or else remember as a well-told tale,
  That for some pensive pleasure may avail.
  Canst thou not love me, then, who wrought thy woe,
  That thou the height and depth of joy mightst know?"

    He spoke, and as upon the bed she lay,
  Trembling amidst new thoughts, he sent a ray
  Of finest love unto her inmost heart,
  Till, murmuring low, she strove the night to part,
  And like a bride who meets her love at last,
  When the long days of yearning are o'erpast,
  She reached to him her perfect arms unseen,
  And said, "O Love, how wretched I have been!
  What hast thou done?" And by her side he lay.
  Till just before the dawning of the day.

         *       *       *       *       *

  The sun was high when Psyche woke again,
    And turning to the place where he had lain
  And seeing no one, doubted of the thing
  That she had dreamed it, till a fair gold ring,
  Unseen before, upon her hand she found,
  And touching her bright head she felt it crowned
  With a bright circlet; then withal she sighed.
  And wondered how the oracle had lied,
  And wished her father knew it, and straightway
  Rose up and clad herself. Slow went the day,
  Though helped with many a solace, till came night;
  And therewithal the new, unseen delight,
  She learned to call her Love.
                                So passed away
  The days and nights, until upon a day
  As in the shade, at noon she lay asleep.
  She dreamed that she beheld her sisters weep,
  And her old father clad in sorry guise,
  Grown foolish with the weight of miseries,
  Her friends black-clad and moving mournfully,
  And folk in wonder landed from the sea,
  At such a fall of such a matchless maid,
  And in some press apart her raiment laid
  Like precious relics, and an empty tomb
  Set in the palace telling of her doom.
    Therefore she wept in sleep, and woke with tears
  Still on her face, and wet hair round her ears,
  And went about unhappily that day,
  Framing a gentle speech wherewith to pray
  For leave to see her sisters once again,
  That they might know her happy, and her pain
  Turned all to joy, and honour come from shame.
    And so at last night and her lover came,
  And midst their fondling, suddenly she said,
  "O Love, a little time we have been wed,
  And yet I ask a boon of thee this night."
    "Psyche," he said, "if my heart tells me right,
  This thy desire may bring us bitter woe,
  For who the shifting chance of fate can know?
  Yet, forasmuch as mortal hearts are weak,
  To-morrow shall my folk thy sisters seek,
  And bear them hither; but before the day
  Is fully ended must they go away.
  And thou--beware--for, fresh and good and true,
  Thou knowest not what worldly hearts may do,
  Or what a curse gold is unto the earth.
  Beware lest from thy full heart, in thy mirth,
  Thou tell'st the story of thy love unseen:
  Thy loving, simple heart, fits not a queen."
    Then by her kisses did she know he frowned,
  But close about him her fair arms she wound,
  Until for happiness he 'gan to smile,
  And in those arms forgat all else awhile.

    So the next day, for joy that they should come,
  Would Psyche further deck her strange new home,
  And even as she 'gan to think the thought,
  Quickly her will by unseen hands was wrought,
  Who came and went like thoughts. Yea, how should I
  Tell of the works of gold and ivory,
  The gems and images, those hands brought there
  The prisoned things of earth, and sea, and air,
  They brought to please their mistress? Many a beast,
  Such as King Bacchus in his reckless feast
  Makes merry with--huge elephants, snow-white
  With gilded tusks, or dusky-grey with bright
  And shining chains about their wrinkled necks;
  The mailed rhinoceros, that of nothing recks;
  Dusky-maned lions; spotted leopards fair
  That through the cane-brake move, unseen as air;
  The deep-mouthed tiger, dread of the brown man;
  The eagle, and the peacock, and the swan--
  --These be the nobles of the birds and beasts.
  But therewithal, for laughter at their feasts,
  They brought them the gods' jesters, such as be
  Quick-chattering apes, that yet in mockery
  Of anxious men wrinkle their ugly brows;
  Strange birds with pouches, birds with beaks like prows
  Of merchant-ships, with tufted crests like threads,
  With unimaginable monstrous heads.
  Lo, such as these, in many a gilded cage
  They brought, or chained for fear of sudden rage.
    Then strewed they scented branches on the floor,
  And hung rose-garlands up by the great door,
  And wafted incense through the bowers and halls,
  And hung up fairer hangings on the walls,
  And filled the baths with water fresh and clear,
  And in the chambers laid apparel fair,
  And spread a table for a royal feast.
    Then when from all these labours they had ceased,
  Psyche they sung to sleep with lullabies;
  Who slept not long, but opening soon her eyes,
  Beheld her sisters on the threshold stand:
  Then did she run to take them by the hand,
  And laid her cheek to theirs, and murmured words
  Of little meaning, like the moan of birds,
  While they bewildered stood and gazed around,
  Like people who in some strange land have found
  One that they thought not of; but she at last
  Stood back, and from her face the strayed locks cast,
  And, smiling through her tears, said, "Ah, that ye
  Should have to weep such useless tears for me!
  Alas, the burden that the city bears
  For nought! O me, my father's burning tears,
  That into all this honour I am come!
  Nay, does he live yet? Is the ancient home
  Still standing? do the galleys throng the quays?
  Do the brown Indians glitter down the ways
  With rubies as of old? Yes, yes, ye smile,
  For ye are thinking, but a little while
  Apart from these has she been dwelling here;
  Truly, yet long enough, loved ones and dear,
  To make me other than I was of old,
  Though now when your dear faces I behold
  Am I myself again. But by what road
  Have ye been brought to this my new abode?"
    "Sister," said one, "I rose up from my bed
  It seems this morn, and being apparelléd,
  And walking in my garden, in a swoon
  Helpless and unattended I sank down,
  Wherefrom I scarce am waked, for as a dream
  Dost thou with all this royal glory seem,
  But for thy kisses and thy words, O love."
    "Yea, Psyche," said the other, "as I drove
  The ivory shuttle through the shuttle-race,
  All was changed suddenly, and in this place
  I found myself, and standing on my feet,
  Where me with sleepy words this one did greet.
  Now, sister, tell us whence these wonders come
  With all the godlike splendour of your home."

    "Sisters," she said, "more marvels shall ye see
  When ye, have been a little while with me,
  Whereof I cannot tell you more than this
  That 'midst them all I dwell in ease and bliss,
  Well loved and wedded to a mighty lord,
  Fair beyond measure, from whose loving word
  I know that happier days await me yet.
  But come, my sisters, let us now forget
  To seek for empty knowledge; ye shall take
  Some little gifts for your lost sister's sake;
  And whatso wonders ye may see or hear
  Of nothing frightful have ye any fear."
    Wondering they went with her, and looking round,
  Each in the other's eyes a strange look found,
  For these, her mother's daughters, had no part
  In her divine fresh singleness of heart,
  But longing to be great, remembered not
  How short a time one heart on earth has got.
    But keener still that guarded look now grew
  As more of that strange lovely place they knew,
  And as with growing hate, but still afeard,
  The unseen choirs' heart-softening strains they heard,
  Which did but harden these; and when at noon
  They sought the shaded waters' freshening boon,
  And all unhidden once again they saw
  That peerless beauty, free from any flaw,
  Which now at last had won its precious meed,
  Her kindness then but fed the fire of greed
  Within their hearts--her gifts, the rich attire
  Wherewith she clad them, where like sparks of fire
  The many-coloured gems shone midst the pearls
  The soft silks' winding lines, the work of girls
  By the Five Rivers; their fair marvellous crowns,
  Their sandals' fastenings worth the rent of towns,
  Zones and carved rings, and nameless wonders fair,
  All things her faithful slaves had brought them there,
  Given amid kisses, made them not more glad;
  Since in their hearts the ravening worm they had
  That love slays not, nor yet is satisfied
  While aught but he has aught; yet still they tried
  To look as they deemed loving folk should look,
  And still with words of love her bounty took.

    So at the last all being apparelléd,
  Her sisters to the banquet Psyche led,
  Fair were they, and each seemed a glorious queen
  With all that wondrous daintiness beseen,
  But Psyche clad in gown of dusky blue
  Little adorned, with deep grey eyes that knew
  The hidden marvels of Love's holy fire,
  Seemed like the soul of innocent desire,
  Shut from the mocking world, wherefrom those twain
  Seemed come to lure her thence with labour vain.

    Now having reached the place where they should eat,
  Ere 'neath the canopy the three took seat,
  The eldest sister unto Psyche said,
  "And he, dear love, the man that thou hast wed,
  Will he not wish to-day thy kin to see?
  Then could we tell of thy felicity
  The better, to our folk and father dear."
    Then Psyche reddened, "Nay, he is not here,"
  She stammered, "neither will be here to-day,
  For mighty matters keep him far away."
  "Alas!" the younger sister said, "Say then,
  What is the likeness of this first of men;
  What sayest thou about his loving eyne,
  Are his locks black, or golden-red as thine?"
  "Black-haired like me," said Psyche stammering,
  And looking round, "what say I? like the king
  Who rules the world, he seems to me at least--
  Come, sisters, sit, and let us make good feast!
  My darling and my love ye shall behold
  I doubt not soon, his crispy hair of gold,
  His eyes unseen; and ye shall hear his voice,
  That in my joy ye also may rejoice."

    Then did they hold their peace, although indeed
  Her stammering haste they did not fail to heed.
  But at their wondrous royal feast they sat
  Thinking their thoughts, and spoke of this or that
  Between the bursts of music, until when
  The sun was leaving the abodes of men;
  And then must Psyche to her sisters say
  That she was bid, her husband being away,
  To suffer none at night to harbour there,
  No, not the mother that her body bare
  Or father that begat her, therefore they
  Must leave her now, till some still happier day.
  And therewithal more precious gifts she brought
  Whereof not e'en in dreams they could have thought
  Things whereof noble stories might be told;
  And said; "These matters that you here behold
  Shall be the worst of gifts that you shall have;
  Farewell, farewell! and may the high gods save
  Your lives and fame; and tell our father dear
  Of all the honour that I live in here,
  And how that greater happiness shall come
  When I shall reach a long-enduring home."
    Then these, though burning through the night to stay,
  Spake loving words, and went upon their way,
  When weeping she had kissed them; but they wept
  Such tears as traitors do, for as they stepped
  Over the threshold, in each other's eyes
  They looked, for each was eager to surprise
  The envy that their hearts were filled withal,
  That to their lips came welling up like gall.

    "So," said the first, "this palace without folk,
  These wonders done with none to strike a stroke.
  This singing in the air, and no one seen,
  These gifts too wonderful for any queen,
  The trance wherein we both were wrapt away,
  And set down by her golden house to-day--
  --These are the deeds of gods, and not of men;
  And fortunate the day was to her, when
  Weeping she left the house where we were born,
  And all men deemed her shamed and most forlorn."
    Then said the other, reddening in her rage,
  "She is the luckiest one of all this age;
  And yet she might have told us of her case,
  What god it is that dwelleth in the place,
  Nor sent us forth like beggars from her gate.
  And beggarly, O sister, is our fate,
  Whose husbands wring from miserable hinds
  What the first battle scatters to the winds;
  While she to us whom from her door she drives
  And makes of no account or honour, gives
  Such wonderful and priceless gifts as these,
  Fit to bedeck the limbs of goddesses!
  And yet who knows but she may get a fall?
  The strongest tower has not the highest wall,
  Think well of this, when you sit safe at home
    By this unto the river were they come,
  Where waited Zephyrus unseen, who cast
  A languor over them that quickly passed
  Into deep sleep, and on the grass they sank;
  Then straightway did he lift them from the bank,
  And quickly each in her fair house set down,
  Then flew aloft above the sleeping town.
    Long in their homes they brooded over this,
  And how that Psyche nigh a goddess is;
  While all folk deemed that she quite lost had been
  For nought they said of all that they had seen.

    But now that night when she, with many a kiss,
  Had told their coming, and of that and this
  That happed, he said, "These things, O Love, are well;
  Glad am I that no evil thing befell.
  And yet, between thy father's house and me
  Must thou choose now; then either royally
  Shalt thou go home, and wed some king at last,
  And have no harm for all that here has passed;
  Or else, my love, bear as thy brave heart may,
  This loneliness in hope of that fair day,
  Which, by my head, shall come to thee; and then
  Shalt thou be glorious to the sons of men,
  And by my side shalt sit in such estate
  That in all time all men shall sing thy fate."
    But with that word such love through her he breathed,
  That round about him her fair arms she wreathed;
  And so with loving passed the night away,
  And with fresh hope came on the fresh May-day.
  And so passed many a day and many a night.
  And weariness was balanced with delight,
  And into such a mind was Psyche brought,
  That little of her father's house she thought,
  But ever of the happy day to come
  When she should go unto her promised home.

    Till she that threw the golden apple down
  Upon the board, and lighted up Troy town,
  On dusky wings came flying o'er the place,
  And seeing Psyche with her happy face
  Asleep beneath some fair tree blossoming,
  Into her sleep straight cast an evil thing;
  Whereby she dreamed she saw her father laid
  Panting for breath beneath the golden shade
  Of his great bed's embroidered canopy,
  And with his last breath moaning heavily
  Her name and fancied woes; thereat she woke,
  And this ill dream through all her quiet broke,
  And when next morn her Love from her would go,
  And going, as it was his wont to do,
  Would kiss her sleeping, he must find the tears
  Filling the hollows of her rosy ears
  And wetting half the golden hair that lay
  Twixt him and her: then did he speak and say,
  "O Love, why dost thou lie awake and weep,
  Who for content shouldst have good heart to sleep
  This cold hour ere the dawning?" Nought she said,
  But wept aloud. Then cried he, "By my head!
  Whate'er thou wishest I will do for thee;
  Yea, if it make an end of thee and me."
    "O Love," she said, "I scarce dare ask again,
  Yet is there in mine heart an aching pain
  To know what of my father is become:
  So would I send my sisters to my home,
  Because I doubt indeed they never told
  Of all my honour in this house of gold;
  And now of them a great oath would I take."
    He said, "Alas! and hast thou been awake
  For them indeed? who in my arms asleep
  Mightst well have been; for their sakes didst thou weep,
  Who mightst have smiled to feel my kiss on thee?
  Yet as thou wishest once more shall it be,
  Because my oath constrains me, and thy tears.
  And yet again beware, and make these fears
  Of none avail; nor waver any more,
  I pray thee: for already to the shore
  Of all delights and joys thou drawest nigh."

    He spoke, and from the chamber straight did fly
  To highest heaven, and going softly then,
  Wearied the father of all gods and men
  With prayers for Psyche's immortality.

    Meantime went Zephyrus across the sea,
  To bring her sisters to her arms again,
  Though of that message little was he fain,
  Knowing their malice and their cankered hearts.
    For now these two had thought upon their parts
  And made up a false tale for Psyche's ear;
  For when awaked, to her they drew anear,
  Sobbing, their faces in their hands they hid,
  Nor when she asked them why this thing they did
  Would answer aught, till trembling Psyche said,
  "Nay, nay, what is it? is our father dead?
  Or do ye weep these tears for shame that ye
  Have told him not of my felicity,
  To make me weep amidst my new-found bliss?
  Be comforted, for short the highway is
  To my forgiveness: this day shall ye go
  And take him gifts, and tell him all ye know
  Of this my unexpected happy lot."
    Amidst fresh sobs one said, "We told him not
  But by good counsel did we hide the thing,
  Deeming it well that he should feel the sting
  For once, than for awhile be glad again,
  And after come to suffer double pain."
    "Alas! what mean you, sister?" Psyche said,
  For terror waxing pale as are the dead.
  "O sister, speak!" "Child, by this loving kiss,"
  Spake one of them, "and that remembered bliss
  We dwelt in when our mother was alive,
  Or ever we began with ills to strive,
  By all the hope thou hast to see again
  Our aged father and to soothe his pain,
  I charge thee tell me,--Hast thou seen the thing
  Thou callest Husband?"
                          Breathless, quivering,
  Psyche cried out, "Alas! what sayest thou?
  What riddles wilt thou speak unto me now?"
    "Alas!" she said; "then is it as I thought.
  Sister, in dreadful places have we sought
  To learn about thy case, and thus we found
  A wise man, dwelling underneath the ground
  In a dark awful cave: he told to us
  A horrid tale thereof, and piteous,
  That thou wert wedded to an evil thing,
  A serpent-bodied fiend of poisonous sting,
  Bestial of form, yet therewith lacking not
  E'en such a soul as wicked men have got.
  Thus ages long agone the gods made him,
  And set him in a lake hereby to swim;
  But every hundred years he hath this grace,
  That he may change within this golden place
  Into a fair young man by night alone.
  Alas, my sister, thou hast cause to groan!
  What sayest thou?--_His words are fair and soft;_
  _He raineth loving kisses on me oft,_
  _Weeping for love; he tells me of a day_
  _When from this place we both shall go away,_
  _And he shall kiss me then no more unseen,_
  _The while I sit by him a glorious queen_----
  --Alas, poor child! it pleaseth thee, his kiss?
  Then must I show thee why he doeth this:
  Because he willeth for a time to save
  Thy body, wretched one! that he may have
  Both child and mother for his watery hell--
  Ah, what a tale this is for me to tell!
    "Thou prayest us to save thee, and we can;
  Since for nought else we sought that wise old man,
  Who for great gifts and seeing that of kings
  We both were come, has told us all these things,
  And given us a fair lamp of hallowed oil
  That he has wrought with danger and much toil;
  And thereto has he added a sharp knife,
  In forging which he well-nigh lost his life,
  About him so the devils of the pit
  Came swarming--O, my sister, hast thou it?"
    Straight from her gown the other one drew out
  The lamp and knife, which Psyche, dumb with doubt
  And misery at once, took in her hand.
    Then said her sister, "From this doubtful land
  Thou gav'st us royal gifts a while ago,
  But these we give thee, though they lack for show,
  Shall be to thee a better gift,--thy life.
  Put now in some sure place this lamp and knife,
  And when he sleeps rise silently from bed
  And hold the hallowed lamp above his head,
  And swiftly draw the charméd knife across
  His cursed neck, thou well may'st bear the loss,
  Nor shall he keep his man's shape more, when he
  First feels the iron wrought so mysticly:
  But thou, flee unto us, we have a tale,
  Of what has been thy lot within this vale,
  When we have 'scaped therefrom, which we shall do
  By virtue of strange spells the old man knew.
  Farewell, sweet sister! here we may not stay,
  Lest in returning he should pass this way;
  But in the vale we will not fail to wait
  Till thou art loosened from thine evil fate."
    Thus went they, and for long they said not aught,
  Fearful lest any should surprise their thought,
  But in such wise had envy conquered fear,
  That they were fain that eve to bide anear
  Their sister's ruined home; but when they came
  Unto the river, on them fell the same
  Resistless languor they had felt before.
  And from the blossoms of that flowery shore
  Their sleeping bodies soon did Zephyr bear,
  For other folk to hatch new ills and care.

    But on the ground sat Psyche all alone,
  The lamp and knife beside her, and no moan
  She made, but silent let the long hours go,
  Till dark night closed around her and her woe.
    Then trembling she arose, for now drew near
  The time of utter loneliness and fear,
  And she must think of death, who until now
  Had thought of ruined life, and love brought low;
  And with, that thought, tormenting doubt there came,
  And images of some unheard-of shame,
  Until forlorn, entrapped of gods she felt,
  As though in some strange hell her spirit dwelt.
    Yet driven by her sisters' words at last,
  And by remembrance of the time now past,
  When she stood trembling, as the oracle
  With all its fearful doom upon her fell,
  She to her hapless wedding-chamber turned,
  And while the waxen tapers freshly burned
  She laid those dread gifts ready to her hand,
  Then quenched the lights, and by the bed did stand,
  Turning these matters in her troubled mind;
  And sometimes hoped some glorious man to find
  Beneath the lamp, fit bridegroom for a bride
  Like her; ah, then! with what joy to his side
  Would she creep back in the dark silent night;
  But whiles she quaked at thought of what a sight
  The lamp might show her; the hot rush of blood
  The knife might shed upon her as she stood,
  The dread of some pursuit, the hurrying out,
  Through rooms where every sound would seem a shout
  Into the windy night among the trees,
  Where many a changing monstrous sight one sees,
  When nought at all has happed to chill the blood.

    But as among these evil thoughts she stood,
  She heard him coming, and straight crept to bed.
  And felt him touch her with a new-born dread,
  And durst not answer to his words of love.
  But when he slept, she rose that tale to prove.
  And sliding down as softly as might be,
  And moving through the chamber quietly,
  She gat the lamp within her trembling hand,
  And long, debating of these things, did stand
  In that thick darkness, till she seemed to be
  A dweller in some black eternity,
  And what she once had called the world did seem
  A hollow void, a colourless mad dream;
  For she felt so alone--three times in vain
  She moved her heavy hand, three times again
  It fell adown; at last throughout the place
  Its flame glared, lighting up her woeful face,
  Whose eyes the silken carpet did but meet,
  Grown strange and awful, and her own wan feet
  As toward the bed she stole; but come thereto
  Back with dosed eyes and quivering lips, she threw
  Her lovely head, and strove to think of it,
  While images of fearful things did flit
  Before her eyes; thus, raising up the hand
  That bore the lamp, one moment did she stand
  As man's time tells it, and then suddenly
  Opened her eyes, but scarce kept back a cry
  At what she saw; for there before her lay
  The very Love brighter than dawn of day;
  And as he lay there smiling, her own name
  His gentle lips in sleep began to frame,
  And as to touch her face his hand did move;
  O then, indeed, her faint heart swelled for love,
  And she began to sob, and tears fell fast
  Upon the bed.--But as she turned at last
  To quench the lamp, there happed a little thing
  That quenched her new delight, for flickering
  The treacherous flame cast on his shoulder fair
  A burning drop; he woke, and seeing her there
  The meaning of that sad sight knew full well,
  Nor was there need the piteous tale to tell.

    Then on her knees she fell with a great cry,
  For in his face she saw the thunder nigh,
  And she began to know what she had done,
  And saw herself henceforth, unloved, alone,
  Pass onward to the grave; and once again
  She heard the voice she now must love in vain
    "Ah, has it come to pass? and hast thou lost
  A life of love, and must thou still be tossed
  One moment in the sun 'twixt night and night?
  And must I lose what would have been delight,
  Untasted yet amidst immortal bliss,
  To wed a soul made worthy of my kiss,
  Set in a frame so wonderfully made?
    "O wavering heart, farewell! be not afraid
  That I with fire will burn thy body fair,
  Or cast thy sweet limbs piecemeal through the air;
  The fates shall work thy punishment alone,
  And thine own memory of our kindness done.
    "Alas! what wilt thou do? how shalt thou bear
  The cruel world, the sickening still despair,
  The mocking, curious faces bent on thee,
  When thou hast known what love there is in me?
  O happy only, if thou couldst forget,
  And live unholpen, lonely, loveless yet,
  But untormented through the little span
  That on the earth ye call the life of man.
  Alas! that thou, too fair a thing to die,
  Shouldst so be born to double misery!
    "Farewell! though I, a god, can never know
  How thou canst lose thy pain, yet time will go
  Over thine head, and thou mayst mingle yet
  The bitter and the sweet, nor quite forget,
  Nor quite remember, till these things shall seem
  The wavering memory of a lovely dream."
    Therewith he caught his shafts up and his bow,
  And striding through the chambers did he go,
  Light all around him; and she, wailing sore,
  Still followed after; but he turned no more,
  And when into the moonlit night he came
  From out her sight he vanished like a flame,
  And on the threshold till the dawn of day
  Through all the changes of the night she lay.

       *       *       *       *       *

    At daybreak when she lifted up her eyes,
  She looked around with heavy dull surprise,
  And rose to enter the fair golden place;
  But then remembering all her piteous case
  She turned away, lamenting very sore,
  And wandered down unto the river shore;
  There, at the head of a green pool and deep,
  She stood so long that she forgot to weep,
  And the wild things about the water-side
  From such a silent thing cared not to hide;
  The dace pushed 'gainst the stream, the dragon-fly,
  With its green-painted wing, went flickering by;
  The water-hen, the lustred kingfisher,
  Went on their ways and took no heed of her;
  The little reed birds never ceased to sing,
  And still the eddy, like a living thing,
  Broke into sudden gurgles at her feet.
  But 'midst these fair things, on that morning sweet,
  How could she, weary creature, find a place?
  She moved at last, and lifting up her face,
  Gathered her raiment up and cried, "Farewell,
  O fairest lord! and since I cannot dwell
  With thee in heaven, let me now hide my head
  In whatsoever dark place dwell the dead!"
    And with that word she leapt into the stream,
  But the kind river even yet did deem
  That she should live, and, with all gentle care,
  Cast her ashore within a meadow fair.
  Upon the other side, where Shepherd Pan
  Sat looking down upon the water wan,
  Goat-legged and merry, who called out, "Fair maid
  Why goest thou hurrying to the feeble shade
  Whence none return? Well do I know thy pain,
  For I am old, and have not lived in vain;
  Thou wilt forget all that within a while,
  And on some other happy youth wilt smile;
  And sure he must be dull indeed if he
  Forget not all things in his ecstasy
  At sight of such a wonder made for him,
  That in that clinging gown makes mine eyes swim,
  Old as I am: but to the god of Love
  Pray now, sweet child, for all things can he move."
    Weeping she passed him, but full reverently,
  And well she saw that she was not to die
  Till she had filled the measure of her woe.
    So through the meads she passed, half blind and slow,
  And on her sisters somewhat now she thought;
  And, pondering on the evil they had wrought,
  The veil fell from her, and she saw their guile.
    "Alas!" she said, "can death make folk so vile?
  What wonder that the gods are glorious then,
  Who cannot feel the hates and fears of men?
  Sisters, alas, for what ye used to be!
  Once did I think, whatso might hap to me,
  Still at the worst, within your arms to find
  A haven of pure love; then were ye kind,
  Then was your joy e'en as my very own--
  And now, and now, if I can be alone
  That is my best: but that can never be,
  For your unkindness still shall stay with me
  When ye are dead--But thou, my love! my dear!
  Wert thou not kind?--I should have lost my fear
  Within a little--Yea, and e'en just now
  With angry godhead on thy lovely brow,
  Still thou wert kind--And art thou gone away
  For ever? I know not, but day by day
  Still will I seek thee till I come to die,
  And nurse remembrance of felicity
  Within my heart, although it wound me sore;
  For what am I but thine for evermore!"

    Thenceforth her back upon the world she turned
  As she had known it; in her heart there burned
  Such deathless love, that still untired she went:
  The huntsman dropping down the woody bent,
  In the still evening, saw her passing by,
  And for her beauty fain would draw anigh,
  But yet durst not; the shepherd on the down
  Wondering, would shade his eyes with fingers brown,
  As on the hill's brow, looking o'er the lands,
  She stood with straining eyes and clinging hands,
  While the wind blew the raiment from her feet;
  The wandering soldier her grey eyes would meet,
  That took no heed of him, and drop his own;
  Like a thin dream she passed the clattering town;
  On the thronged quays she watched the ships come in
  Patient, amid the strange outlandish din;
  Unscared she saw the sacked towns' miseries,
  And marching armies passed before her eyes.
  And still of her the god had such a care
  That none might wrong her, though alone and fair.
  Through rough and smooth she wandered many a day,
  Till all her hope had well-nigh passed away.

    Meanwhile the sisters, each in her own home,
  Waited the day when outcast she should come
  And ask their pity; when perchance, indeed,
  They looked to give her shelter in her need,
  And with soft words such faint reproaches take
  As she durst make them for her ruin's sake;
  But day passed day, and still no Psyche came,
  And while they wondered whether, to their shame,
  Their plot had failed, or gained its end too well,
  And Psyche slain, no tale thereof could tell.--
  Amidst these things, the eldest sister lay
  Asleep one evening of a summer day,
  Dreaming she saw the god of Love anigh,
  Who seemed to say unto her lovingly,
  "Hail unto thee, fair sister of my love;
  Nor fear me for that thou her faith didst prove,
  And found it wanting, for thou, too, art fair,
  Nor is her place filled; rise, and have no care
  For father or for friends, but go straightway
  Unto the rock where she was borne that day;
  There, if thou hast a will to be my bride,
  Put thou all fear of horrid death aside,
  And leap from off the cliff, and there will come
  My slaves, to bear thee up and take thee home.
  Haste then, before the summer night grows late,
  For in my house thy beauty I await!"

    So spake the dream; and through the night did sail,
  And to the other sister bore the tale,
  While this one rose, nor doubted of the thing,
  Such deadly pride unto her heart did cling;
  But by the tapers' light triumphantly,
  Smiling, her mirrored body did she eye,
  Then hastily rich raiment on her cast
  And through the sleeping serving-people passed,
  And looked with changed eyes on the moonlit street,
  Nor scarce could feel the ground beneath her feet.
  But long the time seemed to her, till she came
  There where her sister once was borne to shame;
  And when she reached the bare cliff's rugged brow
  She cried aloud, "O Love, receive me now,
  Who am not all unworthy to be thine!"
  And with that word, her jewelled arms did shine
  Outstretched beneath the moon, and with one breath
  She sprung to meet the outstretched arms of Death,
  The only god that waited for her there,
  And in a gathered moment of despair
  A hideous thing her traitrous life did seem.

    But with the passing of that hollow dream
  The other sister rose, and as she might,
  Arrayed herself alone in that still night,
  And so stole forth, and making no delay
  Came to the rock anigh the dawn of day;
  No warning there her sister's spirit gave,
  No doubt came nigh the fore-doomed soul to save,
  But with a fever burning in her blood,
  With glittering eyes and crimson cheeks she stood
  One moment on the brow, the while she cried,
  "Receive me, Love, chosen to be thy bride
  From all the million women of the world!"
  Then o'er the cliff her wicked limbs were hurled,
  Nor has the language of the earth a name
  For that surprise of terror and of shame.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now, midst her wanderings, on a hot noontide,
  Psyche passed down a road, where, on each side
  The yellow cornfields lay, although as yet
  Unto the stalks no sickle had been set;
  The lark sung over them, the butterfly
  Flickered from ear to ear distractedly,
  The kestrel hung above, the weasel peered
  From out the wheat-stalks on her unafeard,
  Along the road the trembling poppies shed
  On the burnt grass their crumpled leaves and red;
  Most lonely was it, nothing Psyche knew
  Unto what land of all the world she drew;
  Aweary was she, faint and sick at heart,
  Bowed to the earth by thoughts of that sad part
  She needs must play: some blue flower from the corn
  That in her fingers erewhile she had borne,
  Now dropped from them, still clung unto her gown;
  Over the hard way hung her head adown
  Despairingly, but still her weary feet
  Moved on half conscious, her lost love to meet.
    So going, at the last she raised her eyes,
  And saw a grassy mound before her rise
  Over the yellow plain, and thereon was
  A marble fane with doors of burnished brass,
  That 'twixt the pillars set about it burned;
  So thitherward from off the road she turned,
  And soon she heard a rippling water sound,
  And reached a stream that girt the hill around,
  Whose green waves wooed her body lovingly;
  So looking round, and seeing no soul anigh,
  Unclad, she crossed the shallows, and there laid
  Her dusty raiment in the alder-shade,
  And slipped adown into the shaded pool,
  And with the pleasure of the water cool
  Soothed her tired limbs awhile, then with a sigh
  Came forth, and clad her body hastily,
  And up the hill made for the little fane.
    But when its threshold now her feet did gain,
  She, looking through the pillars of the shrine,
  Beheld therein a golden image shine
  Of golden Ceres; then she passed the door,
  And with bowed head she stood awhile before
  The smiling image, striving for some word
  That did not name her lover and her lord,
  Until midst rising tears at last she prayed:
    "O kind one, if while yet I was a maid
  I ever did thee pleasure, on this day
  Be kind to me, poor wanderer on the way,
  Who strive my love upon the earth to meet!
  Then let me rest my weary, doubtful feet
  Within thy quiet house a little while,
  And on my rest if thou wouldst please to smile,
  And send me news of my own love and lord,
  It would not cost thee, lady, many a word."
    But straight from out the shrine a sweet voice came,
  "O Psyche, though of me thou hast no blame,
  And though indeed thou sparedst not to give
  What my soul loved, while happy thou didst live,
  Yet little can I give now unto thee,
  Since thou art rebel, slave, and enemy
  Unto the love-inspiring Queen; this grace
  Thou hast alone of me, to leave this place
  Free as thou camest, though the lovely one
  Seeks for the sorceress who entrapped her son
  In every land, and has small joy in aught,
  Until before her presence thou art brought."
    Then Psyche, trembling at the words she spake,
  Durst answer nought, nor for that counsel's sake
  Could other offerings leave except her tears,
  As now, tormented by the new-born fears
  The words divine had raised in her, she passed
  The brazen threshold once again, and cast
  A dreary hopeless look across the plain,
  Whose golden beauty now seemed nought and vain
  Unto her aching heart; then down the hill
  She went, and crossed the shallows of the rill,
  And wearily she went upon her way,
  Nor any homestead passed upon that day,
  Nor any hamlet, and at night lay down
  Within a wood, far off from any town.

    There, waking at the dawn, did she behold,
  Through the green leaves, a glimmer as of gold,
  And, passing on, amidst an oak-grove found
  A pillared temple gold-adorned and round,
  Whose walls were hung with rich and precious things,
  Worthy to be the ransom of great kings;
  And in the midst of gold and ivory
  An image of Queen Juno did she see;
  Then her heart swelled within her, and she thought,
  "Surely the gods hereto my steps have brought,
  And they will yet be merciful and give
  Some little joy to me, that I may live
  Till my Love finds me." Then upon her knees
  She fell, and prayed, "O Crown of goddesses,
  I pray thee, give me shelter in this place,
  Nor turn away from me thy much-loved face,
  If ever I gave golden gifts to thee
  In happier times when my right hand was free."
    Then from the inmost shrine there came a voice
  That said, "It is so, well mayst thou rejoice
  That of thy gifts I yet have memory,
  Wherefore mayst thou depart forewarned and free;
  Since she that won the golden apple lives,
  And to her servants mighty gifts now gives
  To find thee out, in whatso land thou art,
  For thine undoing; loiter not, depart!
  For what immortal yet shall shelter thee
  From her that rose from out the unquiet sea?"
    Then Psyche moaned out in her grief and fear,
  "Alas! and is there shelter anywhere
  Upon the green flame-hiding earth?" said she,
  "Or yet beneath it is there peace for me?
  O Love, since in thine arms I cannot rest,
  Or lay my weary head upon thy breast,
  Have pity yet upon thy love forlorn,
  Make me as though I never had been born!"

    Then wearily she went upon her way,
  And so, about the middle of the day,
  She came before a green and flowery place,
  Walled round about in manner of a chase,
  Whereof the gates as now were open wide;
  Fair grassy glades and long she saw inside
  Betwixt great trees, down which the unscared deer
  Were playing; yet a pang of deadly fear,
  She knew not why, shot coldly through her heart,
  And thrice she turned as though she would depart,
  And thrice returned, and in the gateway stood
  With wavering feet: small flowers as red as blood
  Were growing up amid the soft green grass,
  And here and there a fallen rose there was,
  And on the trodden grass a silken lace,
  As though crowned revellers had passed by the place
  The restless sparrows chirped upon the wall
  And faint far music on her ears did fall,
  And from the trees within, the pink-foot doves
  Still told their weary tale unto their loves,
  And all seemed peaceful more than words could say.
    Then she, whose heart still whispered, "Keep away."
  Was drawn by strong desire unto the place,
  So toward the greenest glade she set her face,
  Murmuring, "Alas! and what a wretch am I,
  That I should fear the summer's greenery!
  Yea, and is death now any more an ill,
  When lonely through the world I wander still."
    But when she was amidst those ancient groves,
  Whose close green leaves and choirs of moaning doves
  Shut out the world, then so alone she seemed,
  So strange, her former life was but as dreamed;
  Beside the hopes and fears that drew her on,
  Till so far through that green place she had won,
  That she a rose-hedged garden could behold
  Before a house made beautiful with gold;
  Which, to her mind beset with that past dream,
  And dim foreshadowings of ill fate, did seem
  That very house, her joy and misery,
  Where that fair sight her longing eyes did see
  They should not see again; but now the sound
  Of pensive music echoing all around,
  Made all things like a picture, and from thence
  Bewildering odours floating, dulled her sense,
  And killed her fear, and, urged by strong desire
  To see how all should end, she drew yet nigher,
  And o'er the hedge beheld the heads of girls
  Embraced by garlands fresh and orient pearls,
  And heard sweet voices murmuring; then a thrill
  Of utmost joy all memory seemed to kill
  Of good or evil, and her eager hand
  Was on the wicket, then her feet did stand
  Upon new flowers, the while her dizzied eyes
  Gazed wildly round on half-seen mysteries,
  And wandered from unnoting face to face.
    For round a fountain midst the flowery place
  Did she behold full many a minstrel girl;
  While nigh them, on the grass in giddy whirl,
  Bright raiment and white limbs and sandalled feet
  Flew round in time unto the music sweet,
  Whose strains no more were pensive now nor sad,
  But rather a fresh sound of triumph had;
  And round the dance were gathered damsels fair,
  Clad in rich robes adorned with jewels rare;
  Or little hidden by some woven mist,
  That, hanging round them, here a bosom kissed
  And there a knee, or driven by the wind
  About some lily's bowing stem was twined.

    But when a little Psyche's eyes grew clear,
  A sight they saw that brought back all her fear
  A hundred-fold, though neither heaven nor earth
  To such a fair sight elsewhere could give birth;
  Because apart, upon a golden throne
  Of marvellous work, a woman sat alone,
  Watching the dancers with a smiling face,
  Whose beauty sole had lighted up the place.
  A crown there was upon her glorious head,
  A garland round about her girdlestead,
  Where matchless wonders of the hidden sea
  Were brought together and set wonderfully;
  Naked she was of all else, but her hair
  About her body rippled here and there,
  And lay in heaps upon the golden seat,
  And even touched the gold cloth where her feet
  Lay amid roses--ah, how kind she seemed!
  What depths of love from out her grey eyes beamed!

    Well might the birds leave singing on the trees
  To watch in peace that crown of goddesses,
  Yet well might Psyche sicken at the sight,
  And feel her feet wax heavy, her head light;
  For now at last her evil day was come,
  Since she had wandered to the very home
  Of her most bitter cruel enemy.
    Half-dead, yet must she turn about to flee,
  But as her eyes back o'er her shoulder gazed,
  And with weak hands her clinging gown she raised,
  And from her lips unwitting came a moan,
  She felt strong arms about her body thrown,
  And, blind with fear, was haled along till she
  Saw floating by her faint eyes dizzily
  That vision of the pearls and roses fresh,
  The golden carpet and the rosy flesh.
    Then, as in vain she strove to make some sound,
  A sweet voice seemed to pierce the air around
  With bitter words; her doom rang in her ears,
  She felt the misery that lacketh tears.
  "Come hither, damsels, and the pearl behold
  That hath no price? See now the thrice-tried gold,
  That all men worshipped, that a god would have
  To be his bride! how like a wretched slave
  She cowers down, and lacketh even voice
  To plead her cause! Come, damsels, and rejoice,
  That now once more the waiting world will move,
  Since she is found, the well-loved soul of love!
    "And thou poor wretch, what god hath led thee here?
  Art thou so lost in this abyss of fear,
  Thou canst not weep thy misery and shame?
  Canst thou not even speak thy shameful name?"

    But even then the flame of fervent love
  In Psyche's tortured heart began to move,
  And gave her utterance, and she said, "Alas!
  Surely the end of life has come to pass
  For me, who have been bride of very Love,
  Yet love still bides in me, O Seed of Jove,
  For such I know thee; slay me, nought is lost!
  For had I had the will to count the cost
  And buy my love with all this misery,
  Thus and no otherwise the thing should be.
  Would I were dead, my wretched beauty gone,
  No trouble now to thee or any one!"
    And with that last word did she hang her head,
  As one who hears not, whatsoe'er is said;
  But Venus rising with a dreadful cry
  Said, "O thou fool, I will not let thee die!
  But thou shalt reap the harvest thou hast sown
  And many a day thy wretched lot bemoan.
  Thou art my slave, and not a day shall be
  But I will find some fitting task for thee,
  Nor will I slay thee till thou hop'st again.
  What, thinkest thou that utterly in vain
  Jove is my sire, and in despite my will
  That thou canst mock me with thy beauty still?
  Come forth, O strong-armed, punish this new slave,
  That she henceforth a humble heart may have."
    All round about the damsels in a ring
  Were drawn to see the ending of the thing,
  And now as Psyche's eyes stared wildly round
  No help in any face of them she found
  As from the fair and dreadful face she turned
  In whose grey eyes such steadfast anger burned;
  Yet midst her agony she scarcely knew
  What thing it was the goddess bade them do,
  And all the pageant, like a dreadful dream
  Hopeless and long-enduring grew to seem;
  Yea, when the strong-armed through the crowd did break,
  Girls like to those, whose close-locked squadron shake
  The echoing surface of the Asian plain,
  And when she saw their threatening hands, in vain
  She strove to speak, so like a dream it was;
  So like a dream that this should come to pass,
  And 'neath her feet the green earth opened not.
    But when her breaking heart again waxed hot
  With dreadful thoughts and prayers unspeakable
  As all their bitter torment on her fell,
  When she her own voice heard, nor knew its sound,
  And like red flame she saw the trees and ground,
  Then first she seemed to know what misery
  To helpless folk upon the earth can be.

    But while beneath the many moving feet
  The small crushed flowers sent up their odour sweet,
  Above sat Venus, calm, and very fair,
  Her white limbs bared of all her golden hair,
  Into her heart all wrath cast back again,
  As on the terror and the helpless pain
  She gazed with gentle eyes, and unmoved smile;
  Such as in Cyprus, the fair blossomed isle,
  When on the altar in the summer night
  They pile the roses up for her delight,
  Men see within their hearts, and long that they
  Unto her very body there might pray.
    At last to them some dainty sign she made
  To hold their cruel hands, and therewith bade
  To bear her slave new gained from out her sight
  And keep her safely till the morrow's light:
  So her across the sunny sward they led
  With fainting limbs, and heavy downcast head,
  And into some nigh lightless prison cast
  To brood alone o'er happy days long past
  And all the dreadful times that yet should be.
    But she being gone, one moment pensively
  The goddess did the distant hills behold,
  Then bade her girls bind up her hair of gold,
  And veil her breast, the very forge of love,
  With raiment that no earthly shuttle wove,
  And 'gainst the hard earth arm her lovely feet:
  Then she went forth, some shepherd king to meet
  Deep in the hollow of a shaded vale,
  To make his woes a long-enduring tale.

       *       *       *       *       *

    But over Psyche, hapless and forlorn,
  Unseen the sun rose on the morrow morn,
  Nor knew she aught about the death of night
  Until her gaoler's torches filled with light
  The dreary place, blinding her unused eyes,
  And she their voices heard that bade her rise;
  She did their bidding, yet grown faint and pale
  She shrank away and strove her arms to veil
  In her gown's bosom, and to hide from them
  Her little feet within her garment's hem;
  But mocking her, they brought her thence away,
  And led her forth into the light of day,
  And brought her to a marble cloister fair
  Where sat the queen on her adornéd chair,
  But she, as down the sun-streaked place they came,
  Cried out, "Haste! ye, who lead my grief and shame."
  And when she stood before her trembling, said,
  "Although within a palace thou wast bred
  Yet dost thou carry but a slavish heart,
  And fitting is it thou shouldst learn thy part,
  And know the state whereunto thou art brought;
  Now, heed what yesterday thy folly taught,
  And set thyself to-day my will to do;
  Ho ye, bring that which I commanded you."

    Then forth came two, and each upon her back
  Bore up with pain a huge half-bursten sack,
  Which, setting down, they opened on the floor,
  And from their hempen mouths a stream did pour
  Of mingled seeds, and grain, peas, pulse, and wheat,
  Poppies and millet, and coriander sweet,
  And many another brought from far-off lands,
  Which mingling more with swift and ready hands
  They piled into a heap confused and great.
    And then said Venus, rising from her seat,
  "Slave, here I leave thee, but before the night
  These mingled seeds thy hands shall set aright,
  All laid in heaps, each after its own kind,
  And if in any heap I chance to find
  An alien seed; thou knowest since yesterday
  How disobedient slaves the forfeit pay."
    Therewith she turned and left the palace fair
  And from its outskirts rose into the air,
  And flew until beneath her lay the sea,
  Then, looking on its green waves lovingly,
  Somewhat she dropped, and low adown she flew
  Until she reached the temple that she knew
  Within a sunny bay of her fair isle.

    But Psyche sadly labouring all the while
  With hopeless heart felt the swift hours go by,
  And knowing well what bitter mockery
  Lay in that task, yet did she what she might
  That something should be finished ere the night,
  And she a little mercy yet might ask;
  But the first hours of that long feverish task
  Passed amid mocks; for oft the damsels came
  About her, and made merry with her shame,
  And laughed to see her trembling eagerness,
  And how, with some small lappet of her dress,
  She winnowed out the wheat, and how she bent
  Over the millet, hopelessly intent;
  And how she guarded well some tiny heap
  But just begun, from their long raiments' sweep;
  And how herself, with girt gown, carefully
  She went betwixt the heaps that 'gan to lie
  Along the floor; though they were small enow,
  When shadows lengthened and the sun was low;
  But at the last these left her labouring,
  Not daring now to weep, lest some small thing
  Should 'scape her blinded eyes, and soon far off
  She heard the echoes of their careless scoff.
    Longer the shades grew, quicker sank the sun,
  Until at last the day was well-nigh done,
  And every minute did she think to hear
  The fair Queen's dreaded footsteps drawing near;
  But Love, that moves the earth, and skies, and sea,
  Beheld his old love in her misery,
  And wrapped her heart in sudden gentle sleep;
  And meanwhile caused unnumbered ants to creep
  About her, and they wrought so busily
  That all, ere sundown, was as it should be,
  And homeward went again the kingless folk.
    Bewildered with her joy again she woke,
  But scarce had time the unseen hands to bless,
  That thus had helped her utter feebleness,
  Ere Venus came, fresh from the watery way,
  Panting with all the pleasure of the day;
  But when she saw the ordered heaps, her smile
  Faded away, she cried out, "Base and vile
  Thou art indeed, this labour fitteth thee;
  But now I know thy feigned simplicity,
  Thine inward cunning, therefore hope no more,
  Since thou art furnished well with hidden lore,
  To 'scape thy due reward, if any day
  Without some task accomplished, pass away!"
    So with a frown she passed on, muttering,
  "Nought have I done, to-morrow a new thing."

    So the next morning Psyche did they lead
  Unto a terrace o'er a flowery mead,
  Where Venus sat, hid from the young sun's rays,
  Upon the fairest of all summer days;
  She pointed o'er the meads as they drew nigh,
  And said, "See how that stream goes glittering by,
  And on its banks my golden sheep now pass,
  Cropping sweet mouthfuls of the flowery grass;
  If thou, O cunning slave, to-day art fain
  To save thyself from well-remembered pain,
  Put forth a little of thy hidden skill,
  And with their golden fleece thy bosom fill;
  Yet make no haste, but ere the sun is down
  Cast it before my feet from out thy gown;
  Surely thy labour is but light to-day."
    Then sadly went poor Psyche on her way,
  Wondering wherein the snare lay, for she knew
  No easy thing it was she had to do;
  Nor had she failed indeed to note the smile
  Wherewith the goddess praised her for the guile
  That she, unhappy, lacked so utterly.
    Amidst these thoughts she crossed the flowery lea,
  And came unto the glittering river's side;
  And, seeing it was neither deep nor wide,
  She drew her sandals off, and to the knee
  Girt up her gown, and by a willow-tree
  Went down into the water, and but sank
  Up to mid-leg therein; but from the bank
  She scarce had gone three steps, before a voice
  Called out to her, "Stay, Psyche, and rejoice
  That I am here to help thee, a poor reed,
  The soother of the loving hearts that bleed,
  The pourer forth of notes, that oft have made
  The weak man strong, and the rash man afraid.
    "Sweet child, when by me now thy dear foot trod,
  I knew thee for the loved one of our god;
  Then prithee take my counsel in good part;
  Go to the shore again, and rest thine heart
  In sleep awhile, until the sun get low,
  And then across the river shalt thou go
  And find these evil creatures sleeping fast,
  And on the bushes whereby they have passed
  Much golden wool; take what seems good to thee,
  And ere the sun sets go back easily.
  But if within that mead thou sett'st thy feet
  While yet they wake, an ill death shalt thou meet,
  For they are of a cursed man-hating race,
  Bred by a giant in a lightless place."
    But at these words soft tears filled Psyche's eyes
  As hope of love within her heart did rise;
  And when she saw she was not helpless yet
  Her old desire she would not quite forget;
  But turning back, upon the bank she lay
  In happy dreams till nigh the end of day;
  Then did she cross and gather of the wool,
  And with her bosom and her gown-skirt full
  Came back to Venus at the sun-setting;
  But she afar off saw it glistering
  And cried aloud, "Go, take the slave away,
  And keep her safe for yet another day,
  And on the morning will I think again
  Of some fresh task, since with so little pain
  She doeth what the gods find hard enow;
  For since the winds were pleased this waif to blow
  Unto my door, a fool I were indeed,
  If I should fail to use her for my need."
    So her they led away from that bright sun,
  Now scarce more hopeful that the task was done,
  Since by those bitter words she knew full well
  Another tale the coming day would tell.

    But the next morn upon a turret high,
  Where the wind kissed her raiment lovingly,
  Stood Venus waiting her; and when she came
  She said, "O slave, thy city's very shame,
  Lift up thy cunning eyes, and looking hence
  Shalt thou behold betwixt these battlements,
  A black and barren mountain set aloof
  From the green hills, shaped like a palace roof.
  Ten leagues from hence it lieth, toward the north,
  And from its rocks a fountain welleth forth,
  Black like itself, and floweth down its side,
  And in a while part into Styx doth glide,
  And part into Cocytus runs away,
  Now coming thither by the end of day,
  Fill me this ewer from out the awful stream;
  Such task a sorceress like thee will deem
  A little matter; bring it not to pass,
  And if thou be not made of steel or brass,
  To-morrow shalt thou find the bitterest day
  Thou yet hast known, and all be sport and play
  To what thy heart in that hour shall endure--
  Behold, I swear it, and my word is sure!"
    She turned therewith to go down toward the sea,
  To meet her lover, who from Thessaly
  Was come from some well-foughten field of war.
    But Psyche, wandering wearily afar,
  Reached the bare foot of that black rock at last,
  And sat there grieving for the happy past,
  For surely now, she thought, no help could be,
  She had but reached the final misery,
  Nor had she any counsel but to weep.
    For not alone the place was very steep,
  And craggy beyond measure, but she knew
  What well it was that she was driven to,
  The dreadful water that the gods swear by,
  For there on either hand, as one draws nigh,
  Are long-necked dragons ready for the spring,
  And many another monstrous nameless thing,
  The very sight of which is well-nigh death;
  Then the black water as it goes crieth,
  "Fly, wretched one, before you come to die!
  Die, wretched man! I will not let you fly!
  How have you heart to come before me here?
  You have no heart, your life is turned to fear!"
  Till the wretch falls adown with whirling brain,
  And far below the sharp rocks end his pain.
    Well then might Psyche wail her wretched fate,
  And strive no more, but sitting weep and wait
  Alone in that black land for kindly death,
  With weary sobbing, wasting life and breath;
  But o'er her head there flew the bird of Jove,
  The bearer of his servant, friend of Love,
  Who, when he saw her, straightway towards her flew,
  And asked her why she wept, and when he knew,
  And who she was, he said, "Cease all thy fear,
  For to the black waves I thy ewer will bear,
  And fill it for thee; but, remember me,
  When thou art come unto thy majesty."
    Then straight he flew, and through the dragon's wings
  Went carelessly, nor feared their clatterings,
  But set the ewer, filled, in her right hand,
  And on that day saw many another land.

    Then Psyche through the night toiled back again,
  And as she went, she thought, "Ah! all is vain,
  For though once more I just escape indeed,
  Yet hath she many another wile at need;
  And to these days when I my life first learn,
  With unavailing longing shall I turn,
  When this that seemeth now so horrible
  Shall then seem but the threshold of her hell.
  Alas! what shall I do? for even now
  In sleep I see her pitiless white brow,
  And hear the dreadful sound of her commands,
  While with my helpless body and bound hands
  I tremble underneath the cruel whips;
  And oft for dread of her, with quivering lips
  I wake, and waking know the time draws nigh
  When nought shall wake me from that misery--
  Behold, O Love, because of thee I live,
  Because of thee, with these things still I strive."

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now with the risen sun her weary feet
  The late-strewn roses of the floor did meet
  Upon the marble threshold of the place;
  But she being brought before the matchless face,
  Fresh with the new life of another day,
  Beheld her wondering, for the goddess lay
  With half-shut eyes upon her golden bed,
  And when she entered scarcely turned her head,
  But smiling spake, "The gods are good to thee,
  Nor shalt thou always be mine enemy;
  But one more task I charge thee with to-day,
  Now unto Proserpine take thou thy way,
  And give this golden casket to her hands,
  And pray the fair Queen of the gloomy lands
  To fill the void shell with that beauty rare
  That long ago as queen did set her there;
  Nor needest thou to fail in this new thing,
  Who hast to-day the heart and wit to bring
  This dreadful water, and return alive;
  And, that thou may'st the more in this thing strive,
  If thou returnest I will show at last
  My kindness unto thee, and all the past
  Shalt thou remember as an ugly dream."
    And now at first to Psyche did it seem
  Her heart was softening to her, and the thought
  Swelled her full heart to sobbing, and it brought
  Into her yearning eyes half-happy tears:
  But on her way cold thoughts and dreadful fears
  Rose in her heart, for who indeed could teach
  A living soul that dread abode to reach
  And yet return? and then once more it seemed
  The hope of mercy was but lightly dreamed,
  And she remembered that triumphant smile,
  And needs must think, "This is the final wile,
  Alas! what trouble must a goddess take
  So weak a thing as this poor heart to break.
    "See now this tower! from off its top will I
  Go quick to Proserpine--ah, good to die!
  Rather than hear those shameful words again,
  And bear that unimaginable pain
  Which she has hoarded for to-morrow morn;
  Now is the ending of my life forlorn!
  O Love, farewell, thou seest all hope is dead,
  Thou seest what torments on my wretched head
  Thy bitter mother doth not cease to heap;
  Farewell, O Love, for thee and life I weep.
  Alas, my foolish heart! alas, my sin!
  Alas, for all the love I could not win!"

    Now was this tower both old enough and grey,
  Built by some king forgotten many a day,
  And no man dwelt there, now that bitter war
  From that bright land had long been driven afar;
  There now she entered, trembling and afraid;
  But 'neath her doubtful steps the dust long laid
  In utter rest, rose up into the air,
  And wavered in the wind that down the stair
  Rushed to the door; then she drew back a pace,
  Moved by the coolness of the lonely place
  That for so long had seen no ray of sun.
    Then shuddering did she hear these words begun,
  Like a wind's moaning voice, "Have thou no fear
  The hollow words of one long slain to hear!
  Thou livest, and thy hope is not yet dead,
  And if thou heedest me, thou well may'st tread
  The road to hell, and yet return again.
    "For thou must go o'er many a hill and plain
  Until to Sparta thou art come at last,
  And when the ancient city thou hast passed
  A mountain shalt thou reach, that men now call
  Mount Tænarus, that riseth like a wall
  'Twixt plain and upland, therein shalt thou find
  The wide mouth of a cavern huge and blind,
  Wherein there cometh never any sun,
  Whose dreadful darkness all things living shun;
  This shun thou not, but yet take care to have
  Three honey-cakes thy soul alive to save,
  And in thy mouth a piece of money set,
  Then through the dark go boldly, and forget
  The stories thou hast heard of death and hell,
  And heed my words, and then shall all be well.
    "For when thou hast passed through that cavern blind,
  A place of dim grey meadows shalt thou find,
  Wherethrough to inmost hell a path doth lead,
  Which follow thou, with diligence and heed;
  For as thou goest there, thou soon shalt see
  Two men like peasants loading painfully
  A fallen ass; these unto thee will call
  To help them, but give thou no heed at all,
  But pass them swiftly; and then soon again
  Within a shed three crones shalt thou see plain
  Busily weaving, who shall bid thee leave
  The road and fill their shuttles while they weave,
  But slacken not thy steps for all their prayers,
  For these are shadows only, and set snares.
    "At last thou comest to a water wan,
  And at the bank shall be the ferryman
  Surly and grey; and when he asketh thee
  Of money for thy passage, hastily
  Show him thy mouth, and straight from off thy lip
  The money he will take, and in his ship
  Embark thee and set forward; but beware,
  For on thy passage is another snare;
  From out the waves a grisly head shall come,
  Most like thy father thou hast left at home,
  And pray for passage long and piteously,
  But on thy life of him have no pity,
  Else art thou lost; also thy father lives,
  And in the temples of the high gods gives
  Great daily gifts for thy returning home.
    "When thou unto the other side art come,
  A palace shalt thou see of fiery gold,
  And by the door thereof shalt thou behold
  An ugly triple monster, that shall yell
  For thine undoing; now behold him well,
  And into each mouth of him cast a cake,
  And no more heed of thee then shall he take,
  And thou may'st pass into a glorious hall
  Where many a wonder hangs upon the wall;
  But far more wonderful than anything
  The fair slim consort of the gloomy King,
  Arrayed all royally shalt thou behold,
  Who sitting on a carven throne of gold,
  Whene'er thou enterest shall rise up to thee,
  And bid thee welcome there most lovingly,
  And pray thee on a royal bed to sit,
  And share her feast; yet eat thou not of it,
  But sitting on the ground eat bread alone,
  Then do thy message kneeling by her throne;
  And when thou hast the gift, return with speed;
  The sleepy dog of thee shall take no heed,
  The ferryman shall bear thee on thy way
  Without more words, and thou shalt see the day
  Unharmed if that dread box thou openest not;
  But if thou dost, then death shall be thy lot.

    "O beautiful, when safe thou com'st again,
  Remember me, who lie here in such pain
  Unburied; set me in some tomb of stone.
  When thou hast gathered every little bone;
  But never shalt thou set thereon a name,
  Because my ending was with grief and shame,
  Who was a Queen like thee long years agone,
  And in this tower so long have lain alone."

    Then, pale and full of trouble, Psyche went
  Bearing the casket, and her footsteps bent
  To Lacedæmon, and thence found her way
  To Tænarus, and there the golden day
  For that dark cavern did she leave behind;
  Then, going boldly through it, did she find
  The shadowy meads which that wide way ran through,
  Under a seeming sky 'twixt grey and blue;
  No wind blew there, there was no bird or tree,
  Or beast, and dim grey flowers she did but see
  That never faded in that changeless place,
  And if she had but seen a living face
  Most strange and bright she would have thought it there,
  Or if her own face, troubled yet so fair,
  The still pools by the road-side could have shown
  The dimness of that place she might have known;
  But their dull surface cast no image back,
  For all but dreams of light that land did lack.
    So on she passed, still noting every thing,
  Nor yet had she forgotten there to bring
  The honey-cakes and money: in a while
  She saw those shadows striving hard to pile
  The bales upon the ass, and heard them call,
  "O woman, help us! for our skill is small
  And we are feeble in this place indeed;"
  But swiftly did she pass, nor gave them heed,
  Though after her from far their cries they sent.
    Then a long way adown that road she went,
  Not seeing aught, till, as the Shade had said,
  She came upon three women in a shed
  Busily weaving, who cried, "Daughter, leave
  The beaten road a while, and as we weave
  Fill thou our shuttles with these endless threads,
  For here our eyes are sleepy, and our heads
  Are feeble in this miserable place."
  But for their words she did but mend her pace,
  Although her heart beat quick as she passed by.

    Then on she went, until she could espy
  The wan, grey river lap the leaden bank
  Wherefrom there sprouted sparsely sedges rank,
  And there the road had end in that sad boat
  Wherein the dead men unto Minos float;
  There stood the ferryman, who now, seeing her, said,
  "O living soul, that thus among the dead
  Hast come, on whatso errand, without fear,
  Know thou that penniless none passes here;
  Of all the coins that rich men have on earth
  To buy the dreadful folly they call mirth,
  But one they keep when they have passed the grave
  That o'er this stream a passage they may have;
  And thou, though living, art but dead to me,
  Who here, immortal, see mortality
  Pass, stripped of this last thing that men desire
  Unto the changeless meads or changeless fire."
    Speechless she shewed the money on her lip
  Which straight he took, and set her in the ship,
  And then the wretched, heavy oars he threw
  Into the rowlocks and the flood they drew;
  Silent, with eyes that looked beyond her face,
  He laboured, and they left the dreary place.
    But midmost of that water did arise
  A dead man, pale, with ghastly staring eyes
  That somewhat like her father still did seem,
  But in such wise as figures in a dream;
  Then with a lamentable voice it cried,
  "O daughter, I am dead, and in this tide
  For ever shall I drift, an unnamed thing,
  Who was thy father once, a mighty king,
  Unless thou take some pity on me now,
  And bid the ferryman turn here his prow,
  That I with thee to some abode may cross;
  And little unto thee will be the loss,
  And unto me the gain will be to come
  To such a place as I may call a home,
  Being now but dead and empty of delight,
  And set in this sad place 'twixt dark and light."
    Now at these words the tears ran down apace
  For memory of the once familiar face,
  And those old days, wherein, a little child
  'Twixt awe and love beneath those eyes she smiled;
  False pity moved her very heart, although
  The guile of Venus she failed not to know,
  But tighter round the casket clasped her hands,
  And shut her eyes, remembering the commands
  Of that dead queen: so safe to land she came.

    And there in that grey country, like a flame
  Before her eyes rose up the house of gold,
  And at the gate she met the beast threefold,
  Who ran to meet her open-mouthed, but she
  Unto his jaws the cakes cast cunningly,
  But trembling much; then on the ground he lay
  Lolling his heads, and let her go her way;
  And so she came into the mighty hall,
  And saw those wonders hanging on the wall,
  That all with pomegranates was covered o'er
  In memory of the meal on that sad shore,
  Whereby fair Enna was bewept in vain,
  And this became a kingdom and a chain.
    But on a throne, the Queen of all the dead
  She saw therein with gold-embracéd head,
  In royal raiment, beautiful and pale;
  Then with slim hands her face did Psyche veil
  In worship of her, who said, "Welcome here,
  O messenger of Venus! thou art dear
  To me thyself indeed, for of thy grace
  And loveliness we know e'en in this place;
  Rest thee then, fair one, on this royal bed
  And with some dainty food shalt thou be fed;
  Ho, ye who wait, bring in the tables now!"
    Therewith were brought things glorious of show
  On cloths and tables royally beseen,
  By damsels each one fairer than a queen,
  The very latchets of whose shoes were worth
  The royal crown of any queen on earth;
  But when upon them Psyche looked, she saw
  That all these dainty matters without flaw
  Were strange of shape and of strange-blended hues
  So every cup and plate did she refuse
  Those lovely hands brought to her, and she said,
  "O Queen, to me amidst my awe and dread
  These things are nought, my message is not done,
  So let me rest upon this cold grey stone,
  And while my eyes no higher than thy feet
  Are lifted, eat the food that mortals eat."
    Therewith upon the floor she sat her down
  And from the folded bosom of her gown
  Drew forth her bread and ate, while with cold eyes
  Regarding her 'twixt anger and surprise,
  The Queen sat silent for awhile, then spoke,
  "Why art thou here, wisest of living folk?
  Depart in haste, lest thou shouldst come to be
  Thyself a helpless thing and shadowy!
  Give me the casket then, thou need'st not say
  Wherefore thou thus hast passed the awful way;
  Bide there, and for thy mistress shalt thou have
  The charm that beauty from all change can save."
    Then Psyche rose, and from her trembling hand
  Gave her the casket, and awhile did stand
  Alone within the hall, that changing light
  From burning streams, and shadowy waves of night
  Made strange and dread, till to her, standing there
  The world began to seem no longer fair,
  Life no more to be hoped for, but that place
  The peaceful goal of all the hurrying race,
  The house she must return to on some day.
    Then sighing scarcely could she turn away
  When with the casket came the Queen once more,
  And said, "Haste now to leave this shadowy shore
  Before thou changest; even now I see
  Thine eyes are growing strange, thou look'st on me
  E'en as the linnet looks upon the snake.
  Behold, thy wisely-guarded treasure take,
  And let thy breath of life no longer move
  The shadows with the memories of past love."

    But Psyche at that name, with quickened heart
  Turned eagerly, and hastened to depart
  Bearing that burden, hoping for the day;
  Harmless, asleep, the triple monster lay,
  The ferryman did set her in his boat
  Unquestioned, and together did they float
  Over the leaden water back again:
  Nor saw she more those women bent with pain
  Over their weaving, nor the fallen ass,
  But swiftly up the grey road did she pass
  And well-nigh now was come into the day
  By hollow Tænarus, but o'er the way
  The wings of Envy brooded all unseen;
  Because indeed the cruel and fair Queen
  Knew well how she had sped; so in her breast,
  Against the which the dreadful box was pressed,
  Grew up at last this foolish, harmful thought.
    "Behold how far this beauty I have brought
  To give unto my bitter enemy;
  Might I not still a very goddess be
  If this were mine which goddesses desire,
  Yea, what if this hold swift consuming fire,
  Why do I think it good for me to live,
  That I my body once again may give
  Into her cruel hands--come death! come life!
  And give me end to all the bitter strife!"
    Therewith down by the wayside did she sit
  And turned the box round, long regarding it;
  But at the last, with trembling hands, undid
  The clasp, and fearfully raised up the lid;
  But what was there she saw not, for her head
  Fell back, and nothing she rememberéd
  Of all her life, yet nought of rest she had,
  The hope of which makes hapless mortals glad;
  For while her limbs were sunk in deadly sleep
  Most like to death, over her heart 'gan creep
  Ill dreams; so that for fear and great distress
  She would have cried, but in her helplessness
  Could open not her mouth, or frame a word;
  Although the threats of mocking things she heard,
  And seemed, amidst new forms of horror bound,
  To watch strange endless armies moving round,
  With all their sleepless eyes still fixed on her,
  Who from that changeless place should never stir.
  Moveless she lay, and in that dreadful sleep
  Scarce had the strength some few slow tears to weep.

    And there she would have lain for evermore,
  A marble image on the shadowy shore
  In outward seeming, but within oppressed
  With torments, knowing neither hope nor rest
  But as she lay the Phoenix flew along
  Going to Egypt, and knew all her wrong,
  And pitied her, beholding her sweet face,
  And flew to Love and told him of her case;
  And Love, in guerdon of the tale he told,
  Changed all the feathers of his neck to gold,
  And he flew on to Egypt glad at heart.
  But Love himself gat swiftly for his part
  To rocky Tænarus, and found her there
  Laid half a furlong from the outer air.

    But at that sight out burst the smothered flame
  Of love, when he remembered all her shame,
  The stripes, the labour, and the wretched fear,
  And kneeling down he whispered in her ear,
  "Rise, Psyche, and be mine for evermore,
  For evil is long tarrying on this shore."
  Then when she heard him, straightway she arose,
  And from her fell the burden of her woes;
  And yet her heart within her well-nigh broke,
  When she from grief to happiness awoke;
  And loud her sobbing was in that grey place,
  And with sweet shame she covered up her face.
    But her dear hands, all wet with tears, he kissed,
  And taking them about each dainty wrist
  Drew them away, and in a sweet voice said,
  "Raise up again, O Psyche, that dear head,
  And of thy simpleness have no more shame;
  Thou hast been tried, and cast away all blame
  Into the sea of woes that thou didst bear,
  The bitter pain, the hopelessness, the fear--
  Holpen a little, loved with boundless love
  Amidst them all--but now the shadows move
  Fast toward the west, earth's day is well-nigh done,
  One toil thou hast yet; by to-morrow's sun
  Kneel the last time before my mother's feet,
  Thy task accomplished; and my heart, O sweet,
  Shall go with thee to ease thy toilsome way;
  Farewell awhile! but that so glorious day
  I promised thee of old, now cometh fast,
  When even hope thy soul aside shall cast,
  Amidst the joy that thou shalt surely win."
    So saying, all that sleep he shut within
  The dreadful casket, and aloft he flew,
  But slowly she unto the cavern drew
  Scarce knowing if she dreamed, and so she came
  Unto the earth where yet the sun did flame
  Low down between the pine-trunks, tall and red,
  And with its last beams kissed her golden head.

       *       *       *       *       *

    With what words Love unto the Father prayed
  I know not, nor what deeds the balance weighed;
  But this I know, that he prayed not in vain,
  And Psyche's life the heavenly crown shall gain;
  So round about the messenger was sent
  To tell immortals of their King's intent,
  And bid them gather to the Father's hall.
    But while they got them ready at his call,
  On through the night was Psyche toiling still,
  To whom no pain nor weariness seemed ill
  Since now once more she knew herself beloved;
  But when the unresting world again had moved
  Round into golden day, she came again
  To that fair place where she had borne such pain,
  And flushed and joyful in despite her fear,
  Unto the goddess did she draw anear,
  And knelt adown before her golden seat,
  Laying the fatal casket at her feet;
  Then at the first no word the Sea-born said,
  But looked afar over her golden head,
  Pondering upon the mighty deeds of fate;
  While Psyche still, as one who well may wait,
  Knelt, calm and motionless, nor said a word,
  But ever thought of her sweet lovesome lord.
    At last the Queen said, "Girl, I bid thee rise,
  For now hast thou found favour in mine eyes;
  And I repent me of the misery
  That in this place thou hast endured of me,
  Although because of it, thy joy indeed
  Shall now be more, that pleasure is thy meed."
    Then bending, on the forehead did she kiss
  Fair Psyche, who turned red for shame and bliss;
  But Venus smiled again on her, and said,
  "Go now, and bathe, and be as well arrayed
  As thou shouldst be, to sit beside my son;
  I think thy life on earth is well-nigh done."

    So thence once more was Psyche led away,
  And cast into no prison on that day,
  But brought unto a bath beset with flowers,
  Made dainty with a fount's sweet-smelling showers,
  And there being bathed, e'en in such fair attire
  As veils the glorious Mother of Desire
  Her limbs were veiled, then in the wavering shade,
  Amidst the sweetest garden was she laid,
  And while the damsels round her watch did keep,
  At last she closed her weary eyes in sleep,
  And woke no more to earth, for ere the day
  Had yet grown late, once more asleep she lay
  Within the West Wind's mighty arms, nor woke
  Until the light of heaven upon her broke,
  And on her trembling lips she felt the kiss
  Of very Love, and mortal yet, for bliss
  Must fall a-weeping. O for me! that I,
  Who late have told her woe and misery,
  Must leave untold the joy unspeakable
  That on her tender wounded spirit fell!
  Alas! I try to think of it in vain,
  My lyre is but attuned to tears and pain,
  How shall I sing the never-ending day?

    Led by the hand of Love she took her way
  Unto a vale beset with heavenly trees,
  Where all the gathered gods and goddesses
  Abode her coming; but when Psyche saw
  The Father's face, she fainting with her awe
  Had fallen, but that Love's arm held her up.
    Then brought the cup-bearer a golden cup,
  And gently set it in her slender hand,
  And while in dread and wonder she did stand,
  The Father's awful voice smote on her ear,
  "Drink now, O beautiful, and have no fear!
  For with this draught shalt thou be born again.
  And live for ever free from care and pain."

    Then, pale as privet, took she heart to drink,
  And therewithal most strange new thoughts did think,
  And unknown feelings seized her, and there came
  Sudden remembrance, vivid as a flame,
  Of everything that she had done on earth,
  Although it all seemed changed in weight and worth,
  Small things becoming great, and great things small;
  And godlike pity touched her therewithal
  For her old self, for sons of men that die;
  And that sweet new-born immortality
  Now with full love her rested spirit fed.

    Then in that concourse did she lift her head,
  And stood at last a very goddess there,
  And all cried out at seeing her grown so fair.

    So while in heaven quick passed the time away,
  About the ending of that lovely day,
  Bright shone the low sun over all the earth
  For joy of such a wonderful new birth.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Or e'er his tale was done, night held the earth;
  Yea, the brown bird grown bold, as sounds of mirth
  Grew faint and scanty, now his tale had done,
  And by his mate abode the next day's sun;
  And in those old hearts did the story move
  Remembrance of the mighty deeds of love,
  And with these thoughts did hopes of life arise,
  Till tears unseen were in their ancient eyes,
  And in their yearning hearts unspoken prayers,
  And idle seemed the world with all its cares.

    Few words they said; the balmy odorous wind
  Wandered about, some resting-place to find;
  The young leaves rustled 'neath its gentle breath,
  And here and there some blossom burst his sheath,
  Adding unnoticed fragrance to the night;
  But, as they pondered, a new golden light
  Streamed over the green garden, and they heard
  Sweet voices sing some ancient poet's word
  In praise of May, and then in sight there came
  The minstrels' figures underneath the flame
  Of scented torches passing 'twixt the trees,
  And soon the dusky hall grew bright with these,
  And therewithal they put all thought away,
  And midst the tinkling harps drank deep to May.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Through many changes had the May-tide passed,
  The hope of summer oft had been o'ercast,
  Ere midst the gardens they once more were met;
  But now the full-leaved trees might well forget
  The changeful agony of doubtful spring,
  For summer pregnant with so many a thing
  Was at the door; right hot had been the day
  Which they amid the trees had passed away,
  And now betwixt the tulip beds they went
  Unto the hall, and thoughts of days long spent
  Gathered about them, as some blossom's smell
  Unto their hearts familiar tales did tell.
    But when they well were settled in the hall,
  And now behind the trees the sun 'gan fall,
  And they as yet no history had heard,
  Laurence, the Swabian priest, took up the word,
  And said, "Ye know from what has gone before,
  That in my youth I followed mystic lore,
  And many books I read in seeking it,
  And through my memory this same eve doth flit
  A certain tale I found in one of these,
  Long ere mine eyes had looked upon the seas;
  It made me shudder in the times gone by,
  When I believed in many a mystery
  I thought divine, that now I think, forsooth,
  Men's own fears made, to fill the place of truth
  Within their foolish hearts; short is the tale,
  And therefore will the better now avail
  To fill the space before the night comes on,
  And unto rest once more the world is won.




THE WRITING ON THE IMAGE.

ARGUMENT.

How on an image that stood anciently in Rome were written certain words,
    which none understood, until a Scholar, coming there, knew their
    meaning, and thereby discovered great marvels, but withal died
    miserably.


    In half-forgotten days of old,
  As by our fathers we were told,
  Within the town of Rome there stood
  An image cut of cornel wood,
  And on the upraised hand of it
  Men might behold these letters writ:
  "PERCUTE HIC:" which is to say,
  In that tongue that we speak to-day,
  "_Strike here!_" nor yet did any know
  The cause why this was written so.

    Thus in the middle of the square,
  In the hot sun and summer air,
  The snow-drift and the driving rain,
  That image stood, with little pain,
  For twice a hundred years and ten;
  While many a band of striving men
  Were driven betwixt woe and mirth
  Swiftly across the weary earth,
  From nothing unto dark nothing:
  And many an emperor and king,
  Passing with glory or with shame,
  Left little record of his name,
  And no remembrance of the face
  Once watched with awe for gifts or grace
    Fear little, then, I counsel you,
  What any son of man can do;
  Because a log of wood will last
  While many a life of man goes past,
  And all is over in short space.

    Now so it chanced that to this place
  There came a man of Sicily,
  Who when the image he did see,
  Knew full well who, in days of yore,
  Had set it there; for much strange lore,
  In Egypt and in Babylon,
  This man with painful toil had won;
  And many secret things could do;
  So verily full well he knew
  That master of all sorcery
  Who wrought the thing in days gone by,
  And doubted not that some great spell
  It guarded, but could nowise tell
  What it might be. So, day by day,
  Still would he loiter on the way,
  And watch the image carefully,
  Well mocked of many a passer-by.
    And on a day he stood and gazed
  Upon the slender finger, raised
  Against a doubtful cloudy sky,
  Nigh noontide; and thought, "Certainly
  The master who made thee so fair
  By wondrous art, had not stopped there,
  But made thee speak, had he not thought
  That thereby evil might be brought
  Upon his spell." But as he spoke,
  From out a cloud the noon sun broke
  With watery light, and shadows cold:
  Then did the Scholar well behold
  How, from that finger carved to tell
  Those words, a short black shadow fell
  Upon a certain spot of ground,
  And thereon, looking all around
  And seeing none heeding, went straightway
  Whereas the finger's shadow lay,
  And with his knife about the place
  A little circle did he trace;
  Then home he turned with throbbing head,
  And forthright gat him to his bed,
  And slept until the night was late
  And few men stirred from gate to gate.
    So when at midnight he did wake,
  Pickaxe and shovel did he take,
  And, going to that now silent square,
  He found the mark his knife made there,
  And quietly with many a stroke
  The pavement of the place he broke:
  And so, the stones being set apart,
  He 'gan to dig with beating heart,
  And from the hole in haste he cast
  The marl and gravel; till at last,
  Full shoulder high, his arms were jarred,
  For suddenly his spade struck hard
  With clang against some metal thing:
  And soon he found a brazen ring,
  All green with rust, twisted, and great
  As a man's wrist, set in a plate
  Of copper, wrought all curiously
  With words unknown though plain to see,
  Spite of the rust; and flowering trees,
  And beasts, and wicked images,
  Whereat he shuddered: for he knew
  What ill things he might come to do,
  If he should still take part with these
  And that Great Master strive to please.
    But small time had he then to stand
  And think, so straight he set his hand
  Unto the ring, but where he thought
  That by main strength it must be brought
  From out its place, lo! easily
  It came away, and let him see
  A winding staircase wrought of stone,
  Wherethrough the new-come wind did moan.
    Then thought he, "If I come alive
  From out this place well shall I thrive,
  For I may look here certainly
  The treasures of a king to see,
  A mightier man than men are now.
  So in few days what man shall know
  The needy Scholar, seeing me
  Great in the place where great men be,
  The richest man in all the land?
  Beside the best then shall I stand,
  And some unheard-of palace have;
  And if my soul I may not save
  In heaven, yet here in all men's eyes
  Will I make some sweet paradise,
  With marble cloisters, and with trees
  And bubbling wells, and fantasies,
  And things all men deem strange and rare,
  And crowds of women kind and fair,
  That I may see, if so I please,
  Laid on the flowers, or mid the trees
  With half-clad bodies wandering.
  There, dwelling happier than the king,
  What lovely days may yet be mine!
  How shall I live with love and wine,
  And music, till I come to die!
  And then----Who knoweth certainly
  What haps to us when we are dead?
  Truly I think by likelihead
  Nought haps to us of good or bad;
  Therefore on earth will I be glad
  A short space, free from hope or fear;
  And fearless will I enter here
  And meet my fate, whatso it be."

    Now on his back a bag had he,
  To bear what treasure he might win,
  And therewith now did he begin
  To go adown the winding stair;
  And found the walls all painted fair
  With images of many a thing,
  Warrior and priest, and queen and king,
  But nothing knew what they might be.
  Which things full clearly could he see,
  For lamps were hung up here and there
  Of strange device, but wrought right fair,
  And pleasant savour came from them.
    At last a curtain, on whose hem
  Unknown words in red gold were writ,
  He reached, and softly raising it
  Stepped back, for now did he behold
  A goodly hall hung round with gold,
  And at the upper end could see
  Sitting, a glorious company:
  Therefore he trembled, thinking well
  They were no men, but fiends of hell.
  But while he waited, trembling sore,
  And doubtful of his late-earned lore,
  A cold blast of the outer air
  Blew out the lamps upon the stair
  And all was dark behind him; then
  Did he fear less to face those men
  Than, turning round, to leave them there
  While he went groping up the stair.
  Yea, since he heard no cry or call
  Or any speech from them at all,
  He doubted they were images
  Set there some dying king to please
  By that Great Master of the art;
  Therefore at last with stouter heart
  He raised the cloth and entered in
  In hope that happy life to win,
  And drawing nigher did behold
  That these were bodies dead and cold
  Attired in full royal guise,
  And wrought by art in such a wise
  That living they all seemed to be,
  Whose very eyes he well could see,
  That now beheld not foul or fair,
  Shining as though alive they were.
  And midmost of that company
  An ancient king that man could see,
  A mighty man, whose beard of grey
  A foot over his gold gown lay;
  And next beside him sat his queen
  Who in a flowery gown of green
  And golden mantle well was clad,
  And on her neck a collar had
  Too heavy for her dainty breast;
  Her loins by such a belt were prest
  That whoso in his treasury
  Held that alone, a king might be.
  On either side of these, a lord
  Stood heedfully before the board,
  And in their hands held bread and wine
  For service; behind these did shine
  The armour of the guards, and then
  The well-attiréd serving-men,
  The minstrels clad in raiment meet;
  And over against the royal seat
  Was hung a lamp, although no flame
  Was burning there, but there was set
  Within its open golden fret
  A huge carbuncle, red and bright;
  Wherefrom there shone forth such a light
  That great hall was as clear by it,
  As though by wax it had been lit,
  As some great church at Easter-tide.
    Now set a little way aside,
  Six paces from the daïs stood
  An image made of brass and wood,
  In likeness of a full-armed knight
  Who pointed 'gainst the ruddy light
  A huge shaft ready in a bow.
    Pondering how he could come to know
  What all these marvellous matters meant,
  About the hall the Scholar went,
  Trembling, though nothing moved as yet;
  And for awhile did he forget
  The longings that had brought him there
  In wondering at these marvels fair;
  And still for fear he doubted much
  One jewel of their robes to touch.

    But as about the hall he passed
  He grew more used to them at last,
  And thought, "Swiftly the time goes by,
  And now no doubt the day draws nigh
  Folk will be stirring: by my head
  A fool I am to fear the dead,
  Who have seen living things enow,
  Whose very names no man can know,
  Whose shapes brave men might well affright
  More than the lion in the night
  Wandering for food;" therewith he drew
  Unto those royal corpses two,
  That on dead brows still wore the crown;
  And midst the golden cups set down
  The rugged wallet from his back,
  Patched of strong leather, brown and black.
  Then, opening wide its mouth, took up
  From off the board, a golden cup
  The King's dead hand was laid upon,
  Whose unmoved eyes upon him shone
  And recked no more of that last shame
  Than if he were the beggar lame,
  Who in old days was wont to wait
  For a dog's meal beside the gate.
    Of which shame nought our man did reck.
  But laid his hand upon the neck
  Of the slim Queen, and thence undid
  The jewelled collar, that straight slid
  Down her smooth bosom to the board.
  And when these matters he had stored
  Safe in his sack, with both their crowns,
  The jewelled parts of their rich gowns,
  Their shoes and belts, brooches and rings,
  And cleared the board of all rich things,
  He staggered with them down the hall.
  But as he went his eyes did fall
  Upon a wonderful green stone,
  Upon the hall-floor laid alone;
  He said, "Though thou art not so great
  To add by much unto the weight
  Of this my sack indeed, yet thou,
  Certes, would make me rich enow,
  That verily with thee I might
  Wage one-half of the world to fight
  The other half of it, and I
  The lord of all the world might die;--
  I will not leave thee;" therewithal
  He knelt down midmost of the hall,
  Thinking it would come easily
  Into his hand; but when that he
  Gat hold of it, full fast it stack,
  So fuming, down he laid his sack,
  And with both hands pulled lustily,
  But as he strained, he cast his eye
  Back to the daïs; there he saw
  The bowman image 'gin to draw
  The mighty bowstring to his ear,
  So, shrieking out aloud for fear,
  Of that rich stone he loosed his hold
  And catching up his bag of gold,
  Gat to his feet: but ere he stood
  The evil thing of brass and wood
  Up to his ear the notches drew;
  And clanging, forth the arrow flew,
  And midmost of the carbuncle
  Clanging again, the forked barbs fell,
  And all was dark as pitch straightway.

    So there until the judgment day
  Shall come and find his bones laid low
  And raise them up for weal or woe,
  This man must bide; cast down he lay
  While all his past life day by day
  In one short moment he could see
  Drawn out before him, while that he
  In terror by that fatal stone
  Was laid, and scarcely dared to moan.
  But in a while his hope returned,
  And then, though nothing he discerned,
  He gat him up upon his feet,
  And all about the walls he beat
  To find some token of the door,
  But never could he find it more,
  For by some dreadful sorcery
  All was sealed close as it might be
  And midst the marvels of that hall
  This scholar found the end of all.

    But in the town on that same night,
  An hour before the dawn of light,
  Such storm upon the place there fell,
  That not the oldest man could tell
  Of such another: and thereby
  The image was burnt utterly,
  Being stricken from the clouds above;
  And folk deemed that same bolt did move
  The pavement where that wretched one
  Unto his foredoomed fate had gone,
  Because the plate was set again
  Into its place, and the great rain
  Washed the earth down, and sorcery
  Had hid the place where it did lie.
    So soon the stones were set all straight,
  But yet the folk, afraid of fate,
  Where once the man of cornel wood
  Through many a year of bad and good
  Had kept his place, set up alone
  Great Jove himself, cut in white stone,
  But thickly overlaid with gold.
  "Which," saith my tale, "you may behold
  Unto this day, although indeed
  Some Lord or other, being in need,
  Took every ounce of gold away."
    But now, this tale in some past day
  Being writ, I warrant all is gone,
  Both gold and weather-beaten stone.

    Be merry, masters, while ye may,
  For men much quicker pass away.

       *       *       *       *       *

    They praised the tale, and for awhile they talked
  Of other tales of treasure-seekers balked,
  And shame and loss for men insatiate stored,
  Nitocris' tomb, the Niblungs' fatal hoard,
  The serpent-guarded treasures of the dead;
  Then of how men would be rememberéd
  When they are gone; and more than one could tell
  Of what unhappy things therefrom befell;
  Or how by folly men have gained a name;
  A name indeed, not hallowed by the fame
  Of any deeds remembered: and some thought,--
  "Strange hopes and fears for what shall be but nought
  To dead men! better it would be to give
  What things they may, while on the earth they live
  Unto the earth, and from the bounteous earth
  To take their pay of sorrow or of mirth,
  Hatred or love, and get them on their way;
  And let the teeming earth fresh troubles make
  For other men, and ever for their sake
  Use what they left, when they are gone from it."

    But while amid such musings they did sit,
  Dark night being come, men lighted up the hall,
  And the chief man for minstrelsy did call,
  And other talk their dull thoughts chased away,
  Nor did they part till night was mixed with day.




JUNE.


    O June, O June, that we desired so,
  Wilt thou not make us happy on this day?
  Across the river thy soft breezes blow
  Sweet with the scent of beanfields far away,
  Above our heads rustle the aspens grey,
  Calm is the sky with harmless clouds beset,
  No thought of storm the morning vexes yet.

    See, we have left our hopes and fears behind
  To give our very hearts up unto thee;
  What better place than this then could we find
  By this sweet stream that knows not of the sea,
  That guesses not the city's misery,
  This little stream whose hamlets scarce have names,
  This far-off, lonely mother of the Thames?

    Here then, O June, thy kindness will we take;
  And if indeed but pensive men we seem,
  What should we do? thou wouldst not have us wake
  From out the arms of this rare happy dream
  And wish to leave the murmur of the stream,
  The rustling boughs, the twitter of the birds,
  And all thy thousand peaceful happy words.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now in the early June they deemed it good
  That they should go unto a house that stood
  On their chief river, so upon a day
  With favouring wind and tide they took their way
  Up the fair stream; most lovely was the time
  Even amidst the days of that fair clime,
  And still the wanderers thought about their lives,
  And that desire that rippling water gives
  To youthful hearts to wander anywhere.
    So midst sweet sights and sounds a house most fair
  They came to, set upon the river side
  Where kindly folk their coming did abide;
  There they took land, and in the lime-trees' shade
  Beneath the trees they found the fair feast laid,
  And sat, well pleased; but when the water-hen
  Had got at last to think them harmless men,
  And they with rest, and pleasure, and old wine,
  Began to feel immortal and divine,
  An elder spoke, "O gentle friends, the day
  Amid such calm delight now slips away,
  And ye yourselves are grown so bright and glad
  I care not if I tell you something sad;
  Sad, though the life I tell you of passed by,
  Unstained by sordid strife or misery;
  Sad, because though a glorious end it tells,
  Yet on the end of glorious life it dwells,
  And striving through all things to reach the best
  Upon no midway happiness will rest."




THE LOVE OF ALCESTIS.

ARGUMENT

Admetus, King of Pheræ in Thessaly, received unwittingly Apollo as his
    servant, by the help of whom he won to wife Alcestis, daughter of
    Pelias: afterwards too, as in other things, so principally in this,
    Apollo gave him help, that when he came to die, he obtained of the
    Fates for him, that if another would die willingly in his stead, then
    he should live still; and when to every one else this seemed
    impossible, Alcestis gave her life for her husband's.


    Midst sunny grass-clad meads that slope adown
  To lake Boebeis stands an ancient town,
  Where dwelt of old a lord of Thessaly,
  The son of Pheres and fair Clymene,
  Who had to name Admetus: long ago
  The dwellers by the lake have ceased to know
  His name, because the world grows old, but then
  He was accounted great among great men;
  Young, strong, and godlike, lacking nought at all
  Of gifts that unto royal men might fall
  In those old simple days, before men went
  To gather unseen harm and discontent,
  Along with all the alien merchandise
  That rich folk need, too restless to be wise.

    Now on the fairest of all autumn eves,
  When midst the dusty, crumpled, dying leaves
  The black grapes showed, and every press and vat
  Was newly scoured, this King Admetus sat
  Among his people, wearied in such wise
  By hopeful toil as makes a paradise
  Of the rich earth; for light and far away
  Seemed all the labour of the coming day,
  And no man wished for more than then he had,
  Nor with another's mourning was made glad.
  There in the pillared porch, their supper done,
  They watched the fair departing of the sun;
  The while the soft-eyed well-girt maidens poured
  The joy of life from out the jars long stored
  Deep in the earth, while little like a king,
  As we call kings, but glad with everything,
  The wise Thessalian sat and blessed his life,
  So free from sickening fear and foolish strife.
    But midst the joy of this festivity,
  Turning aside he saw a man draw nigh,
  Along the dusty grey vine-bordered road
  That had its ending at his fair abode;
  He seemed e'en from afar to set his face
  Unto the King's adornéd reverend place,
  And like a traveller went he wearily,
  And yet as one who seems his rest to see.
  A staff he bore, but nowise was he bent
  With scrip or wallet; so withal he went
  Straight to the King's high seat, and standing near,
  Seemed a stout youth and noble, free from fear,
  But peaceful and unarmed; and though ill clad,
  And though the dust of that hot land he had
  Upon his limbs and face, as fair was he
  As any king's son you might lightly see,
  Grey-eyed and crisp-haired, beautiful of limb,
  And no ill eye the women cast on him.
    But kneeling now, and stretching forth his hand,
  He said, "O thou, the king of this fair land,
  Unto a banished man some shelter give,
  And help me with thy goods that I may live:
  Thou hast good store, Admetus, yet may I,
  Who kneel before thee now in misery,
  Give thee more gifts before the end shall come
  Than all thou hast laid safely in thine home."
    "Rise up, and be my guest," Admetus said,
  "I need no gifts for this poor gift of bread,
  The land is wide, and bountiful enow.
  What thou canst do, to-morrow thou shalt show,
  And be my man, perchance; but this night rest
  Not questioned more than any passing guest.
  Yea, even if a great king thou hast spilt,
  Thou shall not answer aught but as thou wilt."
    Then the man rose and said, "O King, indeed
  Of thine awarded silence have I need,
  Nameless I am, nameless what I have done
  Must be through many circles of the sun.
  But for to-morrow--let me rather tell
  On this same eve what things I can do well,
  And let me put mine hand in thine and swear
  To serve thee faithfully a changing year;
  Nor think the woods of Ossa hold one beast
  That of thy tenderest yearling shall make feast,
  Whiles that I guard thy flocks, and thou shalt bear
  Thy troubles easier when thou com'st to hear
  The music I can make. Let these thy men
  Witness against me if I fail thee, when
  War falls upon thy lovely land and thee."
    Then the King smiled, and said, "So let it be,
  Well shalt thou serve me, doing far less than this,
  Nor for thy service due gifts shalt thou miss:
  Behold I take thy faith with thy right hand,
  Be thou true man unto this guarded land.
  Ho ye! take this my guest, find raiment meet
  Wherewith to clothe him; bathe his wearied feet,
  And bring him back beside my throne to feast."
    But to himself he said, "I am the least
  Of all Thessalians if this man was born
  In any earthly dwelling more forlorn
  Than a king's palace."
                         Then a damsel slim
  Led him inside, nought loth to go with him,
  And when the cloud of steam had curled to meet
  Within the brass his wearied dusty feet,
  She from a carved press brought him linen fair,
  And a new-woven coat a king might wear,
  And so being clad he came unto the feast,
  But as he came again, all people ceased
  What talk they held soever, for they thought
  A very god among them had been brought;
  And doubly glad the king Admetus was
  At what that dying eve had brought to pass,
  And bade him sit by him and feast his fill.
    So there they sat till all the world was still,
  And 'twixt the pillars their red torches' shine
  Held forth unto the night a joyous sign.

       *       *       *       *       *

  So henceforth did this man at Pheræ dwell,
  And what he set his hand to wrought right well,
  And won much praise and love in everything,
  And came to rule all herdsmen of the King;
  But for two things in chief his fame did grow;
  And first that he was better with the bow
  Than any 'twixt Olympus and the sea,
  And then that sweet, heart-piercing melody
  He drew out from the rigid-seeming lyre,
  And made the circle round the winter fire
  More like to heaven than gardens of the May.
  So many a heavy thought he chased away
  From the King's heart, and softened many a hate,
  And choked the spring of many a harsh debate;
  And, taught by wounds, the snatchers of the wolds
  Lurked round the gates of less well-guarded folds.
  Therefore Admetus loved him, yet withal,
  Strange doubts and fears upon his heart did fall;
  For morns there were when he the man would meet,
  His hair wreathed round with bay and blossoms sweet,
  Gazing distraught into the brightening east,
  Nor taking heed of either man or beast,
  Or anything that was upon the earth.
  Or sometimes, midst the hottest of the mirth,
  Within the King's hall, would he seem to wake
  As from a dream, and his stringed tortoise take
  And strike the cords unbidden, till the hall
  Filled with the glorious sound from wall to wall,
  Trembled and seemed as it would melt away,
  And sunken down the faces weeping lay
  That erewhile laughed the loudest; only he
  Stood upright, looking forward steadily
  With sparkling eyes as one who cannot weep,
  Until the storm of music sank to sleep.

    But this thing seemed the doubtfullest of all
  Unto the King, that should there chance to fall
  A festal day, and folk did sacrifice
  Unto the gods, ever by some device
  The man would be away: yet with all this
  His presence doubled all Admetus' bliss,
  And happy in all things he seemed to live,
  And great gifts to his herdsman did he give.
    But now the year came round again to spring,
  And southward to Iolchos went the King;
  For there did Pelias hold a sacrifice
  Unto the gods, and put forth things of price
  For men to strive for in the people's sight;
  So on a morn of April, fresh and bright,
  Admetus shook the golden-studded reins,
  And soon from windings of the sweet-banked lanes
  The south wind blew the sound of hoof and wheel,
  Clatter of brazen shields and clink of steel
  Unto the herdsman's ears, who stood awhile
  Hearkening the echoes with a godlike smile,
  Then slowly gat him foldwards, murmuring,
  "Fair music for the wooing of a King."
    But in six days again Admetus came,
  With no lost labour or dishonoured name;
  A scarlet cloak upon his back he bare
  A gold crown on his head, a falchion fair
  Girt to his side; behind him four white steeds,
  Whose dams had fed full in Nisæan meads;
  All prizes that his valiant hands had won
  Within the guarded lists of Tyro's son.
  Yet midst the sound of joyous minstrelsy
  No joyous man in truth he seemed to be;
  So that folk looking on him said, "Behold,
  The wise King will not show himself too bold
  Amidst his greatness: the gods too are great,
  And who can tell the dreadful ways of fate?"
    Howe'er it was, he gat him through the town,
  And midst their shouts at last he lighted down
  At his own house, and held high feast that night;
  And yet by seeming had but small delight
  In aught that any man could do or say:
  And on the morrow, just at dawn of day,
  Rose up and clad himself, and took his spear.
  And in the fresh and blossom-scented air
  Went wandering till he reach Boebeis' shore;
  Yet by his troubled face set little store
  By all the songs of birds and scent of flowers;
  Yea, rather unto him the fragrant hours
  Were grown but dull and empty of delight.
    So going, at the last he came in sight
  Of his new herdsman, who that morning lay
  Close by the white sand of a little bay
  The teeming ripple of Boebeis lapped;
  There he in cloak of white-wooled sheepskin wrapped
  Against the cold dew, free from trouble sang,
  The while the heifers' bells about him rang
  And mingled with the sweet soft-throated birds
  And bright fresh ripple: listen, then, these words
  Will tell the tale of his felicity,
  Halting and void of music though they be.


SONG.

    O Dwellers on the lovely earth,
    Why will ye break your rest and mirth
    To weary us with fruitless prayer;
    Why will ye toil and take such care
    For children's children yet unborn,
    And garner store of strife and scorn
    To gain a scarce-remembered name,
    Cumbered with lies and soiled with shame?
    And if the gods care not for you,
    What is this folly ye must do
    To win some mortal's feeble heart?
    O fools! when each man plays his part,
    And heeds his fellow little more
    Than these blue waves that kiss the shore
    Take heed of how the daisies grow.
    O fools! and if ye could but know
    How fair a world to you is given.

      O brooder on the hills of heaven,
    When for my sin thou drav'st me forth,
    Hadst thou forgot what this was worth,
    Thine own hand had made? The tears of men,
    The death of threescore years and ten,
    The trembling of the timorous race--
    Had these things so bedimmed the place
    Thine own hand made, thou couldst not know
    To what a heaven the earth might grow
    If fear beneath the earth were laid,
    If hope failed not, nor love decayed.

    He stopped, for he beheld his wandering lord,
  Who, drawing near, heard little of his word,
  And noted less; for in that haggard mood
  Nought could he do but o'er his sorrows brood,
  Whate'er they were, but now being come anigh,
  He lifted up his drawn face suddenly,
  And as the singer gat him to his feet,
  His eyes Admetus' troubled eyes did meet,
  As with some speech he now seemed labouring,
  Which from his heart his lips refused to bring.
  Then spoke the herdsman, "Master, what is this,
  That thou, returned with honour to the bliss,
  The gods have given thee here, still makest show
  To be some wretch bent with the weight of woe?
  What wilt thou have? What help there is in me
  Is wholly thine, for in felicity
  Within thine house thou still hast let me live,
  Nor grudged most noble gifts to me to give."

    "Yea," said Admetus, "thou canst help indeed,
  But as the spring shower helps the unsown mead.
  Yet listen: at Iolchos the first day
  Unto Diana's house I took my way,
  Where all men gathered ere the games began,
  There, at the right side of the royal man,
  Who rules Iolchos, did his daughter stand,
  Who with a suppliant bough in her right hand
  Headed the band of maidens; but to me
  More than a goddess did she seem to be,
  Nor fit to die; and therewithal I thought
  That we had all been thither called for nought
  But that her bridegroom Pelias might choose,
  And with that thought desire did I let loose,
  And striving not with Love, I gazed my fill,
  As one who will not fear the coming ill:
  All, foolish were mine eyes, foolish my heart,
  To strive in such a marvel to have part!
  What god shall wed her rather? no more fear
  Than vexes Pallas vexed her forehead clear,
  Faith shone from out her eyes, and on her lips
  Unknown love trembled; the Phoenician ships
  Within their dark holds nought so precious bring
  As her soft golden hair, no daintiest thing
  I ever saw was half so wisely wrought
  As was her rosy ear; beyond all thought,
  All words to tell of, her veiled body showed,
  As, by the image of the Three-formed bowed,
  She laid her offering down; then I drawn near
  The murmuring of her gentle voice could hear,
  As waking one hears music in the morn,
  Ere yet the fair June sun is fully born;
  And sweeter than the roses fresh with dew
  Sweet odours floated round me, as she drew
  Some golden thing from out her balmy breast
  With her right hand, the while her left hand pressed
  The hidden wonders of her girdlestead;
  And when abashed I sank adown my head,
  Dreading the god of Love, my eyes must meet
  The happy bands about her perfect feet.
    "What more? thou know'st perchance what thing love is?
  Kindness, and hot desire, and rage, and bliss,
  None first a moment; but before that day
  No love I knew but what might pass away
  When hot desire was changed to certainty,
  Or not abide much longer; e'en such stings
  Had smitten me, as the first warm day brings
  When March is dying; but now half a god
  The crowded way unto the lists I trod,
  Yet hopeless as a vanquished god at whiles,
  And hideous seemed the laughter and the smiles,
  And idle talk about me on the way.
    "But none could stand before me on that day,
  I was as god-possessed, not knowing how
  The King had brought her forth but for a show,
  To make his glory greater through the land:
  Therefore at last victorious did I stand
  Among my peers, nor yet one well-known name
  Had gathered any honour from my shame.
  For there indeed both men of Thessaly,
  Oetolians, Thebans, dwellers by the sea,
  And folk of Attica and Argolis,
  Arcadian woodmen, islanders, whose bliss
  Is to be tossed about from wave to wave,
  All these at last to me the honour gave,
  Nor did they grudge it: yea, and one man said,
  A wise Thessalian with a snowy head,
  And voice grown thin with age, 'O Pelias,
  Surely to thee no evil thing it was
  That to thy house this rich Thessalian
  Should come, to prove himself a valiant man
  Amongst these heroes; for if I be wise
  By dint of many years, with wistful eyes
  Doth he behold thy daughter, this fair maid;
  And surely, if the matter were well weighed,
  Good were it both for thee and for the land
  That he should take the damsel by the hand
  And lead her hence, for ye near neighbours dwell;
  What sayest thou, King, have I said ill or well?'
    "With that must I, a fool, stand forth and ask
  If yet there lay before me some great task
  That I must do ere I the maid should wed,
  But Pelias, looking on us, smiled and said,
  'O neighbour of Larissa, and thou too,
  O King Admetus, this may seem to you
  A little matter; yea, and for my part
  E'en such a marriage would make glad my heart;
  But we the blood of Salmoneus who share
  With godlike gifts great burdens also bear,
  Nor is this maid without them, for the day
  On which her maiden zone she puts away
  Shall be her death-day, if she wed with one
  By whom this marvellous thing may not be done,
  For in the traces neither must steeds paw
  Before my threshold, or white oxen draw
  The wain that comes my maid to take from me,
  Far other beasts that day her slaves must be:
  The yellow lion 'neath the lash must roar,
  And by his side unscared, the forest boar
  Toil at the draught: what sayest thou then hereto,
  O lord of Pheræ, wilt thou come to woo
  In such a chariot, and win endless fame,
  Or turn thine eyes elsewhere with little shame?'
    "What answered I? O herdsman, I was mad
  With sweet love and the triumph I had had.
  I took my father's ring from off my hand,
  And said, 'O heroes of the Grecian land,
  Be witnesses that on my father's name
  For this man's promise, do I take the shame
  Of this deed undone, if I fail herein;
  Fear not, O Pelias, but that I shall win
  This ring from thee, when I shall come again
  Through fair Iolchos, driving that strange wain.
  Else by this token, thou, O King, shalt have
  Pheræ my home, while on the tumbling wave
  A hollow ship my sad abode shall be.'
    "So driven by some hostile deity,
  Such words I said, and with my gifts hard won,
  But little valued now, set out upon
  My homeward way: but nearer as I drew
  To mine abode, and ever fainter grew
  In my weak heart the image of my love,
  In vain with fear my boastful folly strove;
  For I remembered that no god I was
  Though I had chanced my fellows to surpass;
  And I began to mind me in a while
  What murmur rose, with what a mocking smile
  Pelias stretched out his hand to take the ring.
  Made by my drunkard's gift now twice a king:
  And when unto my palace-door I came
  I had awakened fully to my shame;
  For certainly no help is left to me,
  But I must get me down unto the sea
  And build a keel, and whatso things I may
  Set in her hold, and cross the watery way
  Whither Jove bids, and the rough winds may blow
  Unto a land where none my folly know,
  And there begin a weary life anew."

    Eager and bright the herdsman's visage grew
  The while this tale was told, and at the end
  He said, "Admetus, I thy life may mend,
  And thou at lovely Pheræ still may dwell;
  Wait for ten days, and then may all be well,
  And thou to fetch thy maiden home may go,
  And to the King thy team unheard-of show.
  And if not, then make ready for the sea
  Nor will I fail indeed to go with thee,
  And 'twixt the halyards and the ashen oar
  Finish the service well begun ashore;
  But meanwhile do I bid thee hope the best;
  And take another herdsman for the rest,
  For unto Ossa must I go alone
  To do a deed not easy to be done."

    Then springing up he took his spear and bow
  And northward by the lake-shore 'gan to go;
  But the King gazed upon him as he went,
  Then, sighing, turned about, and homeward bent
  His lingering steps, and hope began to spring
  Within his heart, for some betokening
  He seemed about the herdsman now to see
  Of one from mortal cares and troubles free.
    And so midst hopes and fears day followed day,
  Until at last upon his bed he lay
  When the grey, creeping dawn had now begun
  To make the wide world ready for the sun
  On the tenth day: sleepless had been the night
  And now in that first hour of gathering light
  For weariness he slept, and dreamed that he
  Stood by the border of a fair, calm sea
  At point to go a-shipboard, and to leave
  Whatever from his sire he did receive
  Of land or kingship; and withal he dreamed
  That through the cordage a bright light there gleamed
  Far off within the east; and nowise sad
  He felt at leaving all he might have had,
  But rather as a man who goes to see
  Some heritage expected patiently.
  But when he moved to leave the firm fixed shore,
  The windless sea rose high and 'gan to roar,
  And from the gangway thrust the ship aside,
  Until he hung over a chasm wide
  Vocal with furious waves, yet had no fear
  For all the varied tumult he might hear,
  But slowly woke up to the morning light
  That to his eyes seemed past all memory bright,
  And then strange sounds he heard, whereat his heart
  Woke up to joyous life with one glad start,
  And nigh his bed he saw the herdsman stand,
  Holding a long white staff in his right hand,
  Carved with strange figures; and withal he said,
    "Awake, Admetus! loiter not a-bed,
  But haste thee to bring home thy promised bride,
  For now an ivory chariot waits outside,
  Yoked to such beasts as Pelias bade thee bring;
  Whose guidance thou shalt find an easy thing,
  If in thine hands thou holdest still this rod,
  Whereon are carved the names of every god
  That rules the fertile earth; but having come
  Unto King Pelias' well-adornéd home,
  Abide not long, but take the royal maid,
  And let her dowry in thy wain be laid,
  Of silver and fine cloth and unmixed gold,
  For this indeed will Pelias not withhold
  When he shall see thee like a very god.
  Then let thy beasts, ruled by this carven rod,
  Turn round to Pheræ; yet must thou abide
  Before thou comest to the streamlet's side
  That feed its dykes; there, by the little wood
  Wherein unto Diana men shed blood,
  Will I await thee, and thou shalt descend
  And hand-in-hand afoot through Pheræ wend;
  And yet I bid thee, this night let thy bride
  Apart among the womenfolk abide;
  That on the morrow thou with sacrifice
  For these strange deeds may pay a fitting price."

    But as he spoke with something like to awe,
  His eyes and much-changed face Admetus saw,
  And voiceless like a slave his words obeyed;
  For rising up no more delay he made,
  But took the staff and gained the palace-door
  Where stood the beasts, whose mingled whine and roar
  Had wrought his dream; there two and two they stood,
  Thinking, it might be, of the tangled wood,
  And all the joys of the food-hiding trees,
  But harmless as their painted images
  'Neath some dread spell; then, leaping up, he took
  The reins in hand and the bossed leather shook,
  And no delay the conquered beasts durst make
  But drew, not silent; and folk just awake
  When he went by, as though a god they saw,
  Fell on their knees, and maidens come to draw
  Fresh water from the fount sank trembling down,
  And silence held the babbling wakened town.
    So 'twixt the dewy hedges did he wend,
  And still their noise afar the beasts did send,
  His strange victorious advent to proclaim,
  Till to Iolchos at the last he came,
  And drew anigh the gates, whence in affright
  The guards fled, helpless at the wondrous sight;
  And through the town news of the coming spread
  Of some great god so that the scared priests led
  Pale suppliants forth; who, in unmeet attire
  And hastily-caught boughs and smouldering fire
  Within their censers, in the market-place
  Awaited him with many an upturned face,
  Trembling with fear of that unnamed new god;
  But through the midst of them his lions trod
  With noiseless feet, nor noted aught their prey,
  And the boars' hooves went pattering on the way,
  While from their churning tusks the white foam flew
  As raging, helpless, in the trace they drew.
    But Pelias, knowing all the work of fate,
  Sat in his brazen-pillared porch to wait
  The coming of the King; the while the maid
  In her fair marriage garments was arrayed,
  And from strong places of his treasury
  Men brought fine scarlet from the Syrian sea,
  And works of brass, and ivory, and gold;
  But when the strange yoked beasts he did behold
  Come through the press of people terrified,
  Then he arose and o'er the clamour cried,
  "Hail, thou, who like a very god art come
  To bring great honour to my damsel's home;"
  And when Admetus tightened rein before
  The gleaming, brazen-wrought, half-opened door.
  He cried to Pelias, "Hail, to thee, O King;
  Let me behold once more my father's ring,
  Let me behold the prize that I have won,
  Mine eyes are wearying now to look upon."
    "Fear not," he said, "the Fates are satisfied;
  Yet wilt thou not descend and here abide,
  Doing me honour till the next bright morn
  Has dried the dew upon the new-sprung corn,
  That we in turn may give the honour due
  To such a man that such a thing can do,
  And unto all the gods may sacrifice?"
    "Nay," said Admetus, "if thou call'st me wise,
  And like a very god thou dost me deem,
  Shall I abide the ending of the dream
  And so gain nothing? nay, let me be glad
  That I at least one godlike hour have had
  At whatsoever time I come to die,
  That I may mock the world that passes by,
  And yet forgets it." Saying this, indeed,
  Of Pelias did he seem to take small heed,
  But spoke as one unto himself may speak,
  And still the half-shut door his eyes did seek,
  Wherethrough from distant rooms sweet music came,
  Setting his over-strainéd heart a-flame,
  Because amidst the Lydian flutes he thought
  From place to place his love the maidens brought.
    Then Pelias said, "What can I give to thee
  Who fail'st so little of divinity?
  Yet let my slaves lay these poor gifts within
  Thy chariot, while my daughter strives to win
  The favour of the spirits of this place,
  Since from their altars she must turn her face
  For ever now; hearken, her flutes I hear,
  From the last chapel doth she draw anear."
    Then by Admetus' feet the folk 'gan pile
  The precious things, but he no less the while
  Stared at the door ajar, and thought it long
  Ere with the flutes mingled the maidens' song,
  And both grew louder, and the scarce-seen floor
  Was fluttering with white raiment, and the door
  By slender fingers was set open wide,
  And midst her damsels he beheld the bride
  Ungirt, with hair unbound and garlanded:
  Then Pelias took her slender hand and said,
  "Daughter, this is the man that takes from thee
  Thy curse midst women, think no more to be
  Childless, unloved, and knowing little bliss;
  But now behold how like a god he is,
  And yet with what prayers for the love of thee
  He must have wearied some divinity,
  And therefore in thine inmost heart be glad
  That thou 'mongst women such a man hast had."
    Then she with wondering eyes that strange team saw
  A moment, then as one with gathering awe
  Might turn from Jove's bird unto very Jove,
  So did she raise her grey eyes to her love,
  But to her brow the blood rose therewithal,
  And she must tremble, such a look did fall
  Upon her faithful eyes, that none the less
  Would falter aught, for all her shamefastness,
  But rather to her lover's hungry eyes
  Gave back a tender look of glad surprise,
  Wherein love's flame began to flicker now.
    Withal, her father kissed her on the brow,
  And said, "O daughter, take this royal ring,
  And set it on the finger of the King,
  And come not back; and thou, Admetus, pour
  This wine to Jove before my open door,
  And glad at heart take back thine own with thee."
    Then with that word Alcestis silently,
  And with no look cast back, and ring in hand,
  Went forth, and soon beside her love did stand,
  Nor on his finger failed to set the ring;
  And then a golden cup the city's King
  Gave to him, and he poured and said, "O thou,
  From whatsoever place thou lookest now,
  What prayers, what gifts unto thee shall I give
  That we a little time with love may live?
  A little time of love, then fall asleep
  Together, while the crown of love we keep."
    So spake he, and his strange beasts turned about,
  And heeded not the people's wavering shout
  That from their old fear and new pleasure sprung,
  Nor noted aught of what the damsels sung,
  Or of the flowers that after them they cast,
  But like a dream the guarded city passed,
  And 'twixt the song of birds and blossoms' scent
  It seemed for many hundred years they went,
  Though short the way was unto Pheræ's gates;
  Time they forgat, and gods, and men, and fates,
  However nigh unto their hearts they were;
  The woodland boars, the yellow lords of fear
  No more seemed strange to them, but all the earth
  With all its changing sorrow and wild mirth
  In that fair hour seemed new-born to the twain,
  Grief seemed a play forgot, a pageant vain,
  A picture painted, who knows where or when,
  With soulless images of restless men;
  For every thought but love was now gone by,
  And they forgot that they should ever die.

    But when they came anigh the sacred wood,
  There, biding them, Admetus' herdsman stood,
  At sight of whom those yoke-fellows unchecked
  Stopped dead and little of Admetus recked
  Who now, as one from dreams not yet awake,
  Drew back his love and did his wain forsake,
  And gave the carven rod and guiding bands
  Into the waiting herdsman's outstretched hands,
  But when he would have thanked him for the thing
  That he had done, his speechless tongue must cling
  Unto his mouth, and why he could not tell.
  But the man said, "No words! thou hast done well
  To me, as I to thee; the day may come
  When thou shalt ask me for a fitting home,
  Nor shalt thou ask in vain; but hasten now,
  And to thine house this royal maiden show,
  Then give her to thy women for this night.
  But when thou wakest up to thy delight
  To-morrow, do all things that should be done,
  Nor of the gods, forget thou any one,
  And on the next day will I come again
  To tend thy flocks upon the grassy plain.
    "But now depart, and from thine home send here
  Chariot and horse, these gifts of thine to bear
  Unto thine house, and going, look not back
  Lest many a wished-for thing thou com'st to lack."
    Then hand in hand together, up the road
  The lovers passed unto the King's abode,
  And as they went, the whining snort and roar
  From the yoked beasts they heard break out once more
  And then die off, as they were led away,
  But whether to some place lit up by day,
  Or, 'neath the earth, they knew not, for the twain
  Went hastening on, nor once looked back again.
    But soon the minstrels met them, and a band
  Of white-robed damsels flowery boughs in hand,
  To bid them welcome to that pleasant place.
  Then they, rejoicing much, in no long space
  Came to the brazen-pillared porch, whereon
  From 'twixt the passes of the hills yet shone
  The dying sun; and there she stood awhile
  Without the threshold, a faint tender smile
  Trembling upon her lips 'twixt love and shame,
  Until each side of her a maiden came
  And raised her in their arms, that her fair feet
  The polished brazen threshold might not meet,
  And in Admetus' house she stood at last.
    But to the women's chamber straight she passed
  Bepraised of all,--and so the wakeful night
  Lonely the lovers passed e'en as they might.
    But the next day with many a sacrifice,
  Admetus wrought, for such a well-won prize,
  A life so blest, the gods to satisfy,
  And many a matchless beast that day did die
  Upon the altars; nought unlucky seemed
  To be amid the joyous crowd that gleamed
  With gold and precious things, and only this
  Seemed wanting to the King of Pheræ's bliss,
  That all these pageants should be soon past by,
  And hid by night the fair spring blossoms lie.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Yet on the morrow-morn Admetus came,
  A haggard man oppressed with grief and shame
  Unto the spot beside Boebeis' shore
  Whereby he met his herdsman once before,
  And there again he found him flushed and glad,
  And from the babbling water newly clad,
  Then he with downcast eyes these words began,
    "O thou, whatso thy name is, god or man,
  Hearken to me; meseemeth of thy deed
  Some dread immortal taketh angry heed.
    "Last night the height of my desire seemed won,
  All day my weary eyes had watched the sun
  Rise up and sink, and now was come the night
  When I should be alone with my delight;
  Silent the house was now from floor to roof,
  And in the well-hung chambers, far aloof,
  The feasters lay; the moon was in the sky,
  The soft spring wind was wafting lovingly
  Across the gardens fresh scents to my sweet,
  As, troubled with the sound of my own feet,
  I passed betwixt the pillars, whose long shade
  Black on the white red-veinéd floor was laid:
  So happy was I that the briar-rose,
  Rustling outside within the flowery close,
  Seemed but Love's odorous wing--too real all seemed
  For such a joy as I had never dreamed.
    "Why do I linger, as I lingered not
  In that fair hour, now ne'er to be forgot
  While my life lasts?--Upon the gilded door
  I laid my hand; I stood upon the floor
  Of the bride-chamber, and I saw the bride,
  Lovelier than any dream, stand by the side
  Of the gold bed, with hands that hid her face:
  One cry of joy I gave, and then the place
  Seemed changed to hell as in a hideous dream.
    "Still did the painted silver pillars gleam
  Betwixt the scented torches and the moon;
  Still did the garden shed its odorous boon
  Upon the night; still did the nightingale
  Unto his brooding mate tell all his tale:
  But, risen 'twixt my waiting love and me,
  As soundless as the dread eternity,
  Sprung up from nothing, could mine eyes behold
  A huge dull-gleaming dreadful coil that rolled
  In changing circles on the pavement fair.
  Then for the sword that was no longer there
  My hand sank to my side; around I gazed,
  And 'twixt the coils I met her grey eyes, glazed
  With sudden horror most unspeakable;
  And when mine own upon no weapon fell,
  For what should weapons do in such a place,
  Unto the dragon's head I set my face,
  And raised bare hands against him, but a cry
  Burst on mine ears of utmost agony
  That nailed me there, and she cried out to me,
  'O get thee hence; alas, I cannot flee!
  They coil about me now, my lips to kiss.
  O love, why hast thou brought me unto this?'
    "Alas, my shame! trembling, away I slunk,
  Yet turning saw the fearful coil had sunk
  To whence it came, my love's limbs freed I saw,
  And a long breath at first I heard her draw
  As one redeemed, then heard the hard sobs come,
  And wailings for her new accurséd home.
  But there outside across the door I lay,
  Like a scourged hound, until the dawn of day;
  And as her gentle breathing then I heard
  As though she slept, before the earliest bird
  Began his song, I wandered forth to seek
  Thee, O strange man, e'en as thou seest me, weak
  With all the torment of the night, and shamed
  With such a shame as never shall be named
  To aught but thee--Yea, yea, and why to thee
  Perchance this ends all thou wilt do for me?--
  What then, and have I not a cure for that?
  Lo, yonder is a rock where I have sat
  Full many an hour while yet my life was life,
  With hopes of all the coming wonder rife.
  No sword hangs by my side, no god will turn
  This cloudless hazy blue to black, and burn
  My useless body with his lightning flash;
  But the white waves above my bones may wash,
  And when old chronicles our house shall name
  They may leave out the letters and the shame,
  That make Admetus, once a king of men--
  And how could I be worse or better then?"

    As one who notes a curious instrument
  Working against the maker's own intent,
  The herdsman eyed his wan face silently,
  And smiling for a while, and then said he,--
  "Admetus, thou, in spite of all I said,
  Hast drawn this evil thing upon thine head,
  Forgetting her who erewhile laid the curse
  Upon the maiden, so for fear of worse
  Go back again; for fair-limbed Artemis
  Now bars the sweet attainment of thy bliss;
  So taking heart, yet make no more delay
  But worship her upon this very day,
  Nor spare for aught, and of thy trouble make
  No semblance unto any for her sake;
  And thick upon the fair bride-chamber floor
  Strew dittany, and on each side the door
  Hang up such poppy-leaves as spring may yield;
  And for the rest, myself may be a shield
  Against her wrath--nay, be thou not too bold
  To ask me that which may not now be told.
  Yea, even what thou deemest, hide it deep
  Within thine heart, and let thy wonder sleep,
  For surely thou shalt one day know my name,
  When the time comes again that autumn's flame
  Is dying off the vine-boughs, overturned,
  Stripped of their wealth. But now let gifts be burned
  To her I told thee of, and in three days
  Shall I by many hard and rugged ways
  Have come to thee again to bring thee peace.
  Go, the sun rises and the shades decrease."
    Then, thoughtfully, Admetus gat him back,
  Nor did the altars of the Huntress lack
  The fattest of the flocks upon that day.
  But when night came, in arms Admetus lay
  Across the threshold of the bride-chamber,
  And nought amiss that night he noted there,
  But durst not enter, though about the door
  Young poppy-leaves were twined, and on the floor,
  Not flowered as yet with downy leaves and grey,
  Fresh dittany beloved of wild goats lay.
    But when the whole three days and nights were done,
  The herdsman came with rising of the sun,
  And said, "Admetus, now rejoice again,
  Thy prayers and offerings have not been in vain,
  And thou at last mayst come unto thy bliss;
  And if thou askest for a sign of this,
  Take thou this token; make good haste to rise,
  And get unto the garden-close that lies
  Below these windows sweet with greenery,
  And in the midst a marvel shalt thou see,
  Three white, black-hearted poppies blossoming,
  Though this is but the middle of the spring."
    Nor was it otherwise than he had said,
  And on that day with joy the twain were wed,
  And 'gan to lead a life of great delight;
  But the strange woeful history of that night,
  The monstrous car, the promise to the King,
  All these through weary hours of chiselling
  Were wrought in stone, and in Diana's wall
  Set up, a joy and witness unto all.
    But neither so would wingéd time abide,
  The changing year came round to autumn-tide,
  Until at last the day was fully come
  When the strange guest first reached Admetus' home.
  Then, when the sun was reddening to its end,
  He to Admetus' brazen porch did wend,
  Whom there he found feathering a poplar dart,
  Then said he, "King, the time has come to part.
  Come forth, for I have that to give thine ear
  No man upon the earth but thou must hear."
    Then rose the King, and with a troubled look
  His well-steeled spear within his hand he took,
  And by his herdsman silently he went
  As to a peakéd hill his steps he bent,
  Nor did the parting servant speak one word,
  As up they climbed, unto his silent lord,
  Till from the top he turned about his head
  From all the glory of the gold light, shed
  Upon the hill-top by the setting sun,
  For now indeed the day was well-nigh done,
  And all the eastern vale was grey and cold;
  But when Admetus he did now behold,
  Panting beside him from the steep ascent,
  One much-changed godlike look on him he bent.
  And said, "O mortal, listen, for I see
  Thou deemest somewhat of what is in me;
  Fear not! I love thee, even as I can
  Who cannot feel the woes and ways of man
  In spite of this my seeming, for indeed
  Now thou beholdest Jove's immortal seed,
  And what my name is I would tell thee now,
  If men who dwell upon the earth as thou
  Could hear the name and live; but on the earth.
  With strange melodious stories of my birth,
  Phoebus men call me, and Latona's son.
    "And now my servitude with thee is done,
  And I shall leave thee toiling on thine earth,
  This handful, that within its little girth
  Holds that which moves you so, O men that die;
  Behold, to-day thou hast felicity,
  But the times change, and I can see a day
  When all thine happiness shall fade away;
  And yet be merry, strive not with the end,
  Thou canst not change it; for the rest, a friend
  This year has won thee who shall never fail;
  But now indeed, for nought will it avail
  To say what I may have in store for thee,
  Of gifts that men desire; let these things be,
  And live thy life, till death itself shall come,
  And turn to nought the storehouse of thine home,
  Then think of me; these feathered shafts behold,
  That here have been the terror of the wold,
  Take these, and count them still the best of all
  Thine envied wealth, and when on thee shall fall
  By any way the worst extremity,
  Call upon me before thou com'st to die,
  And lay these shafts with incense on a fire,
  That thou mayst gain thine uttermost desire."

    He ceased, but ere the golden tongue was still
  An odorous mist had stolen up the hill,
  And to Admetus first the god grew dim,
  And then was but a lovely voice to him,
  And then at last the sun had sunk to rest,
  And a fresh wind blew lightly from the west
  Over the hill-top, and no soul was there;
  But the sad dying autumn field-flowers fair,
  Rustled dry leaves about the windy place,
  Where even now had been the godlike face,
  And in their midst the brass-bound quiver lay.
  Then, going further westward, far away,
  He saw the gleaming of Peneus wan
  'Neath the white sky, but never any man,
  Except a grey-haired shepherd driving down
  From off the long slopes to his fold-yard brown
  His woolly sheep, with whom a maiden went,
  Singing for labour done and sweet content
  Of coming rest; with that he turned again,
  And took the shafts up, never sped in vain,
  And came unto his house most deep in thought
  Of all the things the varied year had brought.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Thenceforth in bliss and honour day by day
  His measured span of sweet life wore away.
  A happy man he was; no vain desire
  Of foolish fame had set his heart a-fire;
  No care he had the ancient bounds to change,
  Nor yet for him must idle soldiers range
  From place to place about the burdened land,
  Or thick upon the ruined cornfields stand;
  For him no trumpets blessed the bitter war,
  Wherein the right and wrong so mingled are,
  That hardly can the man of single heart
  Amid the sickening turmoil choose his part;
  For him sufficed the changes of the year,
  The god-sent terror was enough of fear
  For him; enough the battle with the earth,
  The autumn triumph over drought and dearth.
    Better to him than wolf-moved battered shields,
  O'er poor dead corpses, seemed the stubble-fields
  Danced down beneath the moon, until the night
  Grew dreamy with a shadowy sweet delight,
  And with the high-risen moon came pensive thought,
  And men in love's despite must grow distraught
  And loiter in the dance, and maidens drop
  Their gathered raiment, and the fifer stop
  His dancing notes the pensive drone that chid,
  And as they wander to their dwellings, hid
  By the black shadowed trees, faint melody,
  Mournful and sweet, their soft good-night must be.
    Far better spoil the gathering vat bore in
  Unto the pressing shed, than midst the din
  Of falling houses in war's waggon lies
  Besmeared with redder stains than Tyrian dyes;
  Or when the temple of the sea-born one
  With glittering crowns and gallant raiment shone,
  Fairer the maidens seemed by no chain bound,
  But such as amorous arms might cast around
  Their lovely bodies, than the wretched band
  Who midst the shipmen by the gangway stand;
  Each lonely in her speechless misery,
  And thinking of the worse time that shall be,
  When midst of folk who scarce can speak her name,
  She bears the uttermost of toil and shame.
    Better to him seemed that victorious crown,
  That midst the reverent silence of the town
  He oft would set upon some singer's brow
  Than was the conqueror's diadem, blest now
  By lying priests, soon, bent and bloody, hung
  Within the thorn by linnets well besung,
  Who think but little of the corpse beneath,
  Though ancient lands have trembled at his breath.
    But to this King--fair Ceres' gifts, the days
  Whereon men sung in flushed Lyæus' praise
  Tales of old time, the bloodless sacrifice
  Unto the goddess of the downcast eyes
  And soft persuading lips, the ringing lyre
  Unto the bearer of the holy fire
  Who once had been amongst them--things like these
  Seemed meet to him men's yearning to appease,
  These were the triumphs of the peaceful king.

    And so, betwixt seed-time and harvesting,
  With little fear his life must pass away;
  And for the rest, he, from the self-same day
  That the god left him, seemed to have some share
  In that same godhead he had harboured there:
  In all things grew his wisdom and his wealth,
  And folk beholding the fair state and health
  Wherein his land was, said, that now at last
  A fragment of the Golden Age was cast
  Over the place, for there was no debate,
  And men forgot the very name of hate.
    Nor failed the love of her he erst had won
  To hold his heart as still the years wore on,
  And she, no whit less fair than on the day
  When from Iolchos first she passed away,
  Did all his will as though he were a god,
  And loving still, the downward way she trod.
    Honour and love, plenty and peace, he had;
  Nor lacked for aught that makes a wise man glad,
  That makes him like a rich well-honoured guest
  Scarce sorry when the time comes, for the rest,
  That at the end perforce must bow his head.
    And yet--was death not much rememberéd,
  As still with happy men the manner is?
  Or, was he not so pleased with this world's bliss,
  As to be sorry when the time should come
  When but his name should hold his ancient home
  While he dwelt nowhere? either way indeed,
  Will be enough for most men's daily need,
  And with calm faces they may watch the world,
  And note men's lives hither and thither hurled,
  As folk may watch the unfolding of a play--
  Nor this, nor that was King Admetus' way,
  For neither midst the sweetness of his life
  Did he forget the ending of the strife,
  Nor yet for heavy thoughts of passing pain
  Did all his life seem lost to him or vain,
  A wasteful jest of Jove, an empty dream;
  Rather before him did a vague hope gleam,
  That made him a great-hearted man and wise,
  Who saw the deeds of men with far-seeing eyes,
  And dealt them pitying justice still, as though
  The inmost heart of each man he did know;
  This hope it was, and not his kingly place
  That made men's hearts rejoice to see his face
  Rise in the council hall; through this, men felt
  That in their midst a son of man there dwelt
  Like and unlike them, and their friend through all;
  And still as time went on, the more would fall
  This glory on the King's belovéd head,
  And round his life fresh hope and fear were shed.

    Yet at the last his good days passed away,
  And sick upon his bed Admetus lay,
  'Twixt him and death nought but a lessening veil
  Of hasty minutes, yet did hope not fail,
  Nor did bewildering fear torment him then,
  But still as ever, all the ways of men
  Seemed dear to him: but he, while yet his breath
  Still held the gateway 'gainst the arms of death,
  Turned to his wife, who, bowed beside the bed,
  Wept for his love, and dying goodlihead,
  And bade her put all folk from out the room,
  Then going to the treasury's rich gloom
  To bear the arrows forth, the Lycian's gift.
  So she, amidst her blinding tears, made shift
  To find laid in the inmost treasury
  Those shafts, and brought them unto him, but he,
  Beholding them, beheld therewith his life,
  Both that now past, with many marvels rife,
  And that which he had hoped he yet should see.
    Then spoke he faintly, "Love, 'twixt thee and me
  A film has come, and I am failing fast:
  And now our ancient happy life is past;
  For either this is death's dividing hand,
  And all is done, or if the shadowy land
  I yet escape, full surely if I live
  The god with life some other gift will give,
  And change me unto thee: e'en at this tide
  Like a dead man among you all I bide,
  Until I once again behold my guest,
  And he has given me either life or rest:
  Alas, my love! that thy too loving heart
  Nor with my life or death can have a part.
  O cruel words! yet death is cruel too:
  Stoop down and kiss me, for I yearn for you
  E'en as the autumn yearneth for the sun."
    "O love, a little time we have been one,
  And if we now are twain weep not therefore;
  For many a man on earth desireth sore
  To have some mate upon the toilsome road,
  Some sharer of his still increasing load,
  And yet for all his longing and his pain
  His troubled heart must seek for love in vain,
  And till he dies still must he be alone--
  But now, although our love indeed is gone,
  Yet to this land as thou art leal and true
  Set now thine hand to what I bid thee do,
  Because I may not die; rake up the brands
  Upon the hearth, and from these trembling hands
  Cast incense thereon, and upon them lay
  These shafts, the relics of a happier day,
  Then watch with me; perchance I may not die,
  Though the supremest hour now draws anigh
  Of life or death--O thou who madest me,
  The only thing on earth alike to thee,
  Why must I be unlike to thee in this?
  Consider, if thou dost not do amiss
  To slay the only thing that feareth death
  Or knows its name, of all things drawing breath
  Upon the earth: see now for no short hour,
  For no half-halting death, to reach me slower
  Than other men, I pray thee--what avail
  To add some trickling grains unto the tale
  Soon told, of minutes thou dost snatch away
  From out the midst of that unending day
  Wherein thou dwellest? rather grant me this
  To right me wherein thou hast done amiss,
  And give me life like thine for evermore."

    So murmured he, contending very sore
  Against the coming death; but she meanwhile
  Faint with consuming love, made haste to pile
  The brands upon the hearth, and thereon cast
  Sweet incense, and the feathered shafts at last;
  Then, trembling, back unto the bed she crept,
  And lay down by his side, and no more wept,
  Nay scarce could think of death for very love
  That in her faithful heart for ever strove
  'Gainst fear and grief: but now the incense-cloud
  The old familiar chamber did enshroud,
  And on the very verge of death drawn close
  Wrapt both their weary souls in strange repose,
  That through sweet sleep sent kindly images
  Of simple things; and in the midst of these,
  Whether it were but parcel of their dream,
  Or that they woke to it as some might deem,
  I know not, but the door was opened wide,
  And the King's name a voice long silent cried,
  And Phoebus on the very threshold trod,
  And yet in nothing liker to a god
  Than when he ruled Admetus' herds, for he
  Still wore the homespun coat men used to see
  Among the heifers in the summer morn,
  And round about him hung the herdsman's horn,
  And in his hand he bore the herdsman's spear
  And cornel bow, the prowling dog-wolfs fear,
  Though empty of its shafts the quiver was.
    He to the middle of the room did pass,
  And said, "Admetus, neither all for nought
  My coming to thee is, nor have I brought
  Good tidings to thee; poor man, thou shalt live
  If any soul for thee sweet life will give
  Enforced by none: for such a sacrifice
  Alone the fates can deem a fitting price
  For thy redemption; in no battle-field,
  Maddened by hope of glory life to yield,
  To give it up to heal no city's shame
  In hope of gaining long-enduring fame;
  For whoso dieth for thee must believe
  That thou with shame that last gift wilt receive,
  And strive henceforward with forgetfulness
  The honied draught of thy new life to bless.
  Nay, and moreover such a glorious heart
  Who loves thee well enough with life to part
  But for thy love, with life must lose love too,
  Which e'en when wrapped about in weeds of woe
  Is godlike life indeed to such an one.
    "And now behold, three days ere life is done
  Do the Fates give thee, and I, even I,
  Upon thy life have shed felicity
  And given thee love of men, that they in turn
  With fervent love of thy dear love might burn.
  The people love thee and thy silk-clad breast,
  Thine open doors have given thee better rest
  Than woods of spears or hills of walls might do.
  And even now in wakefulness and woe
  The city lies, calling to mind thy love
  Wearying with ceaseless prayers the gods above.
  But thou--thine heart is wise enough to know
  That they no whit from their decrees will go."

    So saying, swiftly from the room he passed;
  But on the world no look Admetus cast,
  But peacefully turned round unto the wall
  As one who knows that quick death must befall:
  For in his heart he thought, "Indeed too well
  I know what men are, this strange tale to tell
  To those that live with me: yea, they will weep,
  And o'er my tomb most solemn days will keep,
  And in great chronicles will write my name,
  Telling to many an age my deeds and fame.
  For living men such things as this desire,
  And by such ways will they appease the fire
  Of love and grief: but when death comes to stare
  Full in men's faces, and the truth lays bare,
  How can we then have wish for anything,
  But unto life that gives us all to cling?"
    So said he, and with closed eyes did await,
  Sleeping or waking, the decrees of fate.

    But now Alcestis rose, and by the bed
  She stood, with wild thoughts passing through her head.
  Dried were her tears, her troubled heart and sore
  Throbbed with the anguish of her love no more.
  A strange look on the dying man she cast,
  Then covered up her face and said, "O past!
  Past the sweet times that I remember well!
  Alas, that such a tale my heart can tell!
  Ah, how I trusted him! what love was mine!
  How sweet to feel his arms about me twine,
  And my heart beat with his! what wealth of bliss
  To hear his praises! all to come to this,
  That now I durst not look upon his face,
  Lest in my heart that other thing have place.
  That which I knew not, that which men call hate.
    "O me, the bitterness of God and fate!
  A little time ago we two were one;
  I had not lost him though his life was done,
  For still was he in me--but now alone
  Through the thick darkness must my soul make moan,
  For I must die: how can I live to bear
  An empty heart about, the nurse of fear?
  How can I live to die some other tide,
  And, dying, hear my loveless name outcried
  About the portals of that weary land
  Whereby my shadowy feet should come to stand.
    "Alcestis! O Alcestis, hadst thou known
  That thou one day shouldst thus be left alone,
  How hadst thou borne a living soul to love!
  Hadst thou not rather lifted hands to Jove,
  To turn thine heart to stone, thy front to brass,
  That through this wondrous world thy soul might pass,
  Well pleased and careless, as Diana goes
  Through the thick woods, all pitiless of those
  Her shafts smite down? Alas! how could it be
  Can a god give a god's delights to thee?
  Nay rather, Jove, but give me once again,
  If for one moment only, that sweet pain
  The love I had while still I thought to live!
  Ah! wilt thou not, since unto thee I give
  My life, my hope?--But thou--I come to thee.
  Thou sleepest: O wake not, nor speak to me
  In silence let my last hour pass away,
  And men forget my bitter feeble day."

    With that she laid her down upon the bed,
  And nestling to him, kissed his weary head,
  And laid his wasted hand upon her breast,
  Yet woke him not; and silence and deep rest
  Fell on that chamber. The night wore away
  Mid gusts of wailing wind, the twilight grey
  Stole o'er the sea, and wrought his wondrous change
  On things unseen by night, by day not strange,
  But now half seen and strange; then came the sun,
  And therewithal the silent world and dun
  Waking, waxed many-coloured, full of sound,
  As men again their heap of troubles found,
  And woke up to their joy or misery.
    But there, unmoved by aught, those twain did lie,
  Until Admetus' ancient nurse drew near
  Unto the open door, and full of fear
  Beheld them moving not, and as folk dead;
  Then, trembling with her eagerness and dread,
  She cried, "Admetus! art thou dead indeed?
  Alcestis! livest thou my words to heed?
  Alas, alas, for this Thessalian folk!"
    But with her piercing cry the King awoke,
  And round about him wildly 'gan to stare,
  As a bewildered man who knows not where
  He has awakened: but not thin or wan
  His face was now, as of a dying man,
  But fresh and ruddy; and his eyes shone clear,
  As of a man who much of life may bear.
  And at the first, but joy and great surprise
  Shone out from those awakened, new-healed eyes;
  But as for something more at last he yearned,
  Unto his love with troubled brow he turned,
  For still she seemed to sleep: alas, alas!
  Her lonely shadow even now did pass
  Along the changeless fields, oft looking back,
  As though it yet had thought of some great lack.
  And here, the hand just fallen from off his breast
  Was cold; and cold the bosom his hand pressed.
  And even as the colour lit the day
  The colour from her lips had waned away;
  Yet still, as though that longed-for happiness
  Had come again her faithful heart to bless,
  Those white lips smiled, unwrinkled was her brow,
  But of her eyes no secrets might he know,
  For, hidden by the lids of ivory,
  Had they beheld that death a-drawing nigh.

    Then o'er her dead corpse King Admetus hung,
  Such sorrow in his heart as his faint tongue
  Refused to utter; yet the just-past night
  But dimly he remembered, and the sight
  Of the Far-darter, and the dreadful word
  That seemed to cleave all hope as with a sword:
  Yet stronger in his heart a knowledge grew,
  That nought it was but her fond heart and true
  That all the marvel for his love had wrought,
  Whereby from death to life he had been brought;
  That dead, his life she was, as she had been
  His life's delight while still she lived a queen.
  And he fell wondering if his life were gain,
  So wrapt as then in loneliness and pain;
  Yet therewithal no tears would fill his eyes,
  For as a god he was.
                        Then did he rise
  And gat him down unto the Council-place,
  And when the people saw his well-loved face
  Then cried aloud for joy to see him there.
  And earth again to them seemed blest and fair.
  And though indeed they did lament in turn,
  When of Alcestis' end they came to learn,
  Scarce was it more than seeming, or, at least,
  The silence in the middle of a feast,
  When men have memory of their heroes slain.
  So passed the order of the world again,
  Victorious Summer crowning lusty Spring,
  Rich Autumn faint with wealth of harvesting,
  And Winter the earth's sleep; and then again
  Spring, Summer, Autumn, and the Winter's pain:
  And still and still the same the years went by.

    But Time, who slays so many a memory,
  Brought hers to light, the short-lived loving Queen;
  And her fair soul, as scent of flowers unseen,
  Sweetened the turmoil of long centuries.
  For soon, indeed, Death laid his hand on these,
  The shouters round the throne upon that day.
  And for Admetus, he, too, went his way,
  Though if he died at all I cannot tell;
  But either on the earth he ceased to dwell,
  Or else, oft born again, had many a name.
  But through all lands of Greece Alcestis' fame
  Grew greater, and about her husband's twined
  Lived, in the hearts of far-off men enshrined.
  See I have told her tale, though I know not
  What men are dwelling now on that green spot
  Anigh Boebeis, or if Pheræ still,
  With name oft changed perchance, adown the hill
  Still shows its white walls to the rising sun.
  --The gods at least remember what is done.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Strange felt the wanderers at his tale, for now
  Their old desires it seemed once more to show
  Unto their altered hearts, when now the rest,
  Most surely coming, of all things seemed best;--
  --Unless, by death perchance they yet might gain
  Some space to try such deeds as now in vain
  They heard of amidst stories of the past;
  Such deeds as they for that wild hope had cast
  From out their hands--they sighed to think of it,
  And how as deedless men they there must sit.

    Yet, with the measured falling of that rhyme
  Mingled the lovely sights and glorious time,
  Whereby, in spite of hope long past away,
  In spite of knowledge growing day by day
  Of lives so wasted, in despite of death,
  With sweet content that eve they drew their breath,
  And scarce their own lives seemed to touch them more
  Than that dead Queen's beside Boebéis' shore;
  Bitter and sweet so mingled in them both,
  Their lives and that old tale, they had been loth,
  Perchance, to have them told another way.--
  So passed the sun from that fair summer day.

       *       *       *       *       *

    June drew unto its end, the hot bright days
  Now gat from men as much of blame as praise,
  As rainless still they passed, without a cloud,
  And growing grey at last, the barley bowed
  Before the south-east wind. On such a day
  These folk amid the trellised roses lay,
  And careless for a little while at least,
  Crowned with the mingled blossoms held their feast:
  Nor did the garden lack for younger folk,
  Who cared no more for burning summer's yoke
  Than the sweet breezes of the April-tide;
  But through the thick trees wandered far and wide
  From sun to shade, and shade to sun again,
  Until they deemed the elders would be fain
  To hear the tale, and shadows longer grew:
  Then round about the grave old men they drew,
  Both youths and maidens; and beneath their feet
  The grass seemed greener, and the flowers more sweet
  Unto the elders, as they stood around.

    So through the calm air soon arose the sound
  Of one old voice as now a Wanderer spoke.
  "O friends, and ye, fair loving gentle folk,
  Would I could better tell a tale to-day;
  But hark to this, which while our good ship lay
  Within the Weser such a while agone,
  A Fleming told me, as we sat alone
  One Sunday evening in the Rose-garland,
  And all the other folk were gone a-land
  After their pleasure, like sea-faring men.
  Surely I deem it no great wonder then
  That I remember everything he said,
  Since from that Sunday eve strange fortune led
  That keel and me on such a weary way--
  Well, at the least it serveth you to-day."




THE LADY OF THE LAND.

ARGUMENT.

A certain man having landed on an island in the Greek Sea found there a
    beautiful damsel, whom he would fain have delivered from a strange
    and dreadful doom, but failing herein, he died soon afterwards.


    It happened once, some men of Italy
  Midst the Greek Islands went a sea-roving,
  And much good fortune had they on the sea:
  Of many a man they had the ransoming,
  And many a chain they gat, and goodly thing;
  And midst their voyage to an isle they came,
  Whereof my story keepeth not the name.

    Now though but little was there left to gain,
  Because the richer folk had gone away,
  Yet since by this of water they were fain
  They came to anchor in a land-locked bay,
  Whence in a while some went ashore to play,
  Going but lightly armed in twos or threes,
  For midst that folk they feared no enemies.

    And of these fellows that thus went ashore,
  One was there who left all his friends behind;
  Who going inland ever more and more,
  And being left quite alone, at last did find
  A lonely valley sheltered from the wind,
  Wherein, amidst an ancient cypress wood,
  A long-deserted ruined castle stood.

    The wood, once ordered in fair grove and glade,
  With gardens overlooked by terraces,
  And marble-pavéd pools for pleasure made,
  Was tangled now, and choked with fallen trees;
  And he who went there, with but little ease
  Must stumble by the stream's side, once made meet
  For tender women's dainty wandering feet.

    The raven's croak, the low wind choked and drear,
  The baffled stream, the grey wolf's doleful cry,
  Were all the sounds that mariner could hear,
  As through the wood he wandered painfully;
  But as unto the house he drew anigh,
  The pillars of a ruined shrine he saw,
  The once fair temple of a fallen law.

    No image was there left behind to tell
  Before whose face the knees of men had bowed;
  An altar of black stone, of old wrought well,
  Alone beneath a ruined roof now showed
  The goal whereto the folk were wont to crowd,
  Seeking for things forgotten long ago,
  Praying for heads long ages laid a-low.

    Close to the temple was the castle-gate,
  Doorless and crumbling; there our fellow turned,
  Trembling indeed at what might chance to wait
  The prey entrapped, yet with a heart that burned
  To know the most of what might there be learned,
  And hoping somewhat too, amid his fear,
  To light on such things as all men hold dear.

    Noble the house was, nor seemed built for war,
  But rather like the work of other days,
  When men, in better peace than now they are,
  Had leisure on the world around to gaze,
  And noted well the past times' changing ways;
  And fair with sculptured stories it was wrought,
  By lapse of time unto dim ruin brought.

    Now as he looked about on all these things,
  And strove to read the mouldering histories,
  Above the door an image with wide wings,
  Whose unclad limbs a serpent seemed to seize,
  He dimly saw, although the western breeze,
  And years of biting frost and washing rain,
  Had made the carver's labour well-nigh vain.

    But this, though perished sore, and worn away,
  He noted well, because it seemed to be,
  After the fashion of another day,
  Some great man's badge of war, or armoury,
  And round it a carved wreath he seemed to see;
  But taking note of these things, at the last
  The mariner beneath the gateway passed.

    And there a lovely cloistered court he found,
  A fountain in the midst o'erthrown and dry,
  And in the cloister briers twining round
  The slender shafts; the wondrous imagery
  Outworn by more than many years gone by,
  Because the country people, in their fear
  Of wizardry, had wrought destruction here;

    And piteously these fair things had been maimed;
  There stood great Jove, lacking his head of might;
  Here was the archer, swift Apollo, lamed;
  The shapely limbs of Venus hid from sight
  By weeds and shards; Diana's ankles light
  Bound with the cable of some coasting ship;
  And rusty nails through Helen's maddening lip.

    Therefrom unto the chambers did he pass,
  And found them fair still, midst of their decay,
  Though in them now no sign of man there was,
  And everything but stone had passed away
  That made them lovely in that vanished day;
  Nay, the mere walls themselves would soon be gone
  And nought be left but heaps of mouldering stone.

    But he, when all the place he had gone o'er.
  And with much trouble clomb the broken stair,
  And from the topmost turret seen the shore
  And his good ship drawn up at anchor there,
  Came down again, and found a crypt most fair
  Built wonderfully beneath the greatest hall,
  And there he saw a door within the wall,

    Well-hinged, close shut; nor was there in that place
  Another on its hinges, therefore he
  Stood there and pondered for a little space,
  And thought, "Perchance some marvel I shall see,
  For surely here some dweller there must be,
  Because this door seems whole, and new, and sound.
  While nought but ruin I can see around."

    So with that word, moved by a strong desire,
  He tried the hasp, that yielded to his hand,
  And in a strange place, lit as by a fire
  Unseen but near, he presently did stand;
  And by an odorous breeze his face was fanned,
  As though in some Arabian plain he stood,
  Anigh the border of a spice-tree wood.

    He moved not for awhile, but looking round,
  He wondered much to see the place so fair,
  Because, unlike the castle above ground,
  No pillager or wrecker had been there;
  It seemed that time had passed on otherwhere,
  Nor laid a finger on this hidden place,
  Rich with the wealth of some forgotten race.

    With hangings, fresh as when they left the loom,
  The walls were hung a space above the head,
  Slim ivory chairs were set about the room,
  And in one corner was a dainty bed,
  That seemed for some fair queen apparelléd;
  And marble was the worst stone of the floor,
  That with rich Indian webs was covered o'er.

    The wanderer trembled when he saw all this,
  Because he deemed by magic it was wrought;
  Yet in his heart a longing for some bliss,
  Whereof the hard and changing world knows nought,
  Arose and urged him on, and dimmed the thought
  That there perchance some devil lurked to slay
  The heedless wanderer from the light of day.

    Over against him was another door
  Set in the wall, so, casting fear aside,
  With hurried steps he crossed the varied floor,
  And there again the silver latch he tried
  And with no pain the door he opened wide,
  And entering the new chamber cautiously
  The glory of great heaps of gold could see.

    Upon the floor uncounted medals lay,
  Like things of little value; here and there
  Stood golden caldrons, that might well outweigh
  The biggest midst an emperor's copper-ware,
  And golden cups were set on tables fair,
  Themselves of gold; and in all hollow things
  Were stored great gems, worthy the crowns of kings.

    The walls and roof with gold were overlaid,
  And precious raiment from the wall hung down;
  The fall of kings that treasure might have stayed,
  Or gained some longing conqueror great renown,
  Or built again some god-destroyed old town;
  What wonder, if this plunderer of the sea
  Stood gazing at it long and dizzily?

    But at the last his troubled eyes and dazed
  He lifted from the glory of that gold,
  And then the image, that well-nigh erased
  Over the castle-gate he did behold,
  Above a door well wrought in coloured gold
  Again he saw; a naked girl with wings
  Enfolded in a serpent's scaly rings.

    And even as his eyes were fixed on it
  A woman's voice came from the other side,
  And through his heart strange hopes began to flit
  That in some wondrous land he might abide
  Not dying, master of a deathless bride,
  So o'er the gold which now he scarce could see
  He went, and passed this last door eagerly.

    Then in a room he stood wherein there was
  A marble bath, whose brimming water yet
  Was scarcely still; a vessel of green glass
  Half full of odorous ointment was there set
  Upon the topmost step that still was wet,
  And jewelled shoes and women's dainty gear,
  Lay cast upon the varied pavement near.

    In one quick glance these things his eyes did see,
  But speedily they turned round to behold
  Another sight, for throned on ivory
  There sat a woman, whose wet tresses rolled
  On to the floor in waves of gleaming gold,
  Cast back from such a form as, erewhile shown
  To one poor shepherd, lighted up Troy town.

    Naked she was, the kisses of her feet
  Upon the floor a dying path had made
  From the full bath unto her ivory seat;
  In her right hand, upon her bosom laid,
  She held a golden comb, a mirror weighed
  Her left hand down, aback her fair head lay
  Dreaming awake of some long vanished day.

    Her eyes were shut, but she seemed not to sleep,
  Her lips were murmuring things unheard and low,
  Or sometimes twitched as though she needs must weep
  Though from her eyes the tears refused to flow,
  And oft with heavenly red her cheek did glow,
  As if remembrance of some half-sweet shame
  Across the web of many memories came.

    There stood the man, scarce daring to draw breath
  For fear the lovely sight should fade away;
  Forgetting heaven, forgetting life and death,
  Trembling for fear lest something he should say
  Unwitting, lest some sob should yet betray
  His presence there, for to his eager eyes
  Already did the tears begin to rise.

    But as he gazed she moved, and with a sigh
  Bent forward, dropping down her golden head;
  "Alas, alas! another day gone by,
  Another day and no soul come," she said;
  "Another year, and still I am not dead!"
  And with that word once more her head she raised,
  And on the trembling man with great eyes gazed.

    Then he imploring hands to her did reach,
  And toward her very slowly 'gan to move
  And with wet eyes her pity did beseech,
  And seeing her about to speak he strove
  From trembling lips to utter words of love;
  But with a look she stayed his doubtful feet,
  And made sweet music as their eyes did meet.

    For now she spoke in gentle voice and clear,
  Using the Greek tongue that he knew full well;
  "What man art thou, that thus hast wandered here.
  And found this lonely chamber where I dwell?
  Beware, beware! for I have many a spell;
  If greed of power and gold have led thee on,
  Not lightly shall this untold wealth be won.

    "But if thou com'st here, knowing of my tale,
  In hope to bear away my body fair,
  Stout must thine heart be, nor shall that avail
  If thou a wicked soul in thee dost bear;
  So once again I bid thee to beware,
  Because no base man things like this may see,
  And live thereafter long and happily."

    "Lady," he said, "in Florence is my home,
  And in my city noble is my name;
  Neither on peddling voyage am I come,
  But, like my fathers, bent to gather fame;
  And though thy face has set my heart a-flame
  Yet of thy story nothing do I know,
  But here have wandered heedlessly enow.

    "But since the sight of thee mine eyes did bless,
  What can I be but thine? what wouldst thou have?
  From those thy words, I deem from some distress
  By deeds of mine thy dear life I might save;
  O then, delay not! if one ever gave
  His life to any, mine I give to thee;
  Come, tell me what the price of love must be?

    "Swift death, to be with thee a day and night
  And with the earliest dawning to be slain?
  Or better, a long year of great delight,
  And many years of misery and pain?
  Or worse, and this poor hour for all my gain?
  A sorry merchant am I on this day,
  E'en as thou wiliest so must I obey."

    She said, "What brave words! nought divine am I,
  But an unhappy and unheard-of maid
  Compelled by evil fate and destiny
  To live, who long ago should have been laid
  Under the earth within the cypress shade.
  Hearken awhile, and quickly shalt thou know
  What deed I pray thee to accomplish now.

    "God grant indeed thy words are not for nought!
  Then shalt thou save me, since for many a day
  To such a dreadful life I have been brought:
  Nor will I spare with all my heart to pay
  What man soever takes my grief away;
  Ah! I will love thee, if thou lovest me
  But well enough my saviour now to be.

    "My father lived a many years agone
  Lord of this land, master of all cunning,
  Who ruddy gold could draw from out grey stone,
  And gather wealth from many an uncouth thing,
  He made the wilderness rejoice and sing,
  And such a leech he was that none could say
  Without his word what soul should pass away.

    "Unto Diana such a gift he gave,
  Goddess above, below, and on the earth,
  That I should be her virgin and her slave
  From the first hour of my most wretched birth;
  Therefore my life had known but little mirth
  When I had come unto my twentieth year
  And the last time of hallowing drew anear.

    "So in her temple had I lived and died
  And all would long ago have passed away,
  But ere that time came, did strange things betide,
  Whereby I am alive unto this day;
  Alas, the bitter words that I must say!
  Ah! can I bring my wretched tongue to tell
  How I was brought unto this fearful hell.

    "A queen I was, what gods I knew I loved,
  And nothing evil was there in my thought,
  And yet by love my wretched heart was moved
  Until to utter ruin I was brought!
  Alas! thou sayest our gods were vain and nought,
  Wait, wait, till thou hast heard this tale of mine.
  Then shalt thou think them devilish or divine.

    "Hearken! in spite of father and of vow
  I loved a man; but for that sin I think
  Men had forgiven me--yea, yea, even thou;
  But from the gods the full cup must I drink,
  And into misery unheard of sink,
  Tormented when their own names are forgot,
  And men must doubt e'er if they lived or not.

    "Glorious my lover was unto my sight,
  Most beautiful,--of love we grew so fain
  That we at last agreed, that on a night
  We should be happy, but that he were slain
  Or shut in hold, and neither joy nor pain
  Should else forbid that hoped-for time to be;
  So came the night that made a wretch of me.

    "Ah I well do I remember all that night,
  When through the window shone the orb of June,
  And by the bed flickered the taper's light,
  Whereby I trembled, gazing at the moon:
  Ah me! the meeting that we had, when soon
  Into his strong, well-trusted arms I fell,
  And many a sorrow we began to tell.

    "Ah me I what parting on that night we had!
  I think the story of my great despair
  A little while might merry folk make sad;
  For, as he swept away my yellow hair
  To make my shoulder and my bosom bare,
  I raised mine eyes, and shuddering could behold
  A shadow cast upon the bed of gold:

    "Then suddenly was quenched my hot desire
  And he untwined his arms; the moon so pale
  A while ago, seemed changed to blood and fire,
  And yet my limbs beneath me did not fail,
  And neither had I strength to cry or wail,
  But stood there helpless, bare, and shivering,
  With staring eyes still fixed upon the thing.

    "Because the shade that on the bed of gold
  The changed and dreadful moon was throwing down
  Was of Diana, whom I did behold,
  With knotted hair, and shining girt-up gown,
  And on the high white brow, a deadly frown
  Bent upon us, who stood scarce drawing breath,
  Striving to meet the horrible sure death.

    "No word at all the dreadful goddess said,
  But soon across my feet my lover lay,
  And well indeed I knew that he was dead;
  And would that I had died on that same day!
  For in a while the image turned away,
  And without words my doom I understood,
  And felt a horror change my human blood.

    "And there I fell, and on the floor I lay
  By the dead man, till daylight came on me,
  And not a word thenceforward could I say
  For three years, till of grief and misery,
  The lingering pest, the cruel enemy,
  My father and his folk were dead and gone,
  And in this castle I was left alone:

    "And then the doom foreseen upon me fell,
  For Queen Diana did my body change
  Into a fork-tongued dragon flesh and fell,
  And through the island nightly do I range,
  Or in the green sea mate with monsters strange,
  When in the middle of the moonlit night
  The sleepy mariner I do affright.

    "But all day long upon this gold I lie
  Within this place, where never mason's hand
  Smote trowel on the marble noisily;
  Drowsy I lie, no folk at my command,
  Who once was called the Lady of the Land;
  Who might have bought a kingdom with a kiss,
  Yea, half the world with such a sight as this."

    And therewithal, with rosy fingers light,
  Backward her heavy-hanging hair she threw,
  To give her naked beauty more to sight;
  But when, forgetting all the things he knew,
  Maddened with love unto the prize he drew,
  She cried, "Nay, wait! for wherefore wilt thou die,
  Why should we not be happy, thou and I?

    "Wilt thou not save me? once in every year
  This rightful form of mine that thou dost see
  By favour of the goddess have I here
  From sunrise unto sunset given me,
  That some brave man may end my misery.
  And thou--art thou not brave? can thy heart fail,
  Whose eyes e'en now are weeping at my tale?

    "Then listen! when this day is overpast,
  A fearful monster shall I be again,
  And thou mayst be my saviour at the last,
  Unless, once more, thy words are nought and vain;
  If thou of love and sovereignty art fain,
  Come thou next morn, and when thou seest here
  A hideous dragon, have thereof no fear,

    "But take the loathsome head up in thine hands,
  And kiss it, and be master presently
  Of twice the wealth that is in all the lands,
  From Cathay to the head of Italy;
  And master also, if it pleaseth thee,
  Of all thou praisest as so fresh and bright,
  Of what thou callest crown of all delight.

    "Ah! with what joy then shall I see again
  The sunlight on the green grass and the trees,
  And hear the clatter of the summer rain,
  And see the joyous folk beyond the seas.
  Ah, me! to hold my child upon my knees,
  After the weeping of unkindly tears,
  And all the wrongs of these four hundred years.

    "Go now, go quick! leave this grey heap of stone;
  And from thy glad heart think upon thy way,
  How I shall love thee--yea, love thee alone,
  That bringest me from dark death unto day;
  For this shall be thy wages and thy pay;
  Unheard-of wealth, unheard-of love is near,
  If thou hast heart a little dread to bear."

    Therewith she turned to go; but he cried out,
  "Ah! wilt thou leave me then without one kiss,
  To slay the very seeds of fear and doubt,
  That glad to-morrow may bring certain bliss?
  Hast thou forgotten how love lives by this,
  The memory of some hopeful close embrace,
  Low whispered words within some lonely place?"

    But she, when his bright glittering eyes she saw,
  And burning cheeks, cried out, "Alas, alas!
  Must I be quite undone, and wilt thou draw
  A worse fate on me than the first one was?
  O haste thee from this fatal place to pass!
  Yet, ere thou goest, take this, lest thou shouldst deem
  Thou hast been fooled by some strange midday dream."

    So saying, blushing like a new-kissed maid,
  From off her neck a little gem she drew,
  That, 'twixt those snowy rose-tinged hillocks laid,
  The secrets of her glorious beauty knew;
  And ere he well perceived what she would do,
  She touched his hand, the gem within it lay,
  And, turning, from his sight she fled away.

    Then at the doorway where her rosy heel
  Had glanced and vanished, he awhile did stare,
  And still upon his hand he seemed to feel
  The varying kisses of her fingers fair;
  Then turned he toward the dreary crypt and bare,
  And dizzily throughout the castle passed,
  Till by the ruined fane he stood at last.

    Then weighing still the gem within his hand,
  He stumbled backward through the cypress wood,
  Thinking the while of some strange lovely land,
  Where all his life should be most fair and good;
  Till on the valley's wall of hills he stood,
  And slowly thence passed down unto the bay
  Red with the death of that bewildering day.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The next day came, and he, who all the night
  Had ceaselessly been turning in his bed,
  Arose and clad himself in armour bright,
  And many a danger he rememberéd;
  Storming of towns, lone sieges full of dread,
  That with renown his heart had borne him through,
  And this thing seemed a little thing to do.

    So on he went, and on the way he thought
  Of all the glorious things of yesterday,
  Nought of the price whereat they must be bought,
  But ever to himself did softly say,
  "No roaming now, my wars are passed away,
  No long dull days devoid of happiness,
  When such a love my yearning heart shall bless."

    Thus to the castle did he come at last,
  But when unto the gateway he drew near,
  And underneath its ruined archway passed
  Into the court, a strange noise did he hear,
  And through his heart there shot a pang of fear,
  Trembling, he gat his sword into his hand,
  And midmost of the cloisters took his stand.

    But for a while that unknown noise increased
  A rattling, that with strident roars did blend,
  And whining moans; but suddenly it ceased,
  A fearful thing stood at the cloister's end,
  And eyed him for a while, then 'gan to wend
  Adown the cloisters, and began again
  That rattling, and the moan like fiends in pain.

    And as it came on towards him, with its teeth
  The body of a slain goat did it tear,
  The blood whereof in its hot jaws did seethe,
  And on its tongue he saw the smoking hair;
  Then his heart sank, and standing trembling there,
  Throughout his mind wild thoughts and fearful ran,
  "Some fiend she was," he said, "the bane of man."

    Yet he abode her still, although his blood
  Curdled within him: the thing dropped the goat,
  And creeping on, came close to where he stood,
  And raised its head to him, and wrinkled throat,
  Then he cried out and wildly at her smote,
  Shutting his eyes, and turned and from the place
  Ran swiftly, with a white and ghastly face.

    But little things rough stones and tree-trunks seemed,
  And if he fell, he rose and ran on still;
  No more he felt his hurts than if he dreamed,
  He made no stay for valley or steep hill,
  Heedless he dashed through many a foaming rill,
  Until he came unto the ship at last
  And with no word into the deep hold passed.

    Meanwhile the dragon, seeing him clean gone.
  Followed him not, but crying horribly,
  Caught up within her jaws a block of stone
  And ground it into powder, then turned she,
  With cries that folk could hear far out at sea,
  And reached the treasure set apart of old,
  To brood above the hidden heaps of gold.

    Yet was she seen again on many a day
  By some half-waking mariner, or herd,
  Playing amid the ripples of the bay,
  Or on the hills making all things afeard,
  Or in the wood, that did that castle gird,
  But never any man again durst go
  To seek her woman's form, and end her woe.

    As for the man, who knows what things he bore?
  What mournful faces peopled the sad night,
  What wailings vexed him with reproaches sore,
  What images of that nigh-gained delight!
  What dreamed caresses from soft hands and white,
  Turning to horrors ere they reached the best,
  What struggles vain, what shame, what huge unrest?

    No man he knew, three days he lay and raved,
  And cried for death, until a lethargy
  Fell on him, and his fellows thought him saved;
  But on the third night he awoke to die;
  And at Byzantium doth his body lie
  Between two blossoming pomegranate trees,
  Within the churchyard of the Genoese.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A moment's silence as his tale had end,
  And then the wind of that June night did blend
  Their varied voices, as of that and this
  They fell to talk: of those fair islands' bliss
  They knew in other days, of hope they had
  To live there long an easy life and glad,
  With nought to vex them; and the younger men
  Began to nourish strange dreams even then
  Of sailing east, as these had once sailed west;
  Because the story of that luckless quest
  With hope, not fear, had filled their joyous hearts
  And made them dream of new and noble parts
  That they might act; of raising up the name
  Their fathers bore, and winning boundless fame.
    These too with little patience seemed to hear,
  That story end with shame and grief and fear;
  A little thing the man had had to do,
  They said, if longing burned within him so.
  But at their words the older men must bow
  Their heads, and, smiling, somewhat thoughtful grow,
  Remembering well how fear in days gone by
  Had dealt with them, and poisoned wretchedly
  Good days, good deeds, and longings for all good:
  Yet on the evil times they would not brood,
  But sighing, strove to raise the weight of years,
  And no more memory of their hopes and fears
  They nourished, but such gentle thoughts as fed
  The pensiveness which that sweet season bred.




JULY.


    Fair was the morn to-day, the blossom's scent
  Floated across the fresh grass, and the bees
  With low vexed song from rose to lily went,
  A gentle wind was in the heavy trees,
  And thine eyes shone with joyous memories;
  Fair was the early morn, and fair wert thou,
  And I was happy--Ah, be happy now!

    Peace and content without us, love within
  That hour there was, now thunder and wild rain,
  Have wrapped the cowering world, and foolish sin,
  And nameless pride, have made us wise in vain;
  Ah, love! although the morn shall come again,
  And on new rose-buds the new sun shall smile,
  Can we regain what we have lost meanwhile?

    E'en now the west grows clear of storm and threat,
  But midst the lightning did the fair sun die--
  --Ah, he shall rise again for ages yet,
  He cannot waste his life--but thou and I--
  Who knows if next morn this felicity
  My lips may feel, or if thou still shalt live
  This seal of love renewed once more to give?

       *       *       *       *       *

    Within a lovely valley, watered well
  With flowery streams, the July feast befell,
  And there within the Chief-priest's fair abode
  They cast aside their trouble's heavy load,
  Scarce made aweary by the sultry day.
  The earth no longer laboured; shaded lay
  The sweet-breathed kine, across the sunny vale,
  From hill to hill the wandering rook did sail,
  Lazily croaking, midst his dreams of spring,
  Nor more awake the pink-foot dove did cling
  Unto the beech-bough, murmuring now and then;
  All rested but the restless sons of men
  And the great sun that wrought this happiness,
  And all the vale with fruitful hopes did bless.
    So in a marble chamber bright with flowers,
  The old men feasted through the fresher hours,
  And at the hottest time of all the day
  When now the sun was on his downward way,
  Sat listening to a tale an elder told,
  New to his fathers while they yet did hold
  The cities of some far-off Grecian isle,
  Though in the heavens the cloud of force and guile
  Was gathering dark that sent them o'er the sea
  To win new lands for their posterity.




THE SON OF CROESUS.

ARGUMENT.

Croesus, King of Lydia, dreamed that he saw his son slain by an iron
    weapon, and though by every means he strove to avert this doom from
    him, yet thus it happened, for his son was slain by the hand of the
    man who seemed least of all likely to do the deed.


    Of Croesus tells my tale, a king of old
  In Lydia, ere the Mede fell on the land,
  A man made mighty by great heaps of gold,
  Feared for the myriads strong of heart and hand
  That 'neath his banners wrought out his command,
  And though his latter ending happed on ill,
  Yet first of every joy he had his fill.

    Two sons he had, and one was dumb from birth;
  The other one, that Atys had to name,
  Grew up a fair youth, and of might and worth,
  And well it seemed the race wherefrom he came
  From him should never get reproach or shame:
  But yet no stroke he struck before his death,
  In no war-shout he spent his latest breath.

    Now Croesus, lying on his bed anight
  Dreamed that he saw this dear son laid a-low,
  And folk lamenting he was slain outright,
  And that some iron thing had dealt the blow;
  By whose hand guided he could nowise know,
  Or if in peace by traitors it were done,
  Or in some open war not yet begun.

    Three times one night this vision broke his sleep,
  So that at last he rose up from his bed,
  That he might ponder how he best might keep
  The threatened danger from so dear a head;
  And, since he now was old enough to wed,
  The King sent men to search the lands around,
  Until some matchless maiden should be found;

    That in her arms this Atys might forget
  The praise of men, and fame of history,
  Whereby full many a field has been made wet
  With blood of men, and many a deep green sea
  Been reddened therewithal, and yet shall be;
  That her sweet voice might drown the people's praise,
  Her eyes make bright the uneventful days.

    So when at last a wonder they had brought,
  From some sweet land down by the ocean's rim.
  Than whom no fairer could by man be thought,
  And ancient dames, scanning her limb by limb,
  Had said that she was fair enough for him,
  To her was Atys married with much show,
  And looked to dwell with her in bliss enow.

    And in meantime afield he never went,
  Either to hunting or the frontier war,
  No dart was cast, nor any engine bent
  Anigh him, and the Lydian men afar
  Must rein their steeds, and the bright blossoms mar
  If they have any lust of tourney now,
  And in far meadows must they bend the bow.

    And also through the palace everywhere
  The swords and spears were taken from the wall
  That long with honour had been hanging there,
  And from the golden pillars of the hall;
  Lest by mischance some sacred blade should fall,
  And in its falling bring revenge at last
  For many a fatal battle overpast.

    And every day King Croesus wrought with care
  To save his dear son from that threatened end,
  And many a beast he offered up with prayer
  Unto the gods, and much of wealth did spend,
  That they so prayed might yet perchance defend
  That life, until at least that he were dead,
  With earth laid heavy on his unseeing head.

    But in the midst even of the wedding feast
  There came a man, who by the golden hall
  Sat down upon the steps, and man or beast
  He heeded not, but there against the wall
  He leaned his head, speaking no word at all,
  Till, with his son and son's wife, came the King,
  And then unto his gown the man did cling.

    "What man art thou?" the King said to him then,
  "That in such guise thou prayest on thy knee;
  Hast thou some fell foe here among my men?
  Or hast thou done an ill deed unto me?
  Or has thy wife been carried over sea?
  Or hast thou on this day great need of gold?
  Or say, why else thou now art grown so bold."

    "O King," he said, "I ask no gold to-day,
  And though indeed thy greatness drew me here,
  No wrong have I that thou couldst wipe away;
  And nought of mine the pirate folk did bear
  Across the sea; none of thy folk I fear:
  But all the gods are now mine enemies,
  Therefore I kneel before thee on my knees.

    "For as with mine own brother on a day
  Within the running place at home I played,
  Unwittingly I smote him such-a-way
  That dead upon the green grass he was laid;
  Half-dead myself I fled away dismayed,
  Wherefore I pray thee help me in my need,
  And purify my soul of this sad deed.

    "If of my name and country thou wouldst know,
  In Phrygia yet my father is a king,
  Gordius, the son of Midas, rich enow
  In corn and cattle, golden cup and ring;
  And mine own name before I did this thing
  Was called Adrastus, whom, in street and hall,
  The slayer of his brother men now call."

    "Friend," said the King, "have thou no fear of me;
  For though, indeed, I am right happy now,
  Yet well I know this may not always be,
  And I may chance some day to kneel full low,
  And to some happy man mine head to bow
  With prayers to do a greater thing than this,
  Dwell thou with us, and win again thy bliss.

    "For in this city men in sport and play
  Forget the trouble that the gods have sent;
  Who therewithal send wine, and many a may
  As fair as she for whom the Trojan went,
  And many a dear delight besides have lent,
  Which, whoso is well loved of them shall keep
  Till in forgetful death he falls asleep.

    "Therefore to-morrow shall those rites be done
  That kindred blood demands that thou hast shed,
  That if the mouth of thine own mother's son
  Did hap to curse thee ere he was quite dead,
  The curse may lie the lighter on thine head,
  Because the flower-crowned head of many a beast
  Has fallen voiceless in our glorious feast."

    Then did Adrastus rise and thank the King,
  And the next day when yet low was the sun,
  The sacrifice and every other thing
  That unto these dread rites belonged, was done;
  And there Adrastus dwelt, hated of none,
  And loved of many, and the King loved him,
  For brave and wise he was and strong of limb.

    But chiefly amongst all did Atys love
  The luckless stranger, whose fair tales of war
  The Lydian's heart abundantly did move,
  And much they talked of wandering out afar
  Some day, to lands where many marvels are,
  With still the Phrygian through all things to be
  The leader unto all felicity.

    Now at this time folk came unto the King
  Who on a forest's borders dwelling were,
  Wherein there roamed full many a dangerous thing,
  As wolf and wild bull, lion and brown bear;
  But chiefly in that forest was the lair
  Of a great boar that no man could withstand.
  And many a woe he wrought upon the land.

    Since long ago that men in Calydon
  Held chase, no beast like him had once been seen
  He ruined vineyards lying in the sun,
  After his harvesting the men must glean
  What he had left; right glad they had not been
  Among the tall stalks of the ripening wheat,
  The fell destroyer's fatal tusks to meet.

    For often would the lonely man entrapped
  In vain from his dire fury strive to hide
  In some thick hedge, and other whiles it happed
  Some careless stranger by his place would ride,
  And the tusks smote his fallen horse's side,
  And what help then to such a wretch could come
  With sword he could not draw, and far from home?

    Or else girls, sent their water-jars to fill,
  Would come back pale, too terrified to cry,
  Because they had but seen him from the hill;
  Or else again with side rent wretchedly,
  Some hapless damsel midst the brake would lie.
  Shortly to say, there neither man nor maid
  Was safe afield whether they wrought or played.

    Therefore were come these dwellers by the wood
  To pray the King brave men to them to send,
  That they might live; and if he deemed it good,
  That Atys with the other knights should wend,
  They thought their grief the easier should have end;
  For both by gods and men they knew him loved,
  And easily by hope of glory moved.

    "O Sire," they said, "thou know'st how Hercules
  Was not content to wait till folk asked aid,
  But sought the pests among their guarded trees;
  Thou know'st what name the Theban Cadmus made,
  And how the bull of Marathon was laid
  Dead on the fallows of the Athenian land,
  And how folk worshipped Atalanta's hand.

    "Fair would thy son's name look upon the roll
  Wherein such noble deeds as this are told;
  And great delight shall surely fill thy soul,
  Thinking upon his deeds when thou art old,
  And thy brave heart is waxen faint and cold:
  Dost thou not know, O King, how men will strive
  That they, when dead, still in their sons may live?"

    He shuddered as they spoke, because he thought,
  Most certainly a winning tale is this
  To draw him from the net where he is caught,
  For hearts of men grow weary of all bliss;
  Nor is he one to be content with his,
  If he should hear the trumpet-blast of fame
  And far-off people calling on his name.

    "Good friends," he said, "go, get ye back again.
  And doubt not I will send you men to slay
  This pest ye fear: yet shall your prayer be vain
  If ye with any other speak to-day;
  And for my son, with me he needs must stay,
  For mighty cares oppress the Lydian land.
  Fear not, for ye shall have a noble band."

    And with that promise must they be content,
  And so departed, having feasted well.
  And yet some god or other ere they went,
  If they were silent, this their tale must tell
  To more than one man; therefore it befell,
  That at the last Prince Atys knew the thing,
  And came with angry eyes unto the King.

    "Father," he said, "since when am I grown vile
  Since when am I grown helpless of my hands?
  Or else what folk, with words enwrought with guile
  Thine ears have poisoned; that when far-off lands
  My fame might fill, by thy most strange commands
  I needs must stay within this slothful home,
  Whereto would God that I had never come?

    "What! wilt thou take mine honour quite away
  Wouldst thou, that, as with her I just have wed
  I sit among thy folk at end of day,
  She should be ever turning round her head
  To watch some man for war apparelled
  Because he wears a sword that he may use,
  Which grace to me thou ever wilt refuse?

    "Or dost thou think, when thou hast run thy race
  And thou art gone, and in thy stead I reign,
  The people will do honour to my place,
  Or that the lords leal men will still remain,
  If yet my father's sword be sharp in vain?
  If on the wall his armour still hang up,
  While for a spear I hold a drinking-cup?"

    "O Son!" quoth Croesus, "well I know thee brave
  And worthy of high deeds of chivalry;
  Therefore the more thy dear life would I save,
  Which now is threatened by the gods on high;
  Three times one night I dreamed I saw thee die,
  Slain by some deadly iron-pointed thing,
  While weeping lords stood round thee in a ring."

    Then loud laughed Atys, and he said again,
  "Father, and did this ugly dream tell thee
  What day it was on which I should be slain?
  As may the gods grant I may one day be,
  And not from sickness die right wretchedly,
  Groaning with pain, my lords about my bed,
  Wishing to God that I were fairly dead;

    "But slain in battle, as the Lydian kings
  Have died ere now, in some great victory,
  While all about the Lydian shouting rings
  Death to the beaten foemen as they fly.
  What death but this, O father! should I die?
  But if my life by iron shall be done,
  What steel to-day shall glitter in the sun?

    "Yea, father, if to thee it seemeth good
  To keep me from the bright steel-bearing throng,
  Let me be brave at least within the wood;
  For surely, if thy dream be true, no wrong
  Can hap to me from this beast's tushes strong:
  Unless perchance the beast is grown so wise,
  He haunts the forest clad in Lydian guise."

    Then Croesus said: "O Son, I love thee so,
  That thou shalt do thy will upon this tide:
  But since unto this hunting thou must go,
  A trusty friend along with thee shall ride,
  Who not for anything shall leave thy side.
  I think, indeed, he loves thee well enow
  To thrust his heart 'twixt thee and any blow.

    "Go then, O Son, and if by some short span
  Thy life be measured, how shall it harm thee,
  If while life last thou art a happy man?
  And thou art happy; only unto me
  Is trembling left, and infelicity:
  The trembling of the man who loves on earth,
  But unto thee is hope and present mirth.

    "Nay, be thou not ashamed, for on this day
  I fear not much: thou read'st my dream aright,
  No teeth or claws shall take thy life away.
  And it may chance, ere thy last glorious fight,
  I shall be blinded by the endless night;
  And brave Adrastus on this day shall be
  Thy safeguard, and shall give good heart to me.

    "Go then, and send him hither, and depart;
  And as the heroes did so mayst thou do,
  Winning such fame as well may please thine heart."
  With that word from the King did Atys go,
  Who, left behind, sighed, saying, "May it be so,
  Even as I hope; and yet I would to God
  These men upon my threshold ne'er had trod."

    So when Adrastus to the King was come
  He said unto him, "O my Phrygian friend,
  We in this land have given thee a home,
  And 'gainst all foes your life will we defend:
  Wherefore for us that life thou shouldest spend,
  If any day there should be need therefor;
  And now a trusty friend I need right sore.

    "Doubtless ere now thou hast heard many say
  There is a doom that threatens my son's life;
  Therefore this place is stript of arms to-day,
  And therefore still bides Atys with his wife,
  And tempts not any god by raising strife;
  Yet none the less by no desire of his,
  To whom would war be most abundant bliss.

    "And since to-day some glory he may gain
  Against a monstrous bestial enemy
  And that the meaning of my dream is plain;
  That saith that he by steel alone shall die,
  His burning wish I may not well deny,
  Therefore afield to-morrow doth he wend
  And herein mayst thou show thyself my friend--

    "For thou as captain of his band shalt ride,
  And keep a watchful eye of everything,
  Nor leave him whatsoever may betide:
  Lo, thou art brave, the son of a great king,
  And with thy praises doth this city ring,
  Why should I tell thee what a name those gain,
  Who dying for their friends, die not in vain?"

    Then said Adrastus, "Now were I grown base
  Beyond all words, if I should spare for aught
  In guarding him, so sit with smiling face,
  And of this matter take no further thought,
  Because with my life shall his life be bought,
  If ill should hap; and no ill fate it were,
  If I should die for what I hold so dear."

    Then went Adrastus, and next morn all things,
  That 'longed unto the hunting were well dight,
  And forth they went clad as the sons of kings,
  Fair was the morn, as through the sunshine bright
  They rode, the Prince half wild with great delight,
  The Phrygian smiling on him soberly,
  And ever looking round with watchful eye.

    So through the city all the rout rode fast,
  With many a great black-muzzled yellow hound;
  And then the teeming country-side they passed,
  Until they came to sour and rugged ground,
  And there rode up a little heathy mound,
  That overlooked the scrubby woods and low,
  That of the beast's lair somewhat they might know.

    And there a good man of the country-side
  Showed them the places where he mostly lay;
  And they, descending, through the wood did ride,
  And followed on his tracks for half the day.
  And at the last they brought him well to bay,
  Within an oozy space amidst the wood,
  About the which a ring of alders stood.

    So when the hounds' changed voices clear they heard
  With hearts aflame on towards him straight they drew
  Atys the first of all, of nought afeard,
  Except that folk should say some other slew
  The beast; and lustily his horn he blew,
  Going afoot; then, mighty spear in hand,
  Adrastus headed all the following band.

    Now when they came unto the plot of ground
  Where stood the boar, hounds dead about him lay
  Or sprawled about, bleeding from many a wound,
  But still the others held him well at bay,
  Nor had he been bestead thus ere that day.
  But yet, seeing Atys, straight he rushed at him,
  Speckled with foam, bleeding in flank and limb.

    Then Atys stood and cast his well-steeled spear
  With a great shout, and straight and well it flew;
  For now the broad blade cutting through the ear,
  A stream of blood from out the shoulder drew.
  And therewithal another, no less true,
  Adrastus cast, whereby the boar had died:
  But Atys drew the bright sword from his side,

    And to the tottering beast he drew anigh:
  But as the sun's rays ran adown the blade
  Adrastus threw a javelin hastily,
  For of the mighty beast was he afraid,
  Lest by his wounds he should not yet be stayed,
  But with a last rush cast his life away,
  And dying there, the son of Croesus slay.

    But even as the feathered dart he hurled,
  His strained, despairing eyes, beheld the end,
  And changed seemed all the fashion of the world,
  And past and future into one did blend,
  As he beheld the fixed eyes of his friend,
  That no reproach had in them, and no fear,
  For Death had seized him ere he thought him near.

    Adrastus shrieked, and running up he caught
  The falling man, and from his bleeding side
  Drew out the dart, and, seeing that death had brought
  Deliverance to him, he thereby had died;
  But ere his hand the luckless steel could guide,
  And he the refuge of poor souls could win,
  The horror-stricken huntsmen had rushed in.

    And these, with blows and cries he heeded nought
  His unresisting hands made haste to bind;
  Then of the alder-boughs a bier they wrought,
  And laid the corpse thereon, and 'gan to wind
  Homeward amidst the tangled wood and blind,
  And going slowly, at the eventide,
  Some leagues from Sardis did that day abide.

    Onward next morn the slaughtered man they bore,
  With him that slew him, and at end of day
  They reached the city, and with mourning sore
  Toward the King's palace did they take their way.
  He in an open western chamber lay
  Feasting, though inwardly his heart did burn
  Until that Atys should to him return.

    And when those wails first smote upon his ear
  He set the wine-cup down, and to his feet
  He rose, and bitter all-consuming fear
  Swallowed his joy, and nigh he went to meet
  That which was coming through the weeping street;
  But in the end he thought it good to wait,
  And stood there doubting all the ills of fate.

    But when at last up to that royal place
  Folk brought the thing he once had held so dear
  Still stood the King, staring with ghastly face
  As they brought forth Adrastus and the bier,
  But spoke at last, slowly without a tear,
  "O Phrygian man, that I did purify,
  Is it through thee that Atys came to die?"

    "O King," Adrastus said, "take now my life,
  With whatso torment seemeth good to thee,
  As my word went, for I would end this strife,
  And underneath the earth lie quietly;
  Nor is it my will here alive to be:
  For as my brother, so Prince Atys died,
  And this unlucky hand some god did guide."

    Then as a man constrained, the tale he told
  From end to end, nor spared himself one whit:
  And as he spoke, the wood did still behold,
  The trodden grass, and Atys dead on it;
  And many a change o'er the King's face did flit
  Of kingly rage, and hatred and despair,
  As on the slayer's face he still did stare.

    At last he said, "Thy death avails me nought.
  The gods themselves have done this bitter deed,
  That I was all too happy was their thought,
  Therefore thy heart is dead and mine doth bleed,
  And I am helpless as a trodden weed:
  Thou art but as the handle of the spear,
  The caster sits far off from any fear.

    "Yet, if thy hurt they meant, I can do this,--
  --Loose him and let him go in peace from me--
  I will not slay the slayer of all my bliss;
  Yet go, poor man, for when thy face I see
  I curse the gods for their felicity.
  Surely some other slayer they would have found,
  If thou hadst long ago been under ground.

    "Alas, Adrastus! in my inmost heart
  I knew the gods would one day do this thing,
  But deemed indeed that it would be thy part
  To comfort me amidst my sorrowing;
  Make haste to go, for I am still a King!
  Madness may take me, I have many hands
  Who will not spare to do my worst commands."

    With that Adrastus' bonds were done away,
  And forthwith to the city gates he ran,
  And on the road where they had been that day
  Rushed through the gathering night; and some lone man
  Beheld next day his visage wild and wan,
  Peering from out a thicket of the wood
  Where he had spilt that well-belovéd blood.

    And now the day of burial pomp must be,
  And to those rites all lords of Lydia came
  About the King, and that day, they and he
  Cast royal gifts of rich things on the flame;
  But while they stood and wept, and called by name
  Upon the dead, amidst them came a man
  With raiment rent, and haggard face and wan:

    Who when the marshals would have thrust him out
  And men looked strange on him, began to say,
  "Surely the world is changed since ye have doubt
  Of who I am; nay, turn me not away,
  For ye have called me princely ere to-day--
  Adrastus, son of Gordius, a great king,
  Where unto Pallas Phrygian maidens sing.

    "O Lydians, many a rich thing have ye cast
  Into this flame, but I myself will give
  A greater gift, since now I see at last
  The gods are wearied for that still I live,
  And with their will, why should I longer strive?
  Atys, O Atys, thus I give to thee
  A life that lived for thy felicity."

    And therewith from his side a knife he drew,
  And, crying out, upon the pile he leapt,
  And with one mighty stroke himself he slew.
  So there these princes both together slept,
  And their light ashes, gathered up, were kept
  Within a golden vessel wrought all o'er
  With histories of this hunting of the boar.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A gentle wind had risen midst his tale,
  That bore the sweet scents of the fertile vale
  In at the open windows; and these men
  The burden of their years scarce noted then,
  Soothed by the sweet luxurious summer time,
  And by the cadence of that ancient rhyme,
  Spite of its saddening import; nay, indeed,
  Of some such thoughts the Wanderers had need
  As that tale gave them--Yea, a man shall be
  A wonder for his glorious chivalry,
  First in all wisdom, of a prudent mind,
  Yet none the less him too his fate shall find
  Unfenced by these, a man 'mongst other men.
  Yea, and will Fortune pick out, now and then,
  The noblest for the anvil of her blows;
  Great names are few, and yet, indeed, who knows
  What greater souls have fallen 'neath the stroke
  Of careless fate? Purblind are most of folk,
  The happy are the masters of the earth
  Which ever give small heed to hapless worth;
  So goes the world, and this we needs must bear
  Like eld and death: yet there were some men there
  Who drank in silence to the memory
  Of those who failed on earth great men to be,
  Though better than the men who won the crown.
    But when the sun was fairly going down
  They left the house, and, following up the stream,
  In the low sun saw the kingfisher gleam
  'Twixt bank and alder, and the grebe steal out
  From the high sedge, and, in his restless doubt,
  Dive down, and rise to see what men were there:
  They saw the swallow chase high up in air
  The circling gnats; the shaded dusky pool
  Broke by the splashing chub; the ripple cool,
  Rising and falling, of some distant weir
  They heard, till it oppressed the listening ear,
  As twilight grew: so back they turned again
  Glad of their rest, and pleasure after pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Within the gardens once again they met,
  That now the roses did well-nigh forget,
  For hot July was drawing to an end,
  And August came the fainting year to mend
  With fruit and grain; so 'neath the trellises,
  Nigh blossomless, did they lie well at ease,
  And watched the poppies burn across the grass,
  And o'er the bindweed's bells the brown bee pass
  Still murmuring of his gains: windless and bright
  The morn had been, to help their dear delight;
  But heavy clouds ere noon grew round the sun,
  And, halfway to the zenith, wild and dun
  The sky grew, and the thunder growled afar;
  But, ere the steely clouds began their war,
  A change there came, and, as by some great hand,
  The clouds that hung in threatening o'er the land
  Were drawn away; then a light wind arose
  That shook the light stems of that flowery close,
  And made men sigh for pleasure; therewithal
  Did mirth upon the feasting elders fall,
  And they no longer watched the lowering sky,
  But called aloud for some new history.
    Then spoke the Suabian, "Sirs, this tale is told
  Among our searchers for fine stones and gold,
  And though I tell it wrong be good to me;
  For I the written book did never see,
  Made by some Fleming, as I think, wherein
  Is told this tale of wilfulness and sin."




THE WATCHING OF THE FALCON.

ARGUMENT.

The case of this falcon was such, that whoso watched it without sleeping
    for seven days and seven nights, had his first wish granted him by a
    fay lady, that appeared to him thereon; and some wished one thing, and
    some another. But a certain king, who watched the falcon daily, would
    wish for nought but the love of that fay; which wish being
    accomplished, was afterwards his ruin.


    Across the sea a land there is,
  Where, if fate will, may men have bliss,
  For it is fair as any land:
  There hath the reaper a full hand,
  While in the orchard hangs aloft
  The purple fig, a-growing soft;
  And fair the trellised vine-bunches
  Are swung across the high elm-trees;
  And in the rivers great fish play,
  While over them pass day by day
  The laden barges to their place.
  There maids are straight, and fair of face,
  And men are stout for husbandry,
  And all is well as it can be
  Upon this earth where all has end.
    For on them God is pleased to send
  The gift of Death down from above.
  That envy, hatred, and hot love,
  Knowledge with hunger by his side,
  And avarice and deadly pride,
  There may have end like everything
  Both to the shepherd and the king:
  Lest this green earth become but hell
  If folk for ever there should dwell.
    Full little most men think of this,
  But half in woe and half in bliss
  They pass their lives, and die at last
  Unwilling, though their lot be cast
  In wretched places of the earth,
  Where men have little joy from birth
  Until they die; in no such case
  Were those who tilled this pleasant place.
    There soothly men were loth to die,
  Though sometimes in his misery
  A man would say "Would I were dead!"
  Alas! full little likelihead
  That he should live for ever there.
    So folk within that country fair
  Lived on, nor from their memories drave
  The thought of what they could not have.
  And without need tormented still
  Each other with some bitter ill;
  Yea, and themselves too, growing grey
  With dread of some long-lingering day,
  That never came ere they were dead
  With green sods growing on the head;
  Nowise content with what they had,
  But falling still from good to bad
  While hard they sought the hopeless best
  And seldom happy or at rest
  Until at last with lessening blood
  One foot within the grave they stood.

    Now so it chanced that in this land
  There did a certain castle stand,
  Set all alone deep in the hills,
  Amid the sound of falling rills
  Within a valley of sweet grass,
  To which there went one narrow pass
  Through the dark hills, but seldom trod.
  Rarely did horse-hoof press the sod
  About the quiet weedy moat,
  Where unscared did the great fish float;
  Because men dreaded there to see
  The uncouth things of faërie;
  Nathless by some few fathers old
  These tales about the place were told
    That neither squire nor seneschal
  Or varlet came in bower or hall,
  Yet all things were in order due,
  Hangings of gold and red and blue,
  And tables with fair service set;
  Cups that had paid the Cæsar's debt
  Could he have laid his hands on them;
  Dorsars, with pearls in every hem,
  And fair embroidered gold-wrought things,
  Fit for a company of kings;
  And in the chambers dainty beds,
  With pillows dight for fair young heads;
  And horses in the stables were,
  And in the cellars wine full clear
  And strong, and casks of ale and mead;
  Yea, all things a great lord could need.
    For whom these things were ready there
  None knew; but if one chanced to fare
  Into that place at Easter-tide,
  There would he find a falcon tied
  Unto a pillar of the Hall;
  And such a fate to him would fall,
  That if unto the seventh night,
  He watched the bird from dark to light,
  And light to dark unceasingly,
  On the last evening he should see
  A lady beautiful past words;
  Then, were he come of clowns or lords,
  Son of a swineherd or a king,
  There must she grant him anything
  Perforce, that he might dare to ask,
  And do his very hardest task
    But if he slumbered, ne'er again
  The wretch would wake for he was slain
  Helpless, by hands he could not see,
  And torn and mangled wretchedly.

    Now said these elders--Ere this tide
  Full many folk this thing have tried,
  But few have got much good thereby;
  For first, a many came to die
  By slumbering ere their watch was done;
  Or else they saw that lovely one,
  And mazed, they knew not what to say;
  Or asked some toy for all their pay,
  That easily they might have won,
  Nor staked their lives and souls thereon;
  Or asking, asked for some great thing
  That was their bane; as to be king
  One asked, and died the morrow morn
  That he was crowned, of all forlorn.
    Yet thither came a certain man,
  Who from being poor great riches wan
  Past telling, whose grandsons now are
  Great lords thereby in peace and war.
  And in their coat-of-arms they bear,
  Upon a field of azure fair,
  A castle and a falcon, set
  Below a chief of golden fret.
    And in our day a certain knight
  Prayed to be worsted in no fight,
  And so it happed to him: yet he
  Died none the less most wretchedly.
  And all his prowess was in vain,
  For by a losel was he slain,
  As on the highway side he slept
  One summer night, of no man kept.

    Such tales as these the fathers old
  About that lonely castle told;
  And in their day the King must try
  Himself to prove that mystery,
  Although, unless the fay could give
  For ever on the earth to live,
  Nought could he ask that he had not:
  For boundless riches had he got,
  Fair children, and a faithful wife;
  And happily had passed his life,
  And all fulfilled of victory,
  Yet was he fain this thing to see.
    So towards the mountains he set out
  One noontide, with a gallant rout
  Of knights and lords, and as the day
  Began to fail came to the way
  Where he must enter all alone,
  Between the dreary walls of stone.
  Thereon to that fair company
  He bade farewell, who wistfully
  Looked backward oft as home they rode,
  But in the entry he abode
  Of that rough unknown narrowing pass,
  Where twilight at the high noon was.
    Then onward he began to ride:
  Smooth rose the rocks on every side,
  And seemed as they were cut by man;
  Adown them ever water ran,
  But they of living things were bare,
  Yea, not a blade of grass grew there;
  And underfoot rough was the way,
  For scattered all about there lay
  Great jagged pieces of black stone.
  Throughout the pass the wind did moan,
  With such wild noises, that the King
  Could almost think he heard something
  Spoken of men; as one might hear
  The voices of folk standing near
  One's chamber wall: yet saw he nought
  Except those high walls strangely wrought,
  And overhead the strip of sky.
    So, going onward painfully,
  He met therein no evil thing,
  But came about the sun-setting
  Unto the opening of the pass,
  And thence beheld a vale of grass
  Bright with the yellow daffodil;
  And all the vale the sun did fill
  With his last glory. Midmost there
  Rose up a stronghold, built four-square,
  Upon a flowery grassy mound,
  That moat and high wall ran around.
    Thereby he saw a walled pleasance,
  With walks and sward fit for the dance
  Of Arthur's court in its best time,
  That seemed to feel some magic clime;
  For though through all the vale outside
  Things were as in the April-tide,
  And daffodils and cowslips grew
  And hidden the March violets blew,
  Within the bounds of that sweet close
  Was trellised the bewildering rose;
  There was the lily over-sweet,
  And starry pinks for garlands meet;
  And apricots hung on the wall
  And midst the flowers did peaches fall,
  And nought had blemish there or spot.
  For in that place decay was not.

    Silent awhile the King abode
  Beholding all, then on he rode
  And to the castle-gate drew nigh,
  Till fell the drawbridge silently,
  And when across it he did ride
  He found the great gates open wide,
  And entered there, but as he passed
  The gates were shut behind him fast,
  But not before that he could see
  The drawbridge rise up silently.
    Then round he gazed oppressed with awe,
  And there no living thing he saw
  Except the sparrows in the eaves,
  As restless as light autumn leaves
  Blown by the fitful rainy wind.
  Thereon his final goal to find,
  He lighted off his war-horse good
  And let him wander as he would,
  When he had eased him of his gear;
  Then gathering heart against his fear.
  Just at the silent end of day
  Through the fair porch he took his way
  And found at last a goodly hall
  With glorious hangings on the wall,
  Inwrought with trees of every clime,
  And stories of the ancient time,
  But all of sorcery they were.
  For o'er the daïs Venus fair,
  Fluttered about by many a dove,
  Made hopeless men for hopeless love,
  Both sick and sorry; there they stood
  Wrought wonderfully in various mood,
  But wasted all by that hid fire
  Of measureless o'er-sweet desire,
  And let the hurrying world go by
  Forgetting all felicity.
  But down the hall the tale was wrought
  How Argo in old time was brought
  To Colchis for the fleece of gold.
  And on the other side was told
  How mariners for long years came
  To Circe, winning grief and shame.
  Until at last by hardihead
  And craft, Ulysses won her bed.
    Long upon these the King did look
  And of them all good heed he took;
  To see if they would tell him aught
  About the matter that he sought,
  But all were of the times long past;
  So going all about, at last
  When grown nigh weary of his search
  A falcon on a silver perch,
  Anigh the daïs did he see,
  And wondered, because certainly
  At his first coming 'twas not there;
  But 'neath the bird a scroll most fair,
  With golden letters on the white
  He saw, and in the dim twilight
  By diligence could he read this:--

      _"Ye who have not enow of bliss,_
    _And in this hard world labour sore,_
    _By manhood here may get you more,_
    _And be fulfilled of everything,_
    _Till ye be masters of the King._
      _And yet, since I who promise this_
    _Am nowise God to give man bliss_
    _Past ending, now in time beware,_
    _And if you live in little care_
    _Then turn aback and home again,_
    _Lest unknown woe ye chance to gain_
    _In wishing for a thing untried."_

    A little while did he abide,
  When he had read this, deep in thought,
  Wondering indeed if there were aught
  He had not got, that a wise man
  Would wish; yet in his mind it ran
  That he might win a boundless realm,
  Yea, come to wear upon his helm
  The crown of the whole conquered earth;
  That all who lived thereon, from birth
  To death should call him King and Lord,
  And great kings tremble at his word,
  Until in turn he came to die.
  Therewith a little did he sigh,
  But thought, "Of Alexander yet
  Men talk, nor would they e'er forget
  My name, if this should come to be,
  Whoever should come after me:
  But while I lay wrapped round with gold
  Should tales and histories manifold
  Be written of me, false and true;
  And as the time still onward drew
  Almost a god would folk count me,
  Saying, 'In our time none such be.'"
  But therewith did he sigh again,
  And said, "Ah, vain, and worse than vain!
  For though the world forget me nought,
  Yet by that time should I be brought
  Where all the world I should forget,
  And bitterly should I regret
  That I, from godlike great renown,
  To helpless death must fall adown:
  How could I bear to leave it all?"
    Then straight upon his mind did fall
  Thoughts of old longings half forgot,
  Matters for which his heart was hot
  A while ago: whereof no more
  He cared for some, and some right sore
  Had vexed him, being fulfilled at last.
  And when the thought of these had passed
  Still something was there left behind,
  That by no torturing of his mind
  Could he in any language name,
  Or into form of wishing frame.

    At last he thought, "What matters it,
  Before these seven days shall flit
  Some great thing surely shall I find,
  That gained will not leave grief behind,
  Nor turn to deadly injury.
  So now will I let these things be
  And think of some unknown delight."

    Now, therewithal, was come the night
  And thus his watch was well begun;
  And till the rising of the sun,
  Waking, he paced about the hall,
  And saw the hangings on the wall
  Fade into nought, and then grow white
  In patches by the pale moonlight,
  And then again fade utterly
  As still the moonbeams passed them by;
  Then in a while, with hope of day,
  Begin a little to grow grey,
  Until familiar things they grew,
  As up at last the great sun drew,
  And lit them with his yellow light
  At ending of another night
    Then right glad was he of the day,
  That passed with him in such-like way;
  For neither man nor beast came near,
  Nor any voices did he hear.
  And when again it drew to night
  Silent it passed, till first twilight
  Of morning came, and then he heard
  The feeble twittering of some bird,
  That, in that utter silence drear,
  Smote harsh and startling on his ear.
    Therewith came on that lonely day
  That passed him in no other way;
  And thus six days and nights went by
  And nothing strange had come anigh.
    And on that day he well-nigh deemed
  That all that story had been dreamed.
  Daylight and dark, and night and day,
  Passed ever in their wonted way;
  The wind played in the trees outside,
  The rooks from out the high trees cried;
  And all seemed natural, frank, and fair,
  With little signs of magic there.
  Yet neither could he quite forget
  That close with summer blossoms set,
  And fruit hung on trees blossoming,
  When all about was early spring.
  Yea, if all this by man were made,
  Strange was it that yet undecayed
  The food lay on the tables still
  Unchanged by man, that wine did fill
  The golden cups, yet bright and red.
  And all was so apparelléd
  For guests that came not, yet was all
  As though that servants filled the hall.
    So waxed and waned his hopes, and still
  He formed no wish for good or ill.
    And while he thought of this and that
  Upon his perch the falcon sat
  Unfed, unhooded, his bright eyes
  Beholders of the hard-earned prize,
  Glancing around him restlessly,
  As though he knew the time drew nigh
  When this long watching should be done.

    So little by little fell the sun,
  From high noon unto sun-setting;
  And in that lapse of time the King,
  Though still he woke, yet none the less
  Was dreaming in his sleeplessness
  Of this and that which he had done
  Before this watch he had begun;
  Till, with a start, he looked at last
  About him, and all dreams were past;
  For now, though it was past twilight
  Without, within all grew as bright
  As when the noon-sun smote the wall,
  Though no lamp shone within the hall.
    Then rose the King upon his feet,
  And well-nigh heard his own heart beat,
  And grew all pale for hope and fear,
  As sound of footsteps caught his ear
  But soft, and as some fair lady,
  Going as gently as might be,
  Stopped now and then awhile, distraught
  By pleasant wanderings of sweet thought.
    Nigher the sound came, and more nigh,
  Until the King unwittingly
  Trembled, and felt his hair arise,
  But on the door still kept his eyes.
  That opened soon, and in the light
  There stepped alone a lady bright,
  And made straight toward him up the hall.
    In golden garments was she clad
  And round her waist a belt she had
  Of emeralds fair, and from her feet,
  That shod with gold the floor did meet,
  She held the raiment daintily,
  And on her golden head had she
  A rose-wreath round a pearl-wrought crown,
  Softly she walked with eyes cast down,
  Nor looked she any other than
  An earthly lady, though no man
  Has seen so fair a thing as she.
    So when her face the King could see
  Still more he trembled, and he thought,
  "Surely my wish is hither brought,
  And this will be a goodly day
  If for mine own I win this may."
  And therewithal she drew anear
  Until the trembling King could hear
  Her very breathing, and she raised
  Her head and on the King's face gazed
  With serious eyes, and stopping there,
  Swept from her shoulders her long hair,
  And let her gown fall on her feet,
  Then spoke in a clear voice and sweet:
    "Well hast thou watched, so now, O King,
  Be bold, and wish for some good thing;
  And yet, I counsel thee, be wise.
  Behold, spite of these lips and eyes,
  Hundreds of years old now am I
  And have seen joy and misery.
  And thou, who yet hast lived in bliss.
  I bid thee well consider this;
  Better it were that men should live
  As beasts, and take what earth can give,
  The air, the warm sun and the grass
  Until unto the earth they pass,
  And gain perchance nought worse than rest
  Than that not knowing what is best
  For sons of men, they needs must thirst
  For what shall make their lives accurst.
    "Therefore I bid thee now beware,
  Lest getting something seeming fair,
  Thou com'st in vain to long for more
  Or lest the thing thou wishest for
  Make thee unhappy till thou diest,
  Or lest with speedy death thou buyest
  A little hour of happiness
  Or lazy joy with sharp distress.
    "Alas, why say I this to thee,
  For now I see full certainly,
  That thou wilt ask for such a thing,
  It had been best for thee to fling
  Thy body from a mountain-top,
  Or in a white hot fire to drop,
  Or ever thou hadst seen me here,
  Nay then be speedy and speak clear."
    Then the King cried out eagerly,
  Grown fearless, "Ah, be kind to me!
  Thou knowest what I long for then!
  Thou know'st that I, a king of men,
  Will ask for nothing else than thee!
  Thou didst not say this could not be,
  And I have had enough of bliss,
  If I may end my life with this."
    "Hearken," she said, "what men will say
  When they are mad; before to-day
  I knew that words such things could mean,
  And wondered that it could have been.
    "Think well, because this wished-for joy,
  That surely will thy bliss destroy,
  Will let thee live, until thy life
  Is wrapped in such bewildering strife
  That all thy days will seem but ill--
  Now wilt thou wish for this thing still?"
    "Wilt thou then grant it?" cried the King;
  "Surely thou art an earthly thing,
  And all this is but mockery,
  And thou canst tell no more than I
  What ending to my life shall be."
    "Nay, then," she said, "I grant it thee
  Perforce; come nigh, for I am thine
  Until the morning sun doth shine,
  And only coming time can prove
  What thing I am."
                    Dizzy with love,
  And with surprise struck motionless
  That this divine thing, with far less
  Of striving than a village maid,
  Had yielded, there he stood afraid,
  Spite of hot words and passionate,
  And strove to think upon his fate.

    But as he stood there, presently
  With smiling face she drew anigh,
  And on his face he felt her breath.
  "O love," she said, "dost thou fear death?
  Not till next morning shalt thou die,
  Or fall into thy misery."
  Then on his hand her hand did fall,
  And forth she led him down the hall,
  Going full softly by his side.
    "O love," she said, "now well betide
  The day whereon thou cam'st to me.
  I would this night a year might be,
  Yea, life-long; such life as we have,
  A thousand years from womb to grave."

    And then that clinging hand seemed worth
  Whatever joy was left on earth,
  And every trouble he forgot,
  And time and death remembered not:
  Kinder she grew, she clung to him
  With loving arms, her eyes did swim
  With love and pity, as he strove
  To show the wisdom of his love;
  With trembling lips she praised his choice,
  And said, "Ah, well may'st thou rejoice,
  Well may'st thou think this one short night
  Worth years of other men's delight.
  If thy heart as mine own heart is,
  Sunk in a boundless sea of bliss;
  O love, rejoice with me! rejoice!"
    But as she spoke, her honied voice
  Trembled, and midst of sobs she said,
  "O love, and art thou still afraid?
  Return, then, to thine happiness,
  Nor will I love thee any less;
  But watch thee as a mother might
  Her child at play."
                      With strange delight
  He stammered out, "Nay, keep thy tears
  for me, and for my ruined years
  Weep love, that I may love thee more,
  My little hour will soon be o'er."
    "Ah, love," she said, "and thou art wise
  As men are, with long miseries
  Buying these idle words and vain,
  My foolish love, with lasting pain;
  And yet, thou wouldst have died at last
  If in all wisdom thou hadst passed
  Thy weary life: forgive me then,
  In pitying the sad life of men."
    Then in such bliss his soul did swim,
  But tender music unto him
  Her words were; death and misery
  But empty names were grown to be,
  As from that place his steps she drew,
  And dark the hall behind them grew.

       *       *       *       *       *

    But end comes to all earthly bliss,
  And by his choice full short was his;
  And in the morning, grey and cold,
  Beside the daïs did she hold
  His trembling hand, and wistfully
  He, doubting what his fate should be,
  Gazed at her solemn eyes, that now,
  Beneath her calm, untroubled brow,
  Were fixed on his wild face and wan;
  At last she said, "Oh, hapless man,
  Depart! thy full wish hast thou had;
  A little time thou hast been glad,
  Thou shalt be sorry till thou die.
    "And though, indeed, full fain am I
  This might not be; nathless, as day
  Night follows, colourless and grey,
  So this shall follow thy delight,
  Your joy hath ending with last night--
  Nay, peace, and hearken to thy fate.
    "Strife without peace, early and late,
  Lasting long after thou art dead,
  And laid with earth upon thine head;
  War without victory shalt thou have,
  Defeat, nor honour shalt thou save;
  Thy fair land shall be rent and torn,
  Thy people be of all forlorn,
  And all men curse thee for this thing."
    She loosed his hand, but yet the King
  Said, "Yea, and I may go with thee?
  Why should we part? then let things be
  E'en as they will!" "Poor man," she said,
  "Thou ravest; our hot love is dead,
  If ever it had any life:
  Go, make thee ready for the strife
  Wherein thy days shall soon be wrapped;
  And of the things that here have happed
  Make thou such joy as thou may'st do;
  But I from this place needs must go,
  Nor shalt thou ever see me more
  Until thy troubled life is o'er:
  Alas I to say 'farewell' to thee
  Were nought but bitter mockery.
  Fare as thou may'st, and with good heart
  Play to the end thy wretched part."

    Therewith she turned and went from him,
  And with such pain his eyes did swim
  He scarce could see her leave the place;
  And then, with troubled and pale face,
  He gat him thence: and soon he found
  His good horse in the base-court bound;
  So, loosing him, forth did he ride,
  For the great gates were open wide,
  And flat the heavy drawbridge lay.

    So by the middle of the day,
  That murky pass had he gone through,
  And come to country that he knew;
  And homeward turned his horse's head.
  And passing village and homestead
  Nigh to his palace came at last;
  And still the further that he passed
  From that strange castle of the fays,
  More dreamlike seemed those seven days,
  And dreamlike the delicious night;
  And like a dream the shoulders white,
  And clinging arms and yellow hair,
  And dreamlike the sad morning there.
  Until at last he 'gan to deem
  That all might well have been a dream--
  Yet why was life a weariness?
  What meant this sting of sharp distress?
  This longing for a hopeless love,
  No sighing from his heart could move?

    Or else, 'She did not come and go
  As fays might do, but soft and slow
  Her lovely feet fell on the floor;
  She set her fair hand to the door
  As any dainty maid might do;
  And though, indeed, there are but few
  Beneath the sun as fair as she,
  She seemed a fleshly thing to be.
  Perchance a merry mock this is,
  And I may some day have the bliss
  To see her lovely face again,
  As smiling she makes all things plain.
  And then as I am still a king,
  With me may she make tarrying
  Full long, yea, till I come to die."
    Therewith at last being come anigh
  Unto his very palace gate,
  He saw his knights and squires wait
  His coming, therefore on the ground
  He lighted, and they flocked around
  Till he should tell them of his fare.
  Then mocking said he, "Ye may dare,
  The worst man of you all, to go
  And watch as I was bold to do;
  For nought I heard except the wind,
  And nought I saw to call to mind."
  So said he, but they noted well
  That something more he had to tell
  If it had pleased him; one old man,
  Beholding his changed face and wan,
  Muttered, "Would God it might be so!
  Alas! I fear what fate may do;
  Too much good fortune hast thou had
  By anything to be more glad
  Than thou hast been, I fear thee then
  Lest thou becom'st a curse to men."
  But to his place the doomed King passed,
  And all remembrance strove to cast
  From out his mind of that past day,
  And spent his life in sport and play.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Great among other kings, I said
  He was before he first was led
  Unto that castle of the fays,
  But soon he lost his happy days
  And all his goodly life was done.
    And first indeed his best-loved son,
  The very apple of his eye,
  Waged war against him bitterly;
  And when this son was overcome
  And taken, and folk led him home,
  And him the King had gone to meet,
  Meaning with gentle words and sweet
  To win him to his love again,
  By his own hand he found him slain.
    I know not if the doomed King yet
  Remembered the fay lady's threat,
  But troubles upon troubles came:
  His daughter next was brought to shame,
  Who unto all eyes seemed to be
  The image of all purity,
  And fleeing from the royal place
  The King no more beheld her face.
  Then next a folk that came from far
  Sent to the King great threats of war,
  But he, full-fed of victory,
  Deemed this a little thing to be,
  And thought the troubles of his home
  Thereby he well might overcome
  Amid the hurry of the fight.
    His foemen seemed of little might,
  Although they thronged like summer bees
  About the outlying villages,
  And on the land great ruin brought.
  Well, he this barbarous people sought
  With such an army as seemed meet
  To put the world beneath his feet;
  The day of battle came, and he,
  Flushed with the hope of victory,
  Grew happy, as he had not been
  Since he those glorious eyes had seen.
    They met,--his solid ranks of steel
  There scarcely more the darts could feel
  Of those new foemen, than if they
  Had been a hundred miles away:--
  They met,--a storied folk were his
  To whom sharp war had long been bliss,
  A thousand years of memories
  Were flashing in their shielded eyes;
  And grave philosophers they had
  To bid them ever to be glad
  To meet their death and get life done
  Midst glorious deeds from sire to son.
    And those they met were beasts, or worse,
  To whom life seemed a jest, a curse;
  Of fame and name they had not heard;
  Honour to them was but a word,
  A word spoke in another tongue;
  No memories round their banners clung,
  No walls they knew, no art of war,
  By hunger were they driven afar
  Unto the place whereon they stood,
  Ravening for bestial joys and blood.

    No wonder if these barbarous men
  Were slain by hundreds to each ten
  Of the King's brave well-armoured folk,
  No wonder if their charges broke
  To nothing, on the walls of steel,
  And back the baffled hordes must reel.
  So stood throughout a summer day
  Scarce touched the King's most fair array,
  Yet as it drew to even-tide
  The foe still surged on every side,
  As hopeless hunger-bitten men,
  About his folk grown wearied then.
    Therewith the King beheld that crowd
  Howling and dusk, and cried aloud,
  "What do ye, warriors? and how long
  Shall weak folk hold in check the strong?
  Nay, forward banners! end the day
  And show these folk how brave men play."
  The young knights shouted at his word,
  But the old folk in terror heard
  The shouting run adown the line,
  And saw men flush as if with wine--
  "O Sire," they said, "the day is sure,
  Nor will these folk the night endure
  Beset with misery and fears."
  Alas I they spoke to heedless ears;
  For scarce one look on them he cast
  But forward through the ranks he passed,
  And cried out, "Who will follow me
  To win a fruitful victory?"
  And toward the foe in haste he spurred,
  And at his back their shouts he heard,
  Such shouts as he ne'er heard again.

    They met--ere moonrise all the plain
  Was filled by men in hurrying flight
  The relics of that shameful fight;
  The close array, the full-armed men,
  The ancient fame availed not then,
  The dark night only was a friend
  To bring that slaughter to an end;
  And surely there the King had died.
  But driven by that back-rushing tide
  Against his will he needs must flee;
  And as he pondered bitterly
  On all that wreck that he had wrought,
  From time to time indeed he thought
  Of the fay woman's dreadful threat.

    "But everything was not lost yet;
  Next day he said, great was the rout
  And shameful beyond any doubt,
  But since indeed at eventide
  The flight began, not many died,
  And gathering all the stragglers now
  His troops still made a gallant show--
  Alas! it was a show indeed;
  Himself desponding, did he lead
  His beaten men against the foe,
  Thinking at least to lie alow
  Before the final rout should be
  But scarce upon the enemy
  Could these, whose shaken banners shook
  The frightened world, now dare to look;
  Nor yet could the doomed King die there
  A death he once had held most fair;
  Amid unwounded men he came
  Back to his city, bent with shame,
  Unkingly, midst his great distress,
  Yea, weeping at the bitterness
  Of women's curses that did greet
  His passage down the troubled street
    But sight of all the things they loved,
  The memory of their manhood moved
  Within the folk, and aged men
  And boys must think of battle then.
  And men that had not seen the foe
  Must clamour to the war to go.
  So a great army poured once more
  From out the city, and before
  The very gates they fought again,
  But their late valour was in vain;
  They died indeed, and that was good,
  But nought they gained for all the blood
  Poured out like water; for the foe,
  Men might have stayed a while ago,
  A match for very gods were grown,
  So like the field in June-tide mown
  The King's men fell, and but in vain
  The remnant strove the town to gain;
  Whose battlements were nought to stay
  An untaught foe upon that day,
  Though many a tale the annals told
  Of sieges in the days of old,
  When all the world then knew of war
  From that fair place was driven afar.

    As for the King, a charmed life
  He seemed to bear; from out that strife
  He came unhurt, and he could see,
  As down the valley he did flee
  With his most wretched company,
  His palace flaming to the sky.
  Then in the very midst of woe
  His yearning thoughts would backward go
  Unto the castle of the fay;
  He muttered, "Shall I curse that day,
  The last delight that I have had,
  For certainly I then was glad?
  And who knows if what men call bliss
  Had been much better now than this
  When I am hastening to the end."
    That fearful rest, that dreaded friend,
  That Death, he did not gain as yet;
  A band of men he soon did get,
  A ruined rout of bad and good,
  With whom within the tangled wood,
  The rugged mountain, he abode,
  And thenceforth oftentimes they rode
  Into the fair land once called his,
  And yet but little came of this,
  Except more woe for Heaven to see
  Some little added misery
  Unto that miserable realm:
  The barbarous foe did overwhelm
  The cities and the fertile plain,
  And many a peaceful man was slain,
  And many a maiden brought to shame.
  And yielded towns were set aflame;
  For all the land was masterless.
    Long dwelt the King in great distress,
  From wood to mountain ever tost,
  Mourning for all that he had lost,
  Until it chanced upon a day,
  Asleep in early morn he lay,
  And in a vision there did see
  Clad all in black, that fay lady
  Whereby all this had come to pass,
  But dim as in a misty glass:
  She said, "I come thy death to tell
  Yet now to thee may say 'farewell,'
  For in a short space wilt thou be
  Within an endless dim country
  Where thou may'st well win woe or bliss,"
  Therewith she stooped his lips to kiss
  And vanished straightway from his sight.
  So waking there he sat upright
  And looked around, but nought could see
  And heard but song-birds' melody,
  For that was the first break of day.

    Then with a sigh adown he lay
  And slept, nor ever woke again,
  For in that hour was he slain
  By stealthy traitors as he slept.
    He of a few was much bewept,
  But of most men was well forgot
  While the town's ashes still were hot
  The foeman on that day did burn.
    As for the land, great Time did turn
  The bloody fields to deep green grass,
  And from the minds of men did pass
  The memory of that time of woe,
  And at this day all things are so
  As first I said; a land it is
  Where men may dwell in rest and bliss
  If so they will--Who yet will not,
  Because their hasty hearts are hot
  With foolish hate, and longing vain
  The sire and dam of grief and pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Neath the bright sky cool grew the weary earth,
  And many a bud in that fair hour had birth
  Upon the garden bushes; in the west
  The sky got ready for the great sun's rest,
  And all was fresh and lovely; none the less
  Although those old men shared the happiness
  Of the bright eve, 'twas mixed with memories
  Of how they might in old times have been wise,
  Not casting by for very wilfulness
  What wealth might come their changing life to bless;
  Lulling their hearts to sleep, amid the cold
  Of bitter times, that so they might behold
  Some joy at last, e'en if it lingered long.
  That, wearing not their souls with grief and wrong,
  They still might watch the changing world go by,
  Content to live, content at last to die.
    Alas! if they had reached content at last
  It was perforce when all their strength was past;
  And after loss of many days once bright,
  With foolish hopes of unattained delight.




AUGUST.


    Across the gap made by our English hinds,
  Amidst the Roman's handiwork, behold
  Far off the long-roofed church; the shepherd binds
  The withy round the hurdles of his fold;
  Down in the foss the river fed of old,
  That through long lapse of time has grown to be
  The little grassy valley that you see.

    Rest here awhile, not yet the eve is still,
  The bees are wandering yet, and you may hear
  The barley mowers on the trenchéd hill,
  The sheep-bells, and the restless changing weir,
  All little sounds made musical and clear
  Beneath the sky that burning August gives.
  While yet the thought of glorious Summer lives.

    Ah, love! such happy days, such days as these,
  Must we still waste them, craving for the best,
  Like lovers o'er the painted images
  Of those who once their yearning hearts have blessed?
  Have we been happy on our day of rest?
  Thine eyes say "yes,"--but if it came again,
  Perchance its ending would not seem so vain.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now came fulfilment of the year's desire,
  The tall wheat, coloured by the August fire
  Grew heavy-headed, dreading its decay,
  And blacker grew the elm-trees day by day.
  About the edges of the yellow corn,
  And o'er the gardens grown somewhat outworn
  The bees went hurrying to fill up their store;
  The apple-boughs bent over more and more;
  With peach and apricot the garden wall,
  Was odorous, and the pears began to fall
  From off the high tree with each freshening breeze.
    So in a house bordered about with trees,
  A little raised above the waving gold
  The Wanderers heard this marvellous story told,
  While 'twixt the gleaming flasks of ancient wine,
  They watched the reapers' slow advancing line.




PYGMALION AND THE IMAGE.

ARGUMENT.

A man of Cyprus, a sculptor named Pygmalion, made an image of a woman,
    fairer than any that had yet been seen, and in the end came to love
    his own handiwork as though it had been alive: wherefore, praying to
    Venus for help, he obtained his end, for she made the image alive
    indeed, and a woman, and Pygmalion wedded her.


    At Amathus, that from the southern side
  Of Cyprus, looks across the Syrian sea,
  There did in ancient time a man abide
  Known to the island-dwellers, for that he
  Had wrought most godlike works in imagery,
  And day by day still greater honour won,
  Which man our old books call Pygmalion.

    Yet in the praise of men small joy he had,
  But walked abroad with downcast brooding face.
  Nor yet by any damsel was made glad;
  For, sooth to say, the women of that place
  Must seem to all men an accursed race,
  Who with the Turner of all Hearts once strove
  And now their hearts must carry lust for love.

    Upon a day it chanced that he had been
  About the streets, and on the crowded quays,
  Rich with unopened wealth of bales, had seen
  The dark-eyed merchants of the southern seas
  In chaffer with the base Propoetides,
  And heavy-hearted gat him home again,
  His once-loved life grown idle, poor, and vain.

    And there upon his images he cast
  His weary eyes, yet little noted them,
  As still from name to name his swift thought passed.
  For what to him was Juno's well-wrought hem,
  Diana's shaft, or Pallas' olive-stem?
  What help could Hermes' rod unto him give,
  Until with shadowy things he came to live?

    Yet note, that though, while looking on the sun,
  The craftsman o'er his work some morn of spring
  May chide his useless labour never done,
  For all his murmurs, with no other thing
  He soothes his heart, and dulls thought's poisonous sting,
  And thus in thought's despite the world goes on;
  And so it was with this Pygmalion.

    Unto the chisel must he set his hand,
  And slowly, still in troubled thought must pace,
  About a work begun, that there doth stand,
  And still returning to the self-same place,
  Unto the image now must set his face,
  And with a sigh his wonted toil begin,
  Half-loathed, half-loved, a little rest to win.

    The lessening marble that he worked upon,
  A woman's form now imaged doubtfully,
  And in such guise the work had he begun,
  Because when he the untouched block did see
  In wandering veins that form there seemed to be,
  Whereon he cried out in a careless mood,
  "O lady Venus, make this presage good!

    "And then this block of stone shall be thy maid,
  And, not without rich golden ornament,
  Shall bide within thy quivering myrtle-shade."
  So spoke he, but the goddess, well content,
  Unto his hand such godlike mastery sent,
  That like the first artificer he wrought,
  Who made the gift that woe to all men brought.

    And yet, but such as he was wont to do,
  At first indeed that work divine he deemed,
  And as the white chips from the chisel flew
  Of other matters languidly he dreamed,
  For easy to his hand that labour seemed,
  And he was stirred with many a troubling thought,
  And many a doubt perplexed him as he wrought.

    And yet, again, at last there came a day
  When smoother and more shapely grew the stone
  And he, grown eager, put all thought away
  But that which touched his craftsmanship alone,
  And he would gaze at what his hands had done,
  Until his heart with boundless joy would swell
  That all was wrought so wonderfully well.

    Yet long it was ere he was satisfied,
  And with the pride that by his mastery
  This thing was done, whose equal far and wide
  In no town of the world a man could see,
  Came burning longing that the work should be
  E'en better still, and to his heart there came
  A strange and strong desire he could not name.

    The night seemed long, and long the twilight seemed,
  A vain thing seemed his flowery garden fair;
  Though through the night still of his work he dreamed,
  And though his smooth-stemmed trees so nigh it were,
  That thence he could behold the marble hair;
  Nought was enough, until with steel in hand
  He came before the wondrous stone to stand.

    No song could charm him, and no histories
  Of men's misdoings could avail him now,
  Nay, scarcely seaward had he turned his eyes,
  If men had said, "The fierce Tyrrhenians row
  Up through the bay, rise up and strike a blow
  For life and goods;" for nought to him seemed dear
  But to his well-loved work to be anear.

    Then vexed he grew, and knowing not his heart,
  Unto himself he said, "Ah, what is this,
  That I who oft was happy to depart,
  And wander where the boughs each other kiss
  'Neath the west wind, now have no other bliss
  But in vain smoothing of this marble maid,
  Whose chips this month a drachma had outweighed?

    "Lo I will get me to the woods and try
  If I my woodcraft have forgotten quite,
  And then, returning, lay this folly by,
  And eat my fill, and sleep my sleep anight,
  And 'gin to carve a Hercules aright
  Upon the morrow, and perchance indeed
  The Theban will be good to me at need."

    With that he took his quiver and his bow,
  And through the gates of Amathus he went,
  And toward the mountain slopes began to go,
  Within the woods to work out his intent.
  Fair was the day, the honied beanfield's scent
  The west wind bore unto him, o'er the way
  The glittering noisy poplar leaves did play.

    All things were moving; as his hurried feet
  Passed by, within the flowery swathe he heard
  The sweeping of the scythe, the swallow fleet
  Rose over him, the sitting partridge stirred
  On the field's edge; the brown bee by him whirred,
  Or murmured in the clover flowers below.
  But he with bowed-down head failed not to go.

    At last he stopped, and, looking round, he said,
  "Like one whose thirtieth year is well gone by,
  The day is getting ready to be dead;
  No rest, and on the border of the sky
  Already the great banks of dark haze lie;
  No rest--what do I midst this stir and noise?
  What part have I in these unthinking joys?"

    With that he turned, and toward the city-gate
  Through the sweet fields went swifter than he came,
  And cast his heart into the hands of fate;
  Nor strove with it, when higher 'gan to flame
  That strange and strong desire without a name;
  Till panting, thinking of nought else, once more
  His hand was on the latch of his own door.

    One moment there he lingered, as he said,
  "Alas! what should I do if she were gone?"
  But even with that word his brow waxed red
  To hear his own lips name a thing of stone,
  As though the gods some marvel there had done,
  And made his work alive; and therewithal
  In turn great pallor on his face did fall.

    But with a sigh he passed into the house,
  Yet even then his chamber-door must hold,
  And listen there, half blind and timorous,
  Until his heart should wax a little bold;
  Then entering, motionless and white and cold,
  He saw the image stand amidst the floor
  All whitened now by labour done before.

    Blinded with tears, his chisel up he caught,
  And, drawing near, and sighing, tenderly
  Upon the marvel of the face he wrought,
  E'en as he used to pass the long days by;
  But his sighs changed to sobbing presently,
  And on the floor the useless steel he flung,
  And, weeping loud, about the image clung.

    "Alas!" he cried, "why have I made thee then,
  That thus thou mockest me? I know indeed
  That many such as thou are loved of men,
  Whose passionate eyes poor wretches still will lead
  Into their net, and smile to see them bleed;
  But these the god's made, and this hand made thee
  Who wilt not speak one little word to me."

    Then from the image did he draw aback
  To gaze on it through tears: and you had said,
  Regarding it, that little did it lack
  To be a living and most lovely maid;
  Naked it was, its unbound locks were laid
  Over the lovely shoulders; with one hand
  Reached out, as to a lover, did it stand,

    The other held a fair rose over-blown;
  No smile was on the parted lips, the eyes
  Seemed as if even now great love had shown
  Unto them, something of its sweet surprise,
  Yet saddened them with half-seen mysteries,
  And still midst passion maiden-like she seemed,
  As though of love unchanged for aye she dreamed.

    Reproachfully beholding all her grace,
  Pygmalion stood, until he grew dry-eyed,
  And then at last he turned away his face
  As if from her cold eyes his grief to hide;
  And thus a weary while did he abide,
  With nothing in his heart but vain desire,
  The ever-burning, unconsuming fire.

    But when again he turned his visage round
  His eyes were brighter and no more he wept,
  As if some little solace he had found,
  Although his folly none the more had slept,
  Rather some new-born god-sent madness kept
  His other madness from destroying him,
  And made the hope of death wax faint and dim;

    For, trembling and ashamed, from out the street
  Strong men he called, and faint with jealousy
  He caused them bear the ponderous, moveless feet
  Unto the chamber where he used to lie,
  So in a fair niche to his bed anigh,
  Unwitting of his woe, they set it down,
  Then went their ways beneath his troubled frown.

    Then to his treasury he went, and sought
  Fair gems for its adornment, but all there
  Seemed to his eager eyes but poor and nought,
  Not worthy e'en to touch her rippled hair.
  So he, departing, through the streets 'gan fare,
  And from the merchants at a mighty cost
  Bought gems that kings for no good deed had lost.

    These then he hung her senseless neck around,
  Set on her fingers, and fair arms of stone,
  Then cast himself before her on the ground,
  Praying for grace for all that he had done
  In leaving her untended and alone;
  And still with every hour his madness grew
  Though all his folly in his heart he knew.

    At last asleep before her feet he lay,
  Worn out with passion, yet this burning pain
  Returned on him, when with the light of day
  He woke and wept before her feet again;
  Then of the fresh and new-born morning fain,
  Into his garden passed, and therefrom bore
  New spoil of flowers his love to lay before.

    A little altar, with fine gold o'erlaid,
  Was in his house, that he a while ago
  At some great man's command had deftly made,
  And this he now must take and set below
  Her well-wrought feet, and there must red flame glow
  About sweet wood, and he must send her thence
  The odour of Arabian frankincense.

    Then as the smoke went up, he prayed and said,
  "Thou, image, hear'st me not, nor wilt thou speak,
  But I perchance shall know when I am dead,
  If this has been some goddess' sport, to seek
  A wretch, and in his heart infirm and weak
  To set her glorious image, so that he,
  Loving the form of immortality,

    "May make much laughter for the gods above:
  Hear me, and if my love misliketh thee
  Then take my life away, for I will love
  Till death unfeared at last shall come to me,
  And give me rest, if he of might may be
  To slay the love of that which cannot die,
  The heavenly beauty that can ne'er pass by."

    No word indeed the moveless image said,
  But with the sweet grave eyes his hands had wrought
  Still gazed down on his bowed imploring head,
  Yet his own words some solace to him brought,
  Gilding the net wherein his soul was caught
  With something like to hope, and all that day
  Some tender words he ever found to say;

    And still he felt as something heard him speak;
  Sometimes he praised her beauty, and sometimes
  Reproached her in a feeble voice and weak,
  And at the last drew forth a book of rhymes,
  Wherein were writ the tales of many climes,
  And read aloud the sweetness hid therein
  Of lovers' sorrows and their tangled sin.

    And when the sun went down, the frankincense
  Again upon the altar-flame he cast
  That through the open window floating thence
  O'er the fresh odours of the garden passed;
  And so another day was gone at last,
  And he no more his love-lorn watch could keep,
  But now for utter weariness must sleep.

    But in the night he dreamed that she was gone,
  And knowing that he dreamed, tried hard to wake
  And could not, but forsaken and alone
  He seemed to weep as though his heart would break,
  And when the night her sleepy veil did take
  From off the world, waking, his tears he found
  Still wet upon the pillow all around.

    Then at the first, bewildered by those tears,
  He fell a-wondering wherefore he had wept,
  But suddenly remembering all his fears,
  Panting with terror, from the bed he leapt,
  But still its wonted place the image kept,
  Nor moved for all the joyful ecstasy
  Wherewith he blessed the day that showed it nigh.

    Then came the morning offering and the day,
  Midst flowers and words of love and kisses sweet
  From morn, through noon, to evening passed away,
  And scarce unhappy, crouching at her feet
  He saw the sun descend the sea to meet;
  And scarce unhappy through the darkness crept
  Unto his bed, and midst soft dreaming slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

    But the next morn, e'en while the incense-smoke
  At sun-rising curled round about her head,
  Sweet sound of songs the wonted quiet broke
  Down in the street, and he by something led,
  He knew not what, must leave his prayer unsaid,
  And through the freshness of the morn must see
  The folk who went with that sweet minstrelsy;

    Damsels and youths in wonderful attire,
  And in their midst upon a car of gold
  An image of the Mother of Desire,
  Wrought by his hands in days that seemed grown old
  Though those sweet limbs a garment did enfold,
  Coloured like flame, enwrought with precious things,
  Most fit to be the prize of striving kings.

    Then he remembered that the manner was
  That fair-clad priests the lovely Queen should take
  Thrice in the year, and through the city pass,
  And with sweet songs the dreaming folk awake;
  And through the clouds a light there seemed to break
  When he remembered all the tales well told
  About her glorious kindly deeds of old.

    So his unfinished prayer he finished not,
  But, kneeling, once more kissed the marble feet,
  And, while his heart with many thoughts waxed hot,
  He clad himself with fresh attire and meet
  For that bright service, and with blossoms sweet
  Entwined with tender leaves he crowned his head,
  And followed after as the goddess led.

    But long and vain unto him seemed the way
  Until they came unto her house again;
  Long years, the while they went about to lay
  The honey-hiding dwellers on the plain,
  The sweet companions of the yellowing grain
  Upon her golden altar; long and long
  Before, at end of their delicious song,

    They stripped her of her weed with reverend hands
  And showed the ivory limbs his hand had wrought;
  Yea, and too long e'en then ere those fair bands,
  Dispersing here and there, the shadow sought
  Of Indian spice-trees o'er the warm sea brought
  And toward the splashing of the fountain turned,
  Mocked the noon sun that o'er the cloisters burned.

    But when the crowd of worshippers was gone
  And through the golden dimness of the place
  The goddess' very servants paced alone,
  Or some lone damsel murmured of her case
  Apart from prying eyes, he turned his face
  Unto that image made with toil and care,
  In days when unto him it seemed most fair.

    Dusky and dim, though rich with gems and gold,
  The house of Venus was; high in the dome
  The burning sun-light you could now behold,
  From nowhere else the light of day might come,
  To shame the Shame-faced Mother's lovely home;
  A long way off the shrine, the fresh sea-breeze,
  Now just arising, brushed the myrtle-trees.

    The torches of the flower-crowned, singing band
  Erewhile, indeed, made more than daylight there,
  Lighting the painted tales of many a land,
  And carven heroes, with their unused glare;
  But now a few soft, glimmering lamps there were
  And on the altar a thin, flickering flame
  Just showed the golden letters of her name.

    Blue in the dome yet hung the incense-cloud,
  And still its perfume lingered all around;
  And, trodden by the light-foot, fervent crowd,
  Thick lay the summer flowers upon the ground,
  And now from far-off halls uprose the sound
  Of Lydian music, and the dancer's cry,
  As though some door were opened suddenly.

    So there he stood, some help from her to gain,
  Bewildered by that twilight midst of day;
  Downcast with listening to the joyous strain
  He had no part in, hopeless with delay
  Of all the fair things he had meant to say;
  Yet, as the incense on the flame he cast,
  From stammering lips and pale these words there passed,--

    "O thou forgotten help, dost thou yet know
  What thing it is I need, when even I,
  Bent down before thee in this shame and woe,
  Can frame no set of words to tell thee why
  I needs must pray, O help me or I die!
  Or slay me, and in slaying take from me
  Even a dead man's feeble memory.

    "Say not thine help I have been slow to seek;
  Here have I been from the first hour of morn,
  Who stand before thy presence faint and weak,
  Of my one poor delight left all forlorn;
  Trembling with many fears, the hope outworn
  I had when first I left my love, my shame,
  To call upon thine oft-sung glorious name."

    He stopped to catch his breath, for as a sob
  Did each word leave his mouth; but suddenly,
  Like a live thing, the thin flame 'gan to throb
  And gather force, and then shot up on high
  A steady spike of light, that drew anigh
  The sunbeam in the dome, then sank once more
  Into a feeble flicker as before.

    But at that sight the nameless hope he had
  That kept him living midst unhappiness,
  Stirred in his breast, and with changed face and glad
  Unto the image forward must he press
  With words of praise his first word to redress,
  But then it was as though a thick black cloud
  Altar, and fire, and ivory limbs did shroud.

    He staggered back, amazed and full of awe,
  But when, with anxious eyes, he gazed around,
  About him still the worshippers he saw
  Sunk in their wonted works, with no surprise
  At what to him seemed awful mysteries;
  Therewith he sighed and said, "This, too, I dream,
  No better day upon my life shall beam."

    And yet for long upon the place he gazed
  Where other folk beheld the lovely Queen;
  And while he looked the dusky veil seemed raised,
  And every thing was as it erst had been;
  And then he said, "Such marvels I have seen
  As some sick man may see from off his bed:
  Ah, I am sick, and would that I were dead!"

    Therewith, not questioning his heart at all,
  He turned away and left the holy place,
  When now the wide sun reddened towards his fall,
  And a fresh west wind held the clouds in chase;
  But coming out, at first he hid his face
  Dazed with the light, and in the porch he stood,
  Nor wished to move, or change his dreary mood.

    Yet in a while the freshness of the eve
  Pierced to his weary heart, and with a sigh
  He raised his head, and slowly 'gan to leave
  The high carved pillars; and so presently
  Had passed the grove of whispering myrtles by,
  And, mid the many noises of the street,
  Made himself brave the eyes of men to meet.

    Thronged were the ways with folk in gay attire,
  Nursing the end of that festivity;
  Girls fit to move the moody man's desire
  Brushed past him, and soft dainty minstrelsy
  He heard amid the laughter, and might see,
  Through open doors, the garden's green delight,
  Where pensive lovers waited for the night;

    Or resting dancers round the fountain drawn,
  With faces flushed unto the breeze turned round,
  Or wandering o'er the fragrant trodden lawn,
  Took up their fallen garlands from the ground,
  Or languidly their scattered tresses bound,
  Or let their gathered raiment fall adown,
  With eyes downcast beneath their lovers' frown.

    What hope Pygmalion yet might have, when he
  First left the pillars of the dreamy place,
  Amid such sights had vanished utterly.
  He turned his weary eyes from face to face,
  Nor noted them, as at a lagging pace
  He gat towards home, and still was murmuring,
  "Ah life, sweet life! the only godlike thing!"

    And as he went, though longing to be there
  Whereas his sole desire awaited him,
  Yet did he loath to see the image fair,
  White and unchanged of face, unmoved of limb,
  And to his heart came dreamy thoughts and dim
  That unto some strange region he might come,
  Nor ever reach again his loveless home.

    Yet soon, indeed, before his door he stood,
  And, as a man awaking from a dream,
  Seemed waked from his old folly; nought seemed good
  In all the things that he before had deemed
  At least worth life, and on his heart there streamed
  Cold light of day--he found himself alone,
  Reft of desire, all love and madness gone.

    And yet for that past folly must he weep,
  As one might mourn the parted happiness
  That, mixed with madness, made him smile in sleep;
  And still some lingering sweetness seemed to bless
  The hard life left of toil and loneliness,
  Like a past song too sweet, too short, and yet
  Emmeshed for ever in the memory's net.

    Weeping he entered, murmuring, "O fair Queen,
  I thank thee that my prayer was not for nought,
  Truly a present helper hast thou been
  To those who faithfully thy throne have sought!
  Yet, since with pain deliverance I have bought,
  Hast thou not yet some gift in store for me,
  That I thine happy slave henceforth may be?"

       *       *       *       *       *

    Thus to his chamber at the last he came,
  And, pushing through the still half-opened door,
  He stood within; but there, for very shame
  Of all the things that he had done before,
  Still kept his eyes bent down upon the floor,
  Thinking of all that he had done and said
  Since he had wrought that luckless marble maid.

    Yet soft his thoughts were, and the very place
  Seemed perfumed with some nameless heavenly air
  So gaining courage, did he raise his face
  Unto the work his hands had made so fair,
  And cried aloud to see the niche all bare
  Of that sweet form, while through his heart again
  There shot a pang of his old yearning pain.

    Yet while he stood, and knew not what to do
  With yearning, a strange thrill of hope there came,
  A shaft of new desire now pierced him through,
  And therewithal a soft voice called his name,
  And when he turned, with eager eyes aflame,
  He saw betwixt him and the setting sun
  The lively image of his lovéd one.

    He trembled at the sight, for though her eyes,
  Her very lips, were such as he had made,
  And though her tresses fell but in such guise
  As he had wrought them, now was she arrayed
  In that fair garment that the priests had laid
  Upon the goddess on that very morn,
  Dyed like the setting sun upon the corn.

    Speechless he stood, but she now drew anear,
  Simple and sweet as she was wont to be,
  And all at once her silver voice rang clear,
  Filling his soul with great felicity,
  And thus she spoke, "Pygmalion, come to me,
  O dear companion of my new-found life,
  For I am called thy lover and thy wife.

    "Listen, these words the Dread One bade me say
  That was with me e'en now, _Pygmalion,_
  _My new-made soul I give to thee to-day,_
  _Come, feel the sweet breath that thy prayer has won,_
  _And lay thine hand this heaving breast upon!_
  _Come love, and walk with me between the trees,_
  _And feel the freshness of the evening breeze._

  _"Sweep mine hair round thy neck; behold my feet,_
  _The oft-kissed feet thou thoughtst should never move,_
  _Press down the daisies! draw me to thee, sweet,_
  _And feel the warm heart of thy living love_
  _Beat against thine, and bless the Seed of Jove_
  _Whose loving tender heart hath wrought all this,_
  _And wrapped us both in such a cloud of bliss._

    "Ah, thou art wise to know what this may mean!
  Sweet seem the words to me, and needs must I
  Speak all the lesson of the lovely Queen:
  But this I know, I would we were more nigh,
  I have not heard thy voice but in the cry
  Thou utteredst then, when thou believedst gone
  The marvel of thine hands, the maid of stone."

    She reached her hand to him, and with kind eyes
  Gazed into his; but he the fingers caught
  And drew her to him, and midst ecstasies
  Passing all words, yea, well-nigh passing thought,
  Felt that sweet breath that he so long had sought,
  Felt the warm life within her heaving breast
  As in his arms his living love he pressed.

    But as his cheek touched hers he heard her say,
  "Wilt thou not speak, O love? why dost thou weep?
  Art thou then sorry for this long-wished day,
  Or dost thou think perchance thou wilt not keep
  This that thou holdest, but in dreamy sleep?
  Nay, let us do the bidding of the Queen,
  And hand in hand walk through thy garden green;

    "Then shalt thou tell me, still beholding me,
  Full many things whereof I wish to know,
  And as we walk from whispering tree to tree
  Still more familiar to thee shall I grow,
  And such things shalt thou say unto me now
  As when thou deemedst thou wast quite alone,
  A madman, kneeling to a thing of stone."

    But at that word a smile lit up his eyes
  And therewithal he spake some loving word,
  And she at first looked up in grave surprise
  When his deep voice and musical she heard,
  And clung to him as grown somewhat afeard;
  Then cried aloud and said, "O mighty one!
  What joy with thee to look upon the sun."

    Then into that fair garden did they pass
  And all the story of his love he told,
  And as the twain went o'er the dewy grass,
  Beneath the risen moon could he behold
  The bright tears trickling down, then, waxen bold,
  He stopped and said, "Ah, love, what meaneth this?
  Seest thou how tears still follow earthly bliss?"

    Then both her white arms round his neck she threw
  And sobbing said, "O love, what hurteth me?
  When first the sweetness of my life I knew,
  Not this I felt, but when I first saw thee
  A little pain and great felicity
  Rose up within me, and thy talk e'en now
  Made pain and pleasure ever greater grow?"

    "O sweet," he said, "this thing is even love,
  Whereof I told thee; that all wise men fear,
  But yet escape not; nay, to gods above,
  Unless the old tales lie, it draweth near.
  But let my happy ears I pray thee hear
  Thy story too, and how thy blessed birth
  Has made a heaven of this once lonely earth."

    "My sweet," she said, "as yet I am not wise,
  Or stored with words, aright the tale to tell,
  But listen: when I opened first mine eyes
  I stood within the niche thou knowest well,
  And from mine hand a heavy thing there fell
  Carved like these flowers, nor could I see things clear,
  And but a strange confusèd noise could hear.

    "At last mine eyes could see a woman fair,
  But awful as this round white moon o'erhead.
  So that I trembled when I saw her there,
  For with my life was born some touch of dread,
  And therewithal I heard her voice that said,
  'Come down, and learn to love and be alive,
  For thee, a well-prized gift, to-day I give.'

    "Then on the floor I stepped, rejoicing much,
  Not knowing why, not knowing aught at all,
  Till she reached out her hand my breast to touch,
  And when her fingers thereupon did fall,
  Thought came unto my life, and therewithal
  I knew her for a goddess, and began
  To murmur in some tongue unknown to man.

    "And then indeed not in this guise was I,
  No sandals had I, and no saffron gown,
  But naked as thou knowest utterly,
  E'en as my limbs beneath thine hand had grown,
  And this fair perfumed robe then fell adown
  Over the goddess' feet and swept the ground,
  And round her loins a glittering belt was bound.

    "But when the stammering of my tongue she heard
  Upon my trembling lips her hand she laid,
  And spoke again, 'Nay, say not any word,
  All that thine heart would say I know unsaid,
  Who even now thine heart and voice have made;
  But listen rather, for thou knowest now
  What these words mean, and still wilt wiser grow.

    "'Thy body, lifeless till I gave it life,
  A certain man, my servant, well hath wrought
  I give thee to him as his love and wife,
  With all thy dowry of desire and thought,
  Since this his yearning heart hath ever sought;
  Now from my temple is he on the way,
  Deeming to find thee e'en as yesterday;

    "'Bide thou his coming by the bed-head there,
  And when thou seest him set his eyes upon
  Thine empty niche, and hear'st him cry for care,
  Then call him by his name, Pygmalion,
  And certainly thy lover hast thou won;
  But when he stands before thee silently,
  Say all these words that I shall teach to thee.'

    "With that she said what first I told thee, love
  And then went on, 'Moreover thou shalt say
  That I, the daughter of almighty Jove,
  Have wrought for him this long-desired day;
  In sign whereof, these things that pass away,
  Wherein mine image men have well arrayed,
  I give thee for thy wedding gear, O maid.'

    "Therewith her raiment she put off from her.
  And laid bare all her perfect loveliness,
  And, smiling on me, came yet more anear,
  And on my mortal lips her lips did press,
  And said, 'Now herewith shalt thou love no less
  Than Psyche loved my son in days of old;
  Farewell, of thee shall many a tale be told.'

    "And even with that last word was she gone,
  How, I know not, and I my limbs arrayed
  In her fair gift, and waited thee alone--
  Ah, love, indeed the word is true she said,
  For now I love thee so, I grow afraid
  Of what the gods upon our heads may send--
  I love thee so, I think upon the end."

    What words he said? How can I tell again
  What words they said beneath the glimmering light,
  Some tongue they used unknown to loveless men
  As each to each they told their great delight,
  Until for stillness of the growing night
  Their soft sweet murmuring words seemed growing loud
  And dim the moon grew, hid by fleecy cloud.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Such was the ending of his ancient rhyme,
  That seemed to fit that soft and golden time,
  When men were happy, they could scarce tell why,
  Although they felt the rich year slipping by.
  The sun went down, the harvest-moon arose,
  And 'twixt the slim trees of that fruitful close
  They saw the corn still falling 'neath its light,
  While through the soft air of the windless night
  The voices of the reapers' mates rang clear
  In measured song, as of the fruitful year
  They told, and its delights, and now and then
  The rougher voices of the toiling men
  Joined in the song, as one by one released
  From that hard toil, they sauntered towards the feast
  That waited them upon the strip of grass
  That through the golden-glimmering sea did pass.
    But those old men, glad to have lived so long,
  Sat listening through the twilight to the song,
  And when the night grew and all things were still
  Throughout the wide vale from green hill to hill
  Unto a happy harvesting they drank
  Till once more o'er the hills the white moon sank.

       *       *       *       *       *

    August had not gone by, though now was stored
  In the sweet-smelling granaries all the hoard
  Of golden corn; the land had made her gain,
  And winter should howl round her doors in vain.
  But o'er the same fields grey now and forlorn
  The old men sat and heard the swineherd's horn,
  Far off across the stubble, when the day
  At end of harvest-tide was sad and grey;
  And rain was in the wind's voice as it swept
  Along the hedges where the lone quail crept,
  Beneath the chattering of the restless pie.
  The fruit-hung branches moved, and suddenly
  The trembling apples smote the dewless grass,
  And all the year to autumn-tide did pass.
  E'en such a day it was as young men love
  When swiftly through the veins the blood doth move,
  And they, whose eyes can see not death at all,
  To thoughts of stirring deeds and pleasure fall,
  Because it seems to them to tell of life
  After the dreamy days devoid of strife,
  When every day with sunshine is begun,
  And cloudless skies receive the setting sun.
    On such a day the older folk were fain
  Of something new somewhat to dull the pain
  Of sad, importunate old memories
  That to their weary hearts must needs arise.
    Alas! what new things on that day could come
  From hearts that now so long had been the home
  Of such dull thoughts, nay, rather let them tell
  Some tale that fits their ancient longings well.
    Rolf was the speaker, who said, "Friends, behold
  This is e'en such a tale as those once told
  Unto my greedy ears by Nicholas,
  Before our quest for nothing came to pass."




OGIER THE DANE.

ARGUMENT.

When Ogier was born, six fay ladies came to the cradle where he lay, and
    gave him various gifts, as to be brave and happy and the like; but the
    sixth gave him to be her love when he should have lived long in the
    world: so Ogier grew up and became the greatest of knights, and at
    last, after many years, fell into the hands of that fay, and with her,
    as the story tells, he lives now, though he returned once to the
    world, as is shown in the process of this tale.


    Within some Danish city by the sea,
  Whose name, changed now, is all unknown to me,
  Great mourning was there one fair summer eve,
  Because the angels, bidden to receive
  The fair Queen's lovely soul in Paradise,
  Had done their bidding, and in royal guise
  Her helpless body, once the prize of love,
  Unable now for fear or hope to move,
  Lay underneath the golden canopy;
  And bowed down by unkingly misery
  The King sat by it, and not far away,
  Within the chamber a fair man-child lay,
  His mother's bane, the king that was to be,
  Not witting yet of any royalty,
  Harmless and loved, although so new to life.

    Calm the June evening was, no sign of strife
  The clear sky showed, no storm grew round the sun,
  Unhappy that his day of bliss was done;
  Dumb was the sea, and if the beech-wood stirred,
  'Twas with the nestling of the grey-winged bird
  Midst its thick leaves; and though the nightingale
  Her ancient, hapless sorrow must bewail,
  No more of woe there seemed within her song
  Than such as doth to lovers' words belong,
  Because their love is still unsatisfied.
    But to the King, on that sweet eventide,
  No earth there seemed, no heaven when earth was gone;
  No help, no God! but lonely pain alone;
  And he, midst unreal shadows, seemed to sit
  Himself the very heart and soul of it.
  But round the cradle of the new-born child
  The nurses now the weary time beguiled
  With stories of the just departed Queen;
  And how, amid the heathen folk first seen,
  She had been won to love and godliness;
  And as they spoke, e'en midst his dull distress,
  An eager whisper now and then did smite
  Upon the King's ear, of some past delight,
  Some once familiar name, and he would raise
  His weary head, and on the speaker gaze
  Like one about to speak, but soon again
  Would drop his head and be alone with pain,
  Nor think of these; who, silent in their turn,
  Would sit and watch the waxen tapers burn
  Amidst the dusk of the quick-gathering night,
  Until beneath the high stars' glimmering light,
  The fresh earth lay in colourless repose.
    So passed the night, and now and then one rose
  From out her place to do what might avail
  To still the new-born infant's fretful wail;
  Or through the softly-opened door there came
  Some nurse new waked, who, whispering low the name
  Of her whose turn was come, would take her place;
  Then toward the King would turn about her face
  And to her fellows whisper of the day,
  And tell again of her just past away.

    So waned the hours, the moon arose and grew,
  From off the sea a little west-wind blew,
  Rustling the garden-leaves like sudden rain;
  And ere the moon began to fall again
  The wind grew cold, a change was in the sky,
  And in deep silence did the dawn draw nigh:
  Then from her place a nurse arose to light
  Fresh hallowed lights, for, dying with the night,
  The tapers round about the dead Queen were;
  But the King raised his head and 'gan to stare
  Upon her, as her sweeping gown did glide
  About the floor, that in the stillness cried
  Beneath her careful feet; and now as she
  Had lit the second candle carefully,
  And on its silver spike another one
  Was setting, through her body did there run
  A sudden tremor, and the hand was stayed
  That on the dainty painted wax was laid;
  Her eyelids fell down and she seemed to sleep,
  And o'er the staring King began to creep
  Sweet slumber too; the bitter lines of woe
  That drew his weary face did softer grow,
  His eyelids dropped, his arms fell to his side;
  And moveless in their places did abide
  The nursing women, held by some strong spell,
  E'en as they were, and utter silence fell
  Upon the mournful, glimmering chamber fair.
    But now light footsteps coming up the stair,
  Smote on the deadly stillness, and the sound
  Of silken dresses trailing o'er the ground;
  And heavenly odours through the chamber passed,
  Unlike the scents that rose and lily cast
  Upon the freshness of the dying night;
  Then nigher drew the sound of footsteps light
  Until the door swung open noiselessly--
  A mass of sunlit flowers there seemed to be
  Within the doorway, and but pale and wan
  The flame showed now that serveth mortal man,
  As one by one six seeming ladies passed
  Into the room, and o'er its sorrow cast
  That thoughtless sense of joy bewildering,
  That kisses youthful hearts amidst of spring;
  Crowned were they, in such glorious raiment clad,
  As yet no merchant of the world has had
  Within his coffers; yet those crowns seemed fair
  Only because they kissed their odorous hair,
  And all that flowery raiment was but blessed
  By those fair bodies that its splendour pressed.
    Now to the cradle from that glorious band,
  A woman passed, and laid a tender hand
  Upon the babe, and gently drew aside
  The swathings soft that did his body hide;
  And, seeing him so fair and great, she smiled,
  And stooped, and kissed him, saying, "O noble child,
  Have thou a gift from Gloriande this day;
  For to the time when life shall pass away
  From this dear heart, no fear of death or shame,
  No weariness of good shall foul thy name."
    So saying, to her sisters she returned;
  And one came forth, upon whose brow there burned
  A crown of rubies, and whose heaving breast
  With happy rings a golden hauberk pressed;
  She took the babe, and somewhat frowning said,
  "This gift I give, that till thy limbs are laid
  At rest for ever, to thine honoured life
  There never shall be lacking war and strife,
  That thou a long-enduring name mayst win,
  And by thy deeds, good pardon for thy sin."
    With that another, who, unseen, meanwhile
  Had drawn anigh, said with a joyous smile,
  "And this forgotten gift to thee I give,
  That while amidst the turmoil thou dost live,
  Still shalt thou win the game, and unto thee
  Defeat and shame but idle words shall be."
    Then back they turned, and therewithal, the fourth
  Said, "Take this gift for what it may be worth
  For that is mine to give; lo, thou shalt be
  Gentle of speech, and in all courtesy
  The first of men: a little gift this is,
  After these promises of fame and bliss."
    Then toward the babe the fifth fair woman went;
  Grey-eyed she was, and simple, with eyes bent
  Down on the floor, parted her red lips were,
  And o'er her sweet face marvellously fair
  Oft would the colour spread full suddenly;
  Clad in a dainty gown and thin was she,
  For some green summer of the fay-land dight,
  Tripping she went, and laid her fingers light
  Upon the child, and said, "O little one,
  As long as thou shalt look upon the sun
  Shall women long for thee; take heed to this
  And give them what thou canst of love and bliss."
    Then, blushing for her words, therefrom she past,
  And by the cradle stood the sixth and last,
  The fairest of them all; awhile she gazed
  Down on the child, and then her hand she raised,
  And made the one side of her bosom bare;
  "Ogier," she said, "if this be foul or fair
  Thou know'st not now, but when thine earthly life
  Is drunk out to the dregs, and war and strife
  Have yielded thee whatever joy they may,
  Thine head upon this bosom shalt thou lay;
  And then, despite of knowledge or of God,
  Will we be glad upon the flowery sod
  Within the happy country where I dwell:
  Ogier, my love that is to be, farewell!"

    She turned, and even as they came they passed
  From out the place, and reached the gate at last
  That oped before their feet, and speedily
  They gained the edges of the murmuring sea,
  And as they stood in silence, gazing there
  Out to the west, they vanished into air,
  I know not how, nor whereto they returned.

    But mixed with twilight in the chamber burned
  The flickering candles, and those dreary folk,
  Unlike to sleepers, from their trance awoke,
  But nought of what had happed meanwhile they knew
  Through the half-opened casements now there blew
  A sweet fresh air, that of the flowers and sea
  Mingled together, smelt deliciously,
  And from the unseen sun the spreading light
  Began to make the fair June blossoms bright,
  And midst their weary woe uprose the sun,
  And thus has Ogier's noble life begun.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Hope is our life, when first our life grows clear;
  Hope and delight, scarce crossed by lines of fear,
  Yet the day comes when fain we would not hope,
  But forasmuch as we with life must cope,
  Struggling with this and that, who knoweth why?
  Hope will not give us up to certainty,
  But still must bide with us: and with this man,
  Whose life amid such promises began
  Great things she wrought; but now the time has come
  When he no more on earth may have his home.
    Great things he suffered, great delights he had,
  Unto great kings he gave good deeds for bad;
  He ruled o'er kingdoms where his name no more
  Is had in memory, and on many a shore
  He left his sweat and blood to win a name
  Passing the bounds of earthly creatures' fame.
  A love he won and lost, a well-loved son
  Whose little day of promise soon was done:
  A tender wife he had, that he must leave
  Before his heart her love could well receive;
  Those promised gifts, that on his careless head
  In those first hours of his fair life were shed
  He took unwitting, and unwitting spent,
  Nor gave himself to grief and discontent
  Because he saw the end a-drawing nigh.
    Where is he now? in what land must he die,
  To leave an empty name to us on earth?
  A tale half true, to cast across our mirth
  Some pensive thoughts of life that might have been;
  Where is he now, that all this life has seen?

    Behold, another eve upon the earth
  Than that calm evening of the warrior's birth;
  The sun is setting in the west, the sky
  Is bright and clear and hard, and no clouds lie
  About the golden circle of the sun;
  But East, aloof from him, heavy and dun
  Steel-grey they pack with edges red as blood,
  And underneath them is the weltering flood
  Of some huge sea, whose tumbling hills, as they
  Turn restless sides about, are black or grey,
  Or green, or glittering with the golden flame;
  The wind has fallen now, but still the same
  The mighty army moves, as if to drown
  This lone, bare rock, whose shear scarped sides of brown
  Cast off the weight of waves in clouds of spray.
    Alas! what ships upon an evil day
  Bent over to the wind in this ill sea?
  What navy, whose rent bones lie wretchedly
  Beneath these cliffs? a mighty one it was,
  A fearful storm to bring such things to pass.

    This is the loadstone rock; no armament
  Of warring nations, in their madness bent
  Their course this way; no merchant wittingly
  Has steered his keel unto this luckless sea;
  Upon no shipman's card its name is writ,
  Though worn-out mariners will speak of it
  Within the ingle on the winter's night,
  When all within is warm and safe and bright,
  And the wind howls without: but 'gainst their will
  Are some folk driven here, and then all skill
  Against this evil rock is vain and nought,
  And unto death the shipmen soon are brought;
  For then the keel, as by a giant's hand,
  Is drawn unto that mockery of a land,
  And presently unto its sides doth cleave;
  When if they 'scape swift death, yet none may leave
  The narrow limits of that barren isle,
  And thus are slain by famine in a while
  Mocked, as they say, by night with images
  Of noble castles among groves of trees,
  By day with sounds of merry minstrelsy.

    The sun sinks now below this hopeless sea,
  The clouds are gone, and all the sky is bright;
  The moon is rising o'er the growing night,
  And by its shine may ye behold the bones
  Of generations of these luckless ones
  Scattered about the rock; but nigh the sea
  Sits one alive, who uncomplainingly
  Awaits his death. White-haired is he and old,
  Arrayed in royal raiment, bright with gold,
  But tarnished with the waves and rough salt air;
  Huge is he, of a noble face and fair,
  As for an ancient man, though toil and eld
  Furrow the cheeks that ladies once beheld
  With melting hearts--Nay, listen, for he speaks!
    "God, Thou hast made me strong! nigh seven weeks
  Have passed since from the wreck we haled our store,
  And five long days well told, have now passed o'er
  Since my last fellow died, with my last bread
  Between his teeth, and yet I am not dead.
  Yea, but for this I had been strong enow
  In some last bloody field my sword to show.
  What matter? soon will all be past and done,
  Where'er I died I must have died alone:
  Yet, Caraheu, a good death had it been
  Dying, thy face above me to have seen,
  And heard my banner flapping in the wind,
  Then, though my memory had not left thy mind,
  Yet hope and fear would not have vexed thee more
  When thou hadst known that everything was o'er;
  But now thou waitest, still expecting me,
  Whose sail shall never speck thy bright blue sea.
    "And thou, Clarice, the merchants thou mayst call,
  To tell thee tales within thy pictured hall,
  But never shall they tell true tales of me:
  Whatever sails the Kentish hills may see
  Swept by the flood-tide toward thy well-walled town,
  No more on my sails shall they look adown.
    "Get thee another leader, Charlemaine,
  For thou shalt look to see my shield in vain,
  When in the fair fields of the Frankish land,
  Thick as the corn they tread, the heathen stand.
    "What matter? ye shall learn to live your lives;
  Husbands and children, other friends and wives,
  Shall wipe the tablets of your memory clean,
  And all shall be as I had never been.

    "And now, O God, am I alone with Thee;
  A little thing indeed it seems to be
  To give this life up, since it needs must go
  Some time or other; now at last I know
  How foolishly men play upon the earth,
  When unto them a year of life seems worth
  Honour and friends, and these vague hopes and sweet
  That like real things my dying heart do greet,
  Unreal while living on the earth I trod,
  And but myself I knew no other god.
  Behold, I thank Thee that Thou sweet'nest thus
  This end, that I had thought most piteous,
  If of another I had heard it told."

    What man is this, who weak and worn and old
  Gives up his life within that dreadful isle,
  And on the fearful coming death can smile?
  Alas! this man, so battered and outworn,
  Is none but he, who, on that summer morn,
  Received such promises of glorious life:
  Ogier the Dane this is, to whom all strife
  Was but as wine to stir awhile the blood,
  To whom all life, however hard, was good:
  This is the man, unmatched of heart and limb,
  Ogier the Dane, whose sight has waxed not dim
  For all the years that he on earth has dwelt;
  Ogier the Dane, that never fear has felt,
  Since he knew good from ill; Ogier the Dane,
  The heathen's dread, the evil-doer's bane.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Bright had the moon grown as his words were done,
  And no more was there memory of the sun
  Within the west, and he grew drowsy now.
  And somewhat smoother was his wrinkled brow
  As thought died out beneath the hand of sleep,
  And o'er his soul forgetfulness did creep,
  Hiding the image of swift-coming death;
  Until as peacefully he drew his breath
  As on that day, past for a hundred years,
  When, midst the nurse's quickly-falling tears,
  He fell asleep to his first lullaby.
    The night changed as he slept, white clouds and high
  Began about the lonely moon to close;
  And from the dark west a new wind arose,
  And with the sound of heavy-falling waves
  Mingled its pipe about the loadstone caves;
  But when the twinkling stars were hid away,
  And a faint light and broad, like dawn of day,
  The moon upon that dreary country shed,
  Ogier awoke, and lifting up his head
  And smiling, muttered, "Nay, no more again;
  Rather some pleasure new, some other pain,
  Unthought of both, some other form of strife;"
  For he had waked from dreams of his old life,
  And through St. Omer's archer-guarded gate
  Once more had seemed to pass, and saw the state
  Of that triumphant king; and still, though all
  Seemed changed, and folk by other names did call
  Faces he knew of old, yet none the less
  He seemed the same, and, midst that mightiness,
  Felt his own power, and grew the more athirst
  For coming glory, as of old, when first
  He stood before the face of Charlemaine,
  A helpless hostage with all life to gain.
    But now, awake, his worn face once more sank
  Between his hands, and, murmuring not, he drank
  The draught of death that must that thirst allay.

    But while he sat and waited for the day
  A sudden light across the bare rock streamed,
  Which at the first he noted not, but deemed
  The moon her fleecy veil had broken through;
  But ruddier indeed this new light grew
  Than were the moon's grey beams, and, therewithal
  Soft far-off music on his ears did fall;
  Yet moved he not, but murmured, "This is death.
  An easy thing like this to yield my breath,
  Awake, yet dreaming, with no sounds of fear,
  No dreadful sights to tell me it is near;
  Yea, God, I thank Thee!" but with that last word
  It seemed to him that he his own name heard
  Whispered, as though the wind had borne it past;
  With that he gat unto his feet at last,
  But still awhile he stood, with sunken head,
  And in a low and trembling voice he said,
  "Lord, I am ready, whither shall I go?
  I pray Thee unto me some token show."
  And, as he said this, round about he turned,
  And in the east beheld a light that burned
  As bright as day; then, though his flesh might fear
  The coming change that he believed so near,
  Yet did his soul rejoice, for now he thought
  Unto the very heaven to be brought:
  And though he felt alive, deemed it might be
  That he in sleep had died full easily.
    Then toward that light did he begin to go,
  And still those strains he heard, far off and low,
  That grew no louder; still that bright light streamed
  Over the rocks, yet nothing brighter seemed,
  But like the light of some unseen bright flame
  Shone round about, until at last he came
  Unto the dreary islet's other shore,
  And then the minstrelsy he heard no more,
  And softer seemed the strange light unto him,
  But yet or ever it had grown quite dim,
  Beneath its waning light could he behold
  A mighty palace set about with gold,
  Above green meads and groves of summer trees
  Far-off across the welter of the seas;
  But, as he gazed, it faded from his sight,
  And the grey hidden moon's diffused soft light,
  Which soothly was but darkness to him now,
  His sea-girt island prison did but show.
    But o'er the sea he still gazed wistfully,
  And said, "Alas! and when will this go by
  And leave my soul in peace? must I still dream
  Of life that once so dear a thing did seem,
  That, when I wake, death may the bitterer be?
  Here will I sit until he come to me,
  And hide mine eyes and think upon my sin,
  That so a little calm I yet may win
  Before I stand within the awful place."
    Then down he sat and covered up his face.
  Yet therewithal his trouble could not hide,
  Nor waiting thus for death could he abide,
  For, though he knew it not, the yearning pain
  Of hope of life had touched his soul again--
  If he could live awhile, if he could live!
  The mighty being, who once was wont to give
  The gift of life to many a trembling man;
  Who did his own will since his life began;
  Who feared not aught, but strong and great and free
  Still cast aside the thought of what might be;
  Must all this then be lost, and with no will,
  Powerless and blind, must he some fate fulfil,
  Nor know what he is doing any more?

    Soon he arose and paced along the shore,
  And gazed out seaward for the blessed light;
  But nought he saw except the old sad sight,
  The ceaseless tumbling of the billows grey,
  The white upspringing of the spurts of spray
  Amidst that mass of timbers, the rent bones
  Of the sea-houses of the hapless ones
  Once cast like him upon this deadly isle.
    He stopped his pacing in a little while,
  And clenched his mighty hands, and set his teeth,
  And gazing at the ruin underneath,
  He swung from off the bare cliff's jagged brow,
  And on some slippery ledge he wavered now,
  Without a hand-hold, and now stoutly clung
  With hands alone, and o'er the welter hung,
  Not caring aught if thus his life should end;
  But safely amidst all this did he descend
  The dreadful cliff, and since no beach was there,
  But from the depths the rock rose stark and bare,
  Nor crumbled aught beneath the hammering sea,
  Upon the wrecks he stood unsteadily.

    But now, amid the clamour of the waves,
  And washing to-and-fro of beams and staves,
  Dizzy with hunger, dreamy with distress,
  And all those days of fear and loneliness,
  The ocean's tumult seemed the battle's roar,
  His heart grew hot, as when in days of yore
  He heard the cymbals clash amid the crowd
  Of dusky faces; now he shouted loud,
  And from crushed beam to beam began to leap,
  And yet his footing somehow did he keep
  Amidst their tossing, and indeed the sea
  Was somewhat sunk upon the island's lee.
  So quickly on from wreck to wreck he passed,
  And reached the outer line of wrecks at last,
  And there a moment stood unsteadily,
  Amid the drift of spray that hurried by,
  And drew Courtain his sword from out its sheath,
  And poised himself to meet the coming death,
  Still looking out to sea; but as he gazed,
  And once or twice his doubtful feet he raised
  To take the final plunge, that heavenly strain
  Over the washing waves he heard again,
  And from the dimness something bright he saw
  Across the waste of waters towards him draw;
  And hidden now, now raised aloft, at last
  Unto his very feet a boat was cast,
  Gilded inside and out, and well arrayed
  With cushions soft; far fitter to have weighed
  From some sweet garden on the shallow Seine,
  Or in a reach of green Thames to have lain,
  Than struggle with that huge confuséd sea;
  But Ogier gazed upon it doubtfully
  One moment, and then, sheathing Courtain, said,
  "What tales are these about the newly dead
  The heathen told? what matter, let all pass;
  This moment as one dead indeed I was,
  And this must be what I have got to do,
  I yet perchance may light on something new
  Before I die; though yet perchance this keel
  Unto the wondrous mass of charméd steel
  Is drawn as others." With that word he leapt
  Into the boat, and o'er the cushions crept
  From stem to stern, but found no rudder there,
  Nor any oars, nor were the cushions fair
  Made wet by any dashing of the sea.
    Now while he pondered how these things could be,
  The boat began to move therefrom at last,
  But over him a drowsiness was cast,
  And as o'er tumbling hills the skiff did pass,
  He clean forgot his death and where he was.

    At last he woke up to a sunny day,
  And, looking round, saw that his shallop lay
  Moored at the edge of some fair tideless sea
  Unto an overhanging thick-leaved tree,
  Where in the green waves did the low bank dip
  Its fresh and green grass-covered daisied lip;
  But Ogier looking thence no more could see
  That sad abode of death and misery,
  Nor aught but wide and empty ocean, grey
  With gathering haze, for now it neared midday;
  Then from the golden cushions did he rise,
  And wondering still if this were Paradise
  He stepped ashore, but drew Courtain his sword
  And muttered therewithal a holy word.
    Fair was the place, as though amidst of May,
  Nor did the brown birds fear the sunny day,
  For with their quivering song the air was sweet;
  Thick grew the field-flowers underneath his feet,
  And on his head the blossoms down did rain,
  Yet mid these fair things slowly and with pain
  He 'gan to go, yea, even when his foot
  First touched the flowery sod, to his heart's root
  A coldness seemed to strike, and now each limb
  Was growing stiff, his eyes waxed bleared and dim,
  And all his stored-up memory 'gan to fail,
  Nor yet would his once mighty heart avail
  For lamentations o'er his changéd lot;
  Yet urged by some desire, he knew not what,
  Along a little path 'twixt hedges sweet,
  Drawn sword in hand, he dragged his faltering feet,
  For what then seemed to him a weary way,
  Whereon his steps he needs must often stay
  And lean upon the mighty well-worn sword
  That in those hands, grown old, for king or lord
  Had small respect in glorious days long past.

    But still he crept along, and at the last
  Came to a gilded wicket, and through this
  Entered a garden fit for utmost bliss,
  If that might last which needs must soon go by:
  There 'gainst a tree he leaned, and with a sigh
  He said, "O God, a sinner I have been,
  And good it is that I these things have seen
  Before I meet what Thou hast set apart
  To cleanse the earthly folly from my heart;
  But who within this garden now can dwell
  Wherein guilt first upon the world befell?"
    A little further yet he staggered on,
  Till to a fountain-side at last he won,
  O'er which two white-thorns their sweet blossoms shed.
  There he sank down, and laid his weary head
  Beside the mossy roots, and in a while
  He slept, and dreamed himself within the isle;
  That splashing fount the weary sea did seem,
  And in his dream the fair place but a dream;
  But when again to feebleness he woke
  Upon his ears that heavenly music broke,
  Not faint or far as in the isle it was,
  But e'en as though the minstrels now did pass
  Anigh his resting-place; then fallen in doubt,
  E'en as he might, he rose and gazed about,
  Leaning against the hawthorn stem with pain;
  And yet his straining gaze was but in vain,
  Death stole so fast upon him, and no more
  Could he behold the blossoms as before,
  No more the trees seemed rooted to the ground,
  A heavy mist seemed gathering all around,
  And in its heart some bright thing seemed to be,
  And round his head there breathed deliciously
  Sweet odours, and that music never ceased.
  But as the weight of Death's strong hand increased
  Again he sank adown, and Courtain's noise
  Within the scabbard seemed a farewell voice
  Sent from the world he loved so well of old,
  And all his life was as a story told,
  And as he thought thereof he 'gan to smile
  E'en as a child asleep, but in a while
  It was as though he slept, and sleeping dreamed,
  For in his half-closed eyes a glory gleamed,
  As though from some sweet face and golden hair,
  And on his breast were laid soft hands and fair,
  And a sweet voice was ringing in his ears,
  Broken as if with flow of joyous tears;
    "Ogier, sweet friend, hast thou not tarried long?
  Alas! thine hundred years of strife and wrong!"
  Then he found voice to say, "Alas! dear Lord,
  Too long, too long; and yet one little word
  Right many a year agone had brought me here."
  Then to his face that face was drawn anear,
  He felt his head raised up and gently laid
  On some kind knee, again the sweet voice said,
  "Nay, Ogier, nay, not yet, not yet, dear friend!
  Who knoweth when our linkéd life shall end,
  Since thou art come unto mine arms at last,
  And all the turmoil of the world is past?
  Why do I linger ere I see thy face
  As I desired it in that mourning place
  So many years ago--so many years,
  Thou knewest not thy love and all her fears?"
    "Alas!" he said, "what mockery then is this
  That thou wilt speak to me of earthly bliss?
  No longer can I think upon the earth,
  Have I not done with all its grief and mirth?
  Yes, I was Ogier once, but if my love
  Should come once more my dying heart to move,
  Then must she come from 'neath the milk-white walls
  Whereon to-day the hawthorn blossom falls
  Outside St. Omer's--art thou she? her name
  Which I remembered once mid death and fame
  Is clean forgotten now; but yesterday,
  Meseems, our son, upon her bosom lay:
  Baldwin the fair--what hast thou done with him
  Since Charlot slew him? All, mine eyes wax dim;
  Woman, forbear! wilt thou not let me die?
  Did I forget thee in the days gone by?
  Then let me die, that we may meet again!"

    He tried to move from her, but all in vain,
  For life had well-nigh left him, but withal
  He felt a kiss upon his forehead fall,
  And could not speak; he felt slim fingers fair
  Move to his mighty sword-worn hand, and there
  Set on some ring, and still he could not speak,
  And once more sleep weighed down his eyelids weak.

       *       *       *       *       *

    But, ah! what land was this he woke unto?
  What joy was this that filled his heart anew?
  Had he then gained the very Paradise?
  Trembling, he durst not at the first arise,
  Although no more he felt the pain of eld,
  Nor durst he raise his eyes that now beheld
  Beside him the white flowers and blades of grass;
  He durst not speak, lest he some monster was.
    But while he lay and hoped, that gentle voice
  Once more he heard; "Yea, thou mayst well rejoice
  Thou livest still, my sweet, thou livest still,
  Apart from every earthly fear and ill;
  Wilt thou not love me, who have wrought thee this,
  That I like thee may live in double bliss?"
    Then Ogier rose up, nowise like to one
  Whose span of earthly life is nigh outrun,
  But as he might have risen in old days
  To see the spears cleave the fresh morning haze;
  But, looking round, he saw no change there was
  In the fair place wherethrough he first did pass,
  Though all, grown clear and joyous to his eyes,
  Now looked no worse than very Paradise;
  Behind him were the thorns, the fountain fair
  Still sent its glittering stream forth into air,
  And by its basin a fair woman stood,
  And as their eyes met his new-healéd blood
  Rushed to his face; with unused thoughts and sweet
  And hurrying hopes, his heart began to beat.
    The fairest of all creatures did she seem;
  So fresh and delicate you well might deem
  That scarce for eighteen summers had she blessed
  The happy, longing world; yet, for the rest,
  Within her glorious eyes such wisdom dwelt
  A child before her had the wise man felt,
  And with the pleasure of a thousand years
  Her lips were fashioned to move joy or tears
  Among the longing folk where she might dwell,
  To give at last the kiss unspeakable.
    In such wise was she clad as folk may be,
  Who, for no shame of their humanity,
  For no sad changes of the imperfect year,
  Rather for added beauty, raiment wear;
  For, as the heat-foretelling grey-blue haze
  Veils the green flowery morn of late May-days,
  Her raiment veiled her; where the bands did meet
  That bound the sandals to her dainty feet,
  Gems gleamed; a fresh rose-wreath embraced her head,
  And on her breast there lay a ruby red.
    So with a supplicating look she turned
  To meet the flame that in his own eyes burned,
  And held out both her white arms lovingly,
  As though to greet him as he drew anigh.
  Stammering he said, "Who art thou? how am I
  So cured of all my evils suddenly,
  That certainly I felt no mightier, when,
  Amid the backward rush of beaten men,
  About me drooped the axe-torn Oriflamme?
  Alas! I fear that in some dream I am."
    "Ogier," she said, "draw near, perchance it is
  That such a name God gives unto our bliss;
  I know not, but if thou art such an one
  As I must deem, all days beneath the sun
  That thou hadst had, shall be but dreams indeed
  To those that I have given thee at thy need.
  For many years ago beside the sea
  When thou wert born, I plighted troth with thee:
  Come near then, and make mirrors of mine eyes,
  That thou mayst see what these my mysteries
  Have wrought in thee; surely but thirty years,
  Passed amidst joy, thy new born body bears,
  Nor while thou art with me, and on this shore
  Art still full-fed of love, shalt thou seem more.
  Nay, love, come nigher, and let me take thine hand,
  The hope and fear of many a warring land,
  And I will show thee wherein lies the spell,
  Whereby this happy change upon thee fell."

    Like a shy youth before some royal love,
  Close up to that fair woman did he move,
  And their hands met; yet to his changéd voice
  He dared not trust; nay, scarcely could rejoice
  E'en when her balmy breath he 'gan to feel,
  And felt strange sweetness o'er his spirit steal
  As her light raiment, driven by the wind,
  Swept round him, and, bewildered and half-blind
  His lips the treasure of her lips did press,
  And round him clung her perfect loveliness.
    For one sweet moment thus they stood, and then
  She drew herself from out his arms again,
  And panting, lovelier for her love, did stand
  Apart awhile, then took her lover's hand,
  And, in a trembling voice, made haste to say,--
    "O Ogier, when thou camest here to-day,
  I feared indeed, that in my play with fate,
  I might have seen thee e'en one day too late,
  Before this ring thy finger should embrace;
  Behold it, love, and thy keen eyes may trace
  Faint figures wrought upon the ruddy gold;
  My father dying gave it me, nor told
  The manner of its making, but I know
  That it can make thee e'en as thou art now
  Despite the laws of God--shrink not from me
  Because I give an impious gift to thee--
  Has not God made me also, who do this?
  But I, who longed to share with thee my bliss,
  Am of the fays, and live their changeless life,
  And, like the gods of old, I see the strife
  That moves the world, unmoved if so I will;
  For we the fruit, that teaches good and ill,
  Have never touched like you of Adam's race;
  And while thou dwellest with me in this place
  Thus shalt thou be--ah, and thou deem'st, indeed,
  That thou shalt gain thereby no happy meed
  Reft of the world's joys? nor canst understand
  How thou art come into a happy land?--
  Love, in thy world the priests of heaven still sing,
  And tell thee of it many a joyous thing;
  But think'st thou, bearing the world's joy and pain,
  Thou couldst live there? nay, nay, but born again
  Thou wouldst be happy with the angels' bliss;
  And so with us no otherwise it is,
  Nor hast thou cast thine old life quite away
  Even as yet, though that shall be to-day.
    "But for the love and country thou hast won,
  Know thou, that thou art come to Avallon,
  That is both thine and mine; and as for me,
  Morgan le Fay men call me commonly
  Within the world, but fairer names than this
  I have for thee and me, 'twixt kiss and kiss."

    Ah, what was this? and was it all in vain,
  That she had brought him here this life to gain?
  For, ere her speech was done, like one turned blind
  He watched the kisses of the wandering wind
  Within her raiment, or as some one sees
  The very best of well-wrought images
  When he is blind with grief, did he behold
  The wandering tresses of her locks of gold
  Upon her shoulders; and no more he pressed
  The hand that in his own hand lay at rest:
  His eyes, grown dull with changing memories,
  Could make no answer to her glorious eyes:
  Cold waxed his heart, and weary and distraught,
  With many a cast-by, hateful, dreary thought,
  Unfinished in the old days; and withal
  He needs must think of what might chance to fall
  In this life new-begun; and good and bad
  Tormented him, because as yet he had
  A worldly heart within his frame made new,
  And to the deeds that he was wont to do
  Did his desires still turn. But she a while
  Stood gazing at him with a doubtful smile,
  And let his hand fall down; and suddenly
  Sounded sweet music from some close nearby,
  And then she spoke again: "Come, love, with me,
  That thou thy new life and delights mayst see."
  And gently with that word she led him thence,
  And though upon him now there fell a sense
  Of dreamy and unreal bewilderment,
  As hand in hand through that green place they went,
  Yet therewithal a strain of tender love
  A little yet his restless heart did move.

    So through the whispering trees they came at last
  To where a wondrous house a shadow cast
  Across the flowers, and o'er the daisied grass
  Before it, crowds of lovely folk did pass,
  Playing about in carelessness and mirth,
  Unshadowed by the doubtful deeds of earth;
  And from the midst a band of fair girls came,
  With flowers and music, greeting him by name,
  And praising him; but ever like a dream
  He could not break, did all to Ogier seem.
  And he his old world did the more desire,
  For in his heart still burned unquenched the fire,
  That through the world of old so bright did burn:
  Yet was he fain that kindness to return,
  And from the depth of his full heart he sighed.
    Then toward the house the lovely Queen did guide
  His listless steps, and seemed to take no thought
  Of knitted brow or wandering eyes distraught,
  But still with kind love lighting up her face
  She led him through the door of that fair place,
  While round about them did the damsels press;
  And he was moved by all that loveliness
  As one might be, who, lying half asleep
  In the May morning, notes the light wind sweep
  Over the tulip-beds: no more to him
  Were gleaming eyes, red lips, and bodies slim,
  Amidst that dream, although the first surprise
  Of hurried love wherewith the Queen's sweet eyes
  Had smitten him, still in his heart did stir.

    And so at last he came, led on by her
  Into a hall wherein a fair throne was,
  And hand in hand thereto the twain did pass;
  And there she bade him sit, and when alone
  He took his place upon the double throne,
  She cast herself before him on her knees,
  Embracing his, and greatly did increase
  The shame and love that vexed his troubled heart:
  But now a line of girls the crowd did part,
  Lovelier than all, and Ogier could behold
  One in their midst who bore a crown of gold
  Within her slender hands and delicate;
  She, drawing nigh, beside the throne did wait
  Until the Queen arose and took the crown,
  Who then to Ogier's lips did stoop adown
  And kissed him, and said, "Ogier, what were worth
  Thy miserable days of strife on earth,
  That on their ashes still thine eyes are turned?"
    Then, as she spoke these words, his changed heart burned
  With sudden memories, and thereto had he
  Made answer, but she raised up suddenly
  The crown she held and set it on his head,
  "Ogier," she cried, "those troublous days are dead;
  Thou wert dead with them also, but for me;
  Turn unto her who wrought these things for thee!"
    Then, as he felt her touch, a mighty wave
  Of love swept o'er his soul, as though the grave
  Did really hold his body; from his seat
  He rose to cast himself before her feet;
  But she clung round him, and in close embrace
  The twain were locked amidst that thronging place.

    Thenceforth new life indeed has Ogier won,
  And in the happy land of Avallon
  Quick glide the years o'er his unchanging head;
  There saw he many men the world thought dead,
  Living like him in sweet forgetfulness
  Of all the troubles that did once oppress
  Their vainly-struggling lives--ah, how can I
  Tell of their joy as though I had been nigh?
  Suffice it that no fear of death they knew,
  That there no talk there was of false or true,
  Of right or wrong, for traitors came not there;
  That everything was bright and soft and fair,
  And yet they wearied not for any change,
  Nor unto them did constancy seem strange.
  Love knew they, but its pain they never had,
  But with each other's joy were they made glad;
  Nor were their lives wasted by hidden fire,
  Nor knew they of the unfulfilled desire
  That turns to ashes all the joys of earth,
  Nor knew they yearning love amidst the dearth
  Of kind and loving hearts to spend it on,
  Nor dreamed of discontent when all was won;
  Nor need they struggle after wealth and fame;
  Still was the calm flow of their lives the same,
  And yet, I say, they wearied not of it--
  So did the promised days by Ogier flit.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Think that a hundred years have now passed by,
  Since ye beheld Ogier lie down to die
  Beside the fountain; think that now ye are
  In France, made dangerous with wasting war;
  In Paris, where about each guarded gate,
  Gathered in knots, the anxious people wait,
  And press around each new-come man to learn
  If Harfleur now the pagan wasters burn,
  Or if the Rouen folk can keep their chain,
  Or Pont de l'Arche unburnt still guards the Seine?
  Or if 'tis true that Andelys succour wants?
  That Vernon's folk are fleeing east to Mantes?
  When will they come? or rather is it true
  That a great band the Constable o'erthrew
  Upon the marshes of the lower Seine,
  And that their long-ships, turning back again,
  Caught by the high-raised waters of the bore
  Were driven here and there and cast ashore?
    Such questions did they ask, and, as fresh men
  Came hurrying in, they asked them o'er again,
  And from scared folk, or fools, or ignorant,
  Still got new lies, or tidings very scant.

    But now amidst these men at last came one,
  A little ere the setting of the sun,
  With two stout men behind him, armed right well,
  Who ever as they rode on, sooth to tell,
  With doubtful eyes upon their master stared,
  Or looked about like troubled men and scared.
  And he they served was noteworthy indeed;
  Of ancient fashion were his arms and weed,
  Rich past the wont of men in those sad times;
  His face was bronzed, as though by burning climes,
  But lovely as the image of a god
  Carved in the days before on earth Christ trod;
  But solemn were his eyes, and grey as glass,
  And like to ruddy gold his fine hair was:
  A mighty man he was, and taller far
  Than those who on that day must bear the war
  The pagans waged: he by the warders stayed
  Scarce looked on them, but straight their words obeyed
  And showed his pass; then, asked about his name
  And from what city of the world he came,
  Said, that men called him now the Ancient Knight,
  That he was come midst the king's men to fight
  From St. Omer's; and as he spoke, he gazed
  Down on the thronging street as one amazed,
  And answered no more to the questioning
  Of frightened folk of this or that sad thing;
  But, ere he passed on, turned about at last
  And on the wondering guard a strange look cast,
  And said, "St. Mary! do such men as ye
  Fight with the wasters from across the sea?
  Then, certes, are ye lost, however good
  Your hearts may be; not such were those who stood
  Beside the Hammer-bearer years agone."
    So said he, and as his fair armour shone
  With beauty of a time long passed away,
  So with the music of another day
  His deep voice thrilled the awe-struck, listening folk.

    Yet from the crowd a mocking voice outbroke,
  That cried, "Be merry, masters, fear ye nought,
  Surely good succour to our side is brought;
  For here is Charlemaine come off his tomb
  To save his faithful city from its doom."
    "Yea," said another, "this is certain news,
  Surely ye know how all the carvers use
  To carve the dead man's image at the best,
  That guards the place where he may lie at rest;
  Wherefore this living image looks indeed,
  Spite of his ancient tongue and marvellous weed,
  To have but thirty summers."
                                At the name
  Of Charlemaine, he turned to whence there came
  The mocking voice, and somewhat knit his brow,
  And seemed as he would speak, but scarce knew how;
  So with a half-sigh soon sank back again
  Into his dream, and shook his well-wrought rein,
  And silently went on upon his way.

    And this was Ogier: on what evil day
  Has he then stumbled, that he needs must come,
  Midst war and ravage, to the ancient home
  Of his desires? did he grow weary then,
  And wish to strive once more with foolish men
  For worthless things? or is fair Avallon
  Sunk in the sea, and all that glory gone?
    Nay, thus it happed--One day she came to him
  And said, "Ogier, thy name is waxing dim
  Upon the world that thou rememberest not;
  The heathen men are thick on many a spot
  Thine eyes have seen, and which I love therefore;
  And God will give His wonted help no more.
  Wilt thou, then, help? canst thou have any mind
  To give thy banner once more to the wind?
  Since greater glory thou shalt win for this
  Than erst thou gatheredst ere thou cam'st to bliss:
  For men are dwindled both in heart and frame,
  Nor holds the fair land any such a name
  As thine, when thou wert living midst thy peers;
  The world is worser for these hundred years."
    From his calm eyes there gleamed a little fire,
  And in his voice was something of desire,
  To see the land where he was used to be,
  As now he answered: "Nay, choose thou for me,
  Thou art the wisest; it is more than well
  Within this peaceful place with thee to dwell:
  Nor ill perchance in that old land to die,
  If, dying, I keep not the memory
  Of this fair life of ours." "Nay, nay," said she,
  "As to thy dying, that shall never be,
  Whiles that thou keep'st my ring--and now, behold,
  I take from thee thy charmed crown of gold,
  And thou wilt be the Ogier that thou wast
  Ere on the loadstone rock thy ship was cast:
  Yet thou shalt have thy youthful body still,
  And I will guard thy life from every ill."

    So was it done, and Ogier, armed right well,
  Sleeping, was borne away by some strong spell,
  And set upon the Flemish coast; and thence
  Turned to St. Omer's, with a doubtful sense
  Of being in some wild dream, the while he knew
  That great delight forgotten was his due,
  That all which there might hap was of small worth.
    So on he went, and sometimes unto mirth
  Did his attire move the country-folk,
  But oftener when strange speeches from him broke
  Concerning men and things for long years dead,
  He filled the listeners with great awe and dread;
  For in such wild times as these people were
  Are men soon moved to wonder and to fear.

    Now through the streets of Paris did he ride,
  And at a certain hostel did abide
  Throughout that night, and ere he went next day
  He saw a book that on a table lay,
  And opening it 'gan read in lazy mood:
  But long before it in that place he stood,
  Noting nought else; for it did chronicle
  The deeds of men whom once he knew right well,
  When they were living in the flesh with him:
  Yea, his own deeds he saw, grown strange and dim
  Already, and true stories mixed with lies,
  Until, with many thronging memories
  Of those old days, his heart was so oppressed,
  He 'gan to wish that he might lie at rest,
  Forgetting all things: for indeed by this
  Little remembrance had he of the bliss
  That wrapped his soul in peaceful Avallon.

    But his changed life he needs must carry on;
  For ye shall know the Queen was gathering men
  To send unto the good King, who as then
  In Rouen lay, beset by many a band
  Of those who carried terror through the land,
  And still by messengers for help he prayed:
  Therefore a mighty muster was being made,
  Of weak and strong, and brave and timorous,
  Before the Queen anigh her royal house.
  So thither on this morn did Ogier turn,
  Some certain news about the war to learn;
  And when he came at last into the square,
  And saw the ancient palace great and fair
  Rise up before him as in other days,
  And in the merry morn the bright sun's rays
  Glittering on gathered helms and moving spears,
  He 'gan to feel as in the long-past years,
  And his heart stirred within him. Now the Queen
  Came from within, right royally beseen,
  And took her seat beneath a canopy,
  With lords and captains of the war anigh;
  And as she came a mighty shout arose,
  And round about began the knights to close,
  Their oath of fealty to swear anew,
  And learn what service they had got to do.
  But so it was, that some their shouts must stay
  To gaze at Ogier as he took his way
  Through the thronged place; and quickly too he gat
  Unto the place whereas the Lady sat,
  For men gave place unto him, fearing him:
  For not alone was he most huge of limb,
  And dangerous, but something in his face,
  As his calm eyes looked o'er the crowded place,
  Struck men with awe; and in the ancient days,
  When men might hope alive on gods to gaze,
  They would have thought, "The gods yet love our town
  And from the heavens have sent a great one down."
    Withal unto the throne he came so near,
  That he the Queen's sweet measured voice could hear;
  And swiftly now within him wrought the change
  That first he felt amid those faces strange;
  And his heart burned to taste the hurrying life
  With such desires, such changing sweetness rife.
  And yet, indeed, how should he live alone,
  Who in the old past days such friends had known?
  Then he began to think of Caraheu,
  Of Bellicent the fair, and once more knew
  The bitter pain of rent and ended love.
  But while with hope and vain regret he strove,
  He found none 'twixt him and the Queen's high seat,
  And, stepping forth, he knelt before her feet
  And took her hand to swear, as was the way
  Of doing fealty in that ancient day,
  And raised his eyes to hers; as fair was she
  As any woman of the world might be
  Full-limbed and tall, dark-haired, from her deep eyes,
  The snare of fools, the ruin of the wise,
  Love looked unchecked; and now her dainty hand,
  The well-knit holder of the golden wand,
  Trembled in his, she cast her eyes adown,
  And her sweet brow was knitted to a frown,
  As he, the taker of such oaths of yore,
  Now unto her all due obedience swore,
  Yet gave himself no name; and now the Queen,
  Awed by his voice as other folk had been,
  Yet felt a trembling hope within her rise
  Too sweet to think of, and with love's surprise
  Her cheek grew pale; she said, "Thy style and name
  Thou tellest not, nor what land of thy fame
  Is glad; for, certes, some land must be glad,
  That in its bounds her house thy mother had."
    "Lady," he said, "from what far land I come
  I well might tell thee, but another home
  Have I long dwelt in, and its name have I
  Forgotten now, forgotten utterly
  Who were my fellows, and what deeds they did;
  Therefore, indeed, shall my first name be hid
  And my first country; call me on this day
  The Ancient Knight, and let me go my way."
  He rose withal, for she her fingers fair
  Had drawn aback, and on him 'gan to stare
  As one afeard; for something terrible
  Was in his speech, and that she knew right well,
  Who 'gan to love him, and to fear that she,
  Shut out by some strange deadly mystery,
  Should never gain from him an equal love;
  Yet, as from her high seat he 'gan to move,
  She said, "O Ancient Knight, come presently,
  When we have done this muster, unto me,
  And thou shalt have thy charge and due command
  For freeing from our foes this wretched land!"
    Then Ogier made his reverence and went,
  And somewhat could perceive of her intent;
  For in his heart life grew, and love with life
  Grew, and therewith, 'twixt love and fame, was strife.
    But, as he slowly gat him from the square,
  Gazing at all the people gathered there,
  A squire of the Queen's behind him came,
  And breathless, called him by his new-coined name,
  And bade him turn because the Queen now bade,
  Since by the muster long she might be stayed,
  That to the palace he should bring him straight,
  Midst sport and play her coming back to wait;
  Then Ogier turned, nought loath, and with him went,
  And to a postern-gate his steps he bent,
  That Ogier knew right well in days of old;
  Worn was it now, and the bright hues and gold
  Upon the shields above, with lapse of days,
  Were faded much: but now did Ogier gaze
  Upon the garden where he walked of yore,
  Holding the hands that he should see no more;
  For all was changed except the palace fair,
  That Charlemaine's own eyes had seen built there
  Ere Ogier knew him; there the squire did lead
  The Ancient Knight, who still took little heed
  Of all the things that by the way he said,
  For all his thoughts were on the days long dead.
    There in the painted hall he sat again,
  And 'neath the pictured eyes of Charlemaine
  He ate and drank, and felt it like a dream;
  And midst his growing longings yet might deem
  That he from sleep should wake up presently
  In some fair city on the Syrian sea,
  Or on the brown rocks of the loadstone isle.
  But fain to be alone, within a while
  He gat him to the garden, and there passed
  By wondering squires and damsels, till at last,
  Far from the merry folk who needs must play,
  If on the world were coming its last day,
  He sat him down, and through his mind there ran
  Faint thoughts of that day, when, outworn and wan,
  He lay down by the fountain-side to die.
  But when he strove to gain clear memory
  Of what had happed since on the isle he lay
  Waiting for death, a hopeless castaway,
  Thought, failing him, would rather bring again
  His life among the peers of Charlemaine,
  And vex his soul with hapless memories;
  Until at last, worn out by thought of these,
  And hopeless striving to find what was true,
  And pondering on the deeds he had to do
  Ere he returned, whereto he could not tell,
  Sweet sleep upon his wearied spirit fell.
  And on the afternoon of that fair day,
  Forgetting all, beneath the trees he lay.

    Meanwhile the Queen, affairs of state being done,
  Went through the gardens with one dame alone
  Seeking for Ogier, whom at last she found
  Laid sleeping on the daisy-sprinkled ground.
  Dreaming, I know not what, of other days.
  Then on him for a while the Queen did gaze,
  Drawing sweet poison from the lovely sight,
  Then to her fellow turned, "The Ancient Knight--
  What means he by this word of his?" she said;
  "He were well mated with some lovely maid
  Just pondering on the late-heard name of love."
    "Softly, my lady, he begins to move,"
  Her fellow said, a woman old and grey;
  "Look now, his arms are of another day;
  None know him or his deeds; thy squire just said
  He asked about the state of men long dead;
  I fear what he may be; look, seest thou not
  That ring that on one finger he has got,
  Where figures strange upon the gold are wrought:
  God grant that he from hell has not been brought
  For our confusion, in this doleful war,
  Who surely in enough of trouble are
  Without such help;" then the Queen turned aside
  Awhile, her drawn and troubled face to hide,
  For lurking dread this speech within her stirred;
  But yet she said, "Thou sayest a foolish word,
  This man is come against our enemies
  To fight for us." Then down upon her knees
  Fell the old woman by the sleeping knight,
  And from his hand she drew with fingers light
  The wondrous ring, and scarce again could rise
  Ere 'neath the trembling Queen's bewildered eyes
  The change began; his golden hair turned white,
  His smooth cheek wrinkled, and his breathing light
  Was turned to troublous struggling for his breath,
  And on his shrunk lips lay the hand of death;
  And, scarce less pale than he, the trembling Queen
  Stood thinking on the beauty she had seen
  And longed for, but a little while ago,
  Yet with her terror still her love did grow,
  And she began to weep as though she saw
  Her beauty e'en to such an ending draw.
  And 'neath her tears waking he oped his eyes,
  And strove to speak, but nought but gasping sighs
  His lips could utter; then he tried to reach
  His hand to them, as though he would beseech
  The gift of what was his: but all the while
  The crone gazed on them with an evil smile,
  Then holding toward the Queen that wondrous ring,
  She said, "Why weep'st thou? having this fair thing,
  Thou, losing nought the beauty that thou hast,
  May'st watch the vainly struggling world go past,
  Thyself unchanged." The Queen put forth her hand
  And took the ring, and there awhile did stand
  And strove to think of it, but still in her
  Such all-absorbing longings love did stir,
  So young she was, of death she could not think,
  Or what a cup eld gives to man to drink;
  Yet on her finger had she set the ring
  When now the life that hitherto did cling
  To Ogier's heart seemed fading quite away,
  And scarcely breathing with shut eyes he lay.
  Then, kneeling down, she murmured piteously,
  "Ah, wilt thou love me if I give it thee,
  And thou grow'st young again? what should I do
  If with the eyes thou thus shalt gain anew
  Thou shouldst look scorn on me?" But with that word
  The hedge behind her, by the west wind stirred,
  Cast fear into her heart of some one nigh,
  And therewith on his finger hastily
  She set the ring, then rose and stood apart
  A little way, and in her doubtful heart
  With love and fear was mixed desire of life.
    But standing so, a look with great scorn rife
  The elder woman, turning, cast on her,
  Pointing to Ogier, who began to stir;
  She looked, and all she erst saw now did seem
  To have been nothing but a hideous dream,
  As fair and young he rose from off the ground
  And cast a dazed and puzzled look around,
  Like one just waked from sleep in some strange place;
  But soon his grave eyes rested on her face,
  And turned yet graver seeing her so pale,
  And that her eyes were pregnant with some tale
  Of love and fear; she 'neath his eyes the while
  Forced her pale lips to semblance of a smile,
  And said, "O Ancient Knight, thou sleepest then?
  While through this poor land range the heathen men
  Unmet of any but my King and Lord:
  Nay, let us see the deeds of thine old sword."
    "Queen," said he, "bid me then unto this work,
  And certes I behind no wall would lurk,
  Nor send for succour, while a scanty folk
  Still followed after me to break the yoke:
  I pray thee grace for sleeping, and were fain
  That I might rather never sleep again
  Then have such wretched dreams as I e'en now
  Have waked from."
                    Lovelier she seemed to grow
  Unto him as he spoke; fresh colour came
  Into her face, as though for some sweet shame,
  While she with tearful eyes beheld him so,
  That somewhat even must his burnt cheek glow,
  His heart beat faster. But again she said,
  "Nay, will dreams burden such a mighty head?
  Then may I too have pardon for a dream:
  Last night in sleep I saw thee, who didst seem
  To be the King of France; and thou and I
  Were sitting at some great festivity
  Within the many-peopled gold-hung place."
    The blush of shame was gone as on his face
  She gazed, and saw him read her meaning clear
  And knew that no cold words she had to fear,
  But rather that for softer speech he yearned.
  Therefore, with love alone her smooth cheek burned;
  Her parted lips were hungry for his kiss,
  She trembled at the near approaching bliss;
    Nathless, she checked her love a little while,
  Because she felt the old dame's curious smile
  Upon her, and she said, "O Ancient Knight,
  If I then read my last night's dream aright,
  Thou art come here our very help to be,
  Perchance to give my husband back to me;
  Come then, if thou this land art fain to save,
  And show the wisdom thou must surely have
  Unto my council; I will give thee then
  What charge I may among my valiant men;
  And certes thou wilt do so well herein,
  That, ere long, something greater shalt thou win:
  Come, then, deliverer of my throne and land,
  And let me touch for once thy mighty hand
  With these weak fingers."
                            As she spoke, she met
  His eager hand, and all things did forget
  But for one moment, for too wise were they
  To cast the coming years of joy away;
  Then with her other hand her gown she raised
  And led him thence, and o'er her shoulder gazed
  At her old follower with a doubtful smile,
  As though to say, "Be wise, I know thy guile!"
    But slowly she behind the lovers walked,
  Muttering, "So be it! thou shalt not be balked
  Of thy desire; be merry! I am wise,
  Nor will I rob thee of thy Paradise
  For any other than myself; and thou
  May'st even happen to have had enow
  Of this new love, before I get the ring,
  And I may work for thee no evil thing."

    Now ye shall know that the old chronicle,
  Wherein I read all this, doth duly tell
  Of all the gallant deeds that Ogier did,
  There may ye read them; nor let me be chid
  If I therefore say little of these things,
  Because the thought of Avallon still clings
  Unto my heart, and scarcely can I bear
  To think of that long, dragging, useless year,
  Through which, with dulled and glimmering memory,
  Ogier was grown content to live and die
  Like other men; but this I have to say,
  That in the council chamber on that day
  The Old Knight showed his wisdom well enow,
  While fainter still with love the Queen did grow
  Hearing his words, beholding his grey eyes
  Flashing with fire of warlike memories;
  Yea, at the last he seemed so wise indeed
  That she could give him now the charge, to lead
  One wing of the great army that set out
  From Paris' gates, midst many a wavering shout,
  Midst trembling prayers, and unchecked wails and tears,
  And slender hopes and unresisted fears.

    Now ere he went, upon his bed he lay,
  Newly awakened at the dawn of day,
  Gathering perplexéd thoughts of many a thing,
  When, midst the carol that the birds did sing
  Unto the coming of the hopeful sun,
  He heard a sudden lovesome song begun
  'Twixt two young voices in the garden green,
  That seemed indeed the farewell of the Queen.


SONG.

                      HÆC.

          _In the white-flowered hawthorn brake,_
        _Love, be merry for my sake;_
        _Twine the blossoms in my hair,_
        _Kiss me where I am most fair--_
        _Kiss me, love! for who knoweth_
        _What thing cometh after death?_

                      ILLE.

          _Nay, the garlanded gold hair_
        _Hides thee where thou art most fair;_
        _Hides the rose-tinged hills of snow--_
        _Ah, sweet love, I have thee now!_
        _Kiss me, love! for who knoweth_
        _What thing cometh after death?_

                      HÆC

          _Shall we weep for a dead day,_
        _Or set Sorrow in our way?_
        _Hidden by my golden hair,_
        _Wilt thou weep that sweet days wear?_
        _Kiss me, love! for who knoweth_
        _What thing cometh after death?_

                      ILLE.

        _Weep, O Love, the days that flit,_
          _Now, while I can feel thy breath,_
        _Then may I remember it_
          _Sad and old, and near my death._
        _Kiss me, love! for who knoweth_
        _What thing cometh after death?_

  Soothed by the pleasure that the music brought
  And sweet desire, and vague and dreamy thought
  Of happiness it seemed to promise him,
  He lay and listened till his eyes grew dim,
  And o'er him 'gan forgetfulness to creep
  Till in the growing light he lay asleep,
  Nor woke until the clanging trumpet-blast
  Had summoned him all thought away to cast:
  Yet one more joy of love indeed he had
  Ere with the battle's noise he was made glad;
  For, as on that May morning forth they rode
  And passed before the Queen's most fair abode,
  There at a window was she waiting them
  In fair attire with gold in every hem,
  And as the Ancient Knight beneath her passed
  A wreath of flowering white-thorn down she cast,
  And looked farewell to him, and forth he set
  Thinking of all the pleasure he should get
  From love and war, forgetting Avallon
  And all that lovely life so lightly won;
  Yea, now indeed the earthly life o'erpast
  Ere on the loadstone rock his ship was cast
  Was waxing dim, nor yet at all he learned
  To 'scape the fire that erst his heart had burned.
  And he forgat his deeds, forgat his fame,
  Forgat the letters of his ancient name
  As one waked fully shall forget a dream,
  That once to him a wondrous tale did seem.

    Now I, though writing here no chronicle
  E'en as I said, must nathless shortly tell
  That, ere the army Rouen's gates could gain
  By a broad arrow had the King been slain,
  And helpless now the wretched country lay
  Beneath the yoke, until the glorious day
  When Ogier fell at last upon the foe,
  And scattered them as helplessly as though
  They had been beaten men without a name:
  So when to Paris town once more he came
  Few folk the memory of the King did keep
  Within their hearts, and if the folk did weep
  At his returning, 'twas for joy indeed
  That such a man had risen at their need
  To work for them so great deliverance,
  And loud they called on him for King of France.

    But if the Queen's heart were the more a-flame
  For all that she had heard of his great fame,
  I know not; rather with some hidden dread
  Of coming fate, she heard her lord was dead,
  And her false dream seemed coming true at last,
  For the clear sky of love seemed overcast
  With clouds of God's great judgments, and the fear
  Of hate and final parting drawing near.
    So now when he before her throne did stand
  Amidst the throng as saviour of the land,
  And she her eyes to his kind eyes did raise,
  And there before all her own love must praise;
  Then did she fall a-weeping, and folk said,
  "See, how she sorrows for the newly dead!
  Amidst our joy she needs must think of him;
  Let be, full surely shall her grief wax dim
  And she shall wed again."
                            So passed the year,
  While Ogier set himself the land to clear
  Of broken remnants of the heathen men,
  And at the last, when May-time came again,
  Must he be crowned King of the twice-saved land,
  And at the altar take the fair Queen's hand
  And wed her for his own. And now by this
  Had he forgotten clean the woe and bliss
  Of his old life, and still was he made glad
  As other men; and hopes and fears he had
  As others, and bethought him not at all
  Of what strange days upon him yet should fall
  When he should live and these again be dead.

    Now drew the time round when he should be wed,
  And in his palace on his bed he lay
  Upon the dawning of the very day:
  'Twixt sleep and waking was he, and could hear
  E'en at that hour, through the bright morn and clear,
  The hammering of the folk who toiled to make
  Some well-wrought stages for the pageant's sake,
  Though hardly yet the sparrows had begun
  To twitter o'er the coming of the sun,
  Nor through the palace did a creature move.
    There in the sweet entanglement of love
  Midst languid thoughts of greater bliss he lay,
  Remembering no more of that other day
  Than the hot noon remembereth of the night,
  Than summer thinketh of the winter white.
    In that sweet hour he heard a voice that cried,
  "Ogier, Ogier!" then, opening his eyes wide,
  And rising on his elbow, gazed around,
  And strange to him and empty was the sound
  Of his own name; "Whom callest thou?" he said
  "For I, the man who lie upon this bed,
  Am Charles of France, and shall be King to-day,
  But in a year that now is passed away
  The Ancient Knight they called me: who is this,
  Thou callest Ogier, then, what deeds are his?
  And who art thou?" But at that word a sigh,
  As of one grieved, came from some place anigh
  His bed-side, and a soft voice spake again,
  "This Ogier once was great amongst great men;
  To Italy a helpless hostage led;
  He saved the King when the false Lombard fled,
  Bore forth the Oriflamme and gained the day;
  Charlot he brought back, whom men led away,
  And fought a day-long fight with Caraheu.
  The ravager of Rome his right hand slew;
  Nor did he fear the might of Charlemaine,
  Who for a dreary year beset in vain
  His lonely castle; yet at last caught then,
  And shut in hold, needs must he come again
  To give an unhoped great deliverance
  Unto the burdened helpless land of France:
  Denmark he gained thereafter, and he wore
  The crown of England drawn from trouble sore;
  At Tyre then he reigned, and Babylon
  With mighty deeds he from the foemen won;
  And when scarce aught could give him greater fame,
  He left the world still thinking on his name.
    "These things did Ogier, and these things didst thou,
  Nor will I call thee by a new name now
  Since I have spoken words of love to thee--
  Ogier, Ogier, dost thou remember me,
  E'en if thou hast no thought of that past time
  Before thou camest to our happy clime?"

    As this was said, his mazed eyes saw indeed
  A lovely woman clad in dainty weed
  Beside his bed, and many a thought was stirred
  Within his heart by that last plaintive word,
  Though nought he said, but waited what should come
  "Love," said she, "I am here to bring thee home;
  Well hast thou done all that thou cam'st to do,
  And if thou bidest here, for something new
  Will folk begin to cry, and all thy fame
  Shall then avail thee but for greater blame;
  Thy love shall cease to love thee, and the earth
  Thou lovest now shall be of little worth
  While still thou keepest life, abhorring it
  Behold, in men's lives that so quickly flit
  Thus is it, how then shall it be with thee,
  Who some faint image of eternity
  Hast gained through me?--alas, thou heedest not!
  On all these changing things thine heart is hot--
  Take then this gift that I have brought from far,
  And then may'st thou remember what we are;
  The lover and the loved from long ago."
    He trembled, and more memory seemed to grow
  Within his heart as he beheld her stand,
  Holding a glittering crown in her right hand:
  "Ogier," she said, "arise and do on thee
  The emblems of thy worldly sovereignty,
  For we must pass o'er many a sea this morn."
    He rose, and in the glittering tunic worn
  By Charlemaine he clad himself, and took
  The ivory hand, that Charlemaine once shook
  Over the people's heads in days of old;
  Then on his feet he set the shoes of gold.
  And o'er his shoulders threw the mantle fair,
  And set the gold crown on his golden hair:
  Then on the royal chair he sat him down,
  As though he deemed the elders of the town
  Should come to audience; and in all he seemed
  To do these things e'en as a man who dreamed.

    And now adown the Seine the golden sun
  Shone out, as toward him drew that lovely one
  And took from off his head the royal crown,
  And, smiling, on the pillow laid it down
  And said, "Lie there, O crown of Charlemaine,
  Worn by a mighty man, and worn in vain,
  Because he died, and all the things he did
  Were changed before his face by earth was hid;
  A better crown I have for my love's head,
  Whereby he yet shall live, when all are dead
  His hand has helped." Then on his head she set
  The wondrous crown, and said, "Forget, forget!
  Forget these weary things, for thou hast much
  Of happiness to think of."
                              At that touch
  He rose, a happy light gleamed in his eyes;
  And smitten by the rush of memories,
  He stammered out, "O love! how came we here?
  What do we in this land of Death and Fear?
  Have I not been from thee a weary while?
  Let us return--I dreamed about the isle;
  I dreamed of other years of strife and pain,
  Of new years full of struggles long and vain."
    She took him by the hand and said, "Come, love,
  I am not changed;" and therewith did they move
  Unto the door, and through the sleeping place
  Swiftly they went, and still was Ogier's face
  Turned on her beauty, and no thought was his
  Except the dear returning of his bliss.
    But at the threshold of the palace-gate
  That opened to them, she awhile did wait,
  And turned her eyes unto the rippling Seine
  And said, "O love, behold it once again!"
  He turned, and gazed upon the city grey
  Smit by the gold of that sweet morn of May;
  He heard faint noises as of wakening folk
  As on their heads his day of glory broke;
  He heard the changing rush of the swift stream
  Against the bridge-piers. All was grown a dream
  His work was over, his reward was come,
  Why should he loiter longer from his home?

    A little while she watched him silently,
  Then beckoned him to follow with a sigh,
  And, raising up the raiment from her feet,
  Across the threshold stepped into the street;
  One moment on the twain the low sun shone,
  And then the place was void, and they were gone
  How I know not; but this I know indeed,
  That in whatso great trouble or sore need
  The land of France since that fair day has been,
  No more the sword of Ogier has she seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Such was the tale he told of Avallon.
  E'en such an one as in days past had won
  His youthful heart to think upon the quest;
  But to those old hearts nigh in reach of rest,
  Not much to be desired now it seemed--
  Perchance the heart that of such things had dreamed
  Had found no words in this death-laden tongue
  We speak on earth, wherewith they might be sung;
  Perchance the changing years that changed his heart
  E'en in the words of that old tale had part,
  Changing its sweet to bitter, to despair
  The foolish hope that once had glittered there--
  Or think, that in some bay of that far home
  They then had sat, and watched the green waves come
  Up to their feet with many promises;
  Or the light wind midst blossom-laden trees,
  In the sweet Spring had weighted many a word
  Of no worth now, and many a hope had stirred
  Long dead for ever.
                      Howsoe'er that be
  Among strange folk they now sat quietly,
  As though that tale with them had nought to do,
  As though its hopes and fears were something new
    But though, indeed, the outworn, dwindled band
  Had no tears left for that once longed-for land,
  The very wind must moan for their decay,
  And from the sky, grown dull, and low, and grey,
  Cold tears must fall upon the lonely field,
  That such fair golden hopes erewhile did yield;
  And on the blackening woods, wherein the doves
  Sat silent now, forgetful of their loves.
  Yet, since a little life at least was left,
  They were not yet of every joy bereft,
  For long ago was past the agony,
  Midst which they found that they indeed must die;
  And now well-nigh as much their pain was past
  As though death's veil already had been cast
  Over their heads--so, midst some little mirth,
  They watched the dark night hide the gloomy earth.




  Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO
  Edinburgh & London




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Page "118" has been corrected to "112" in the Contents.

Some quotes are opened with marks but are not closed and, since they
require interpretation, have been left open as presented in the original
text.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Earthly Paradise, by William Morris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EARTHLY PARADISE ***

***** This file should be named 30332-8.txt or 30332-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/3/30332/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Henry Craig, Stephanie Eason,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



%20 



e . 



uu %i 



X 



/ 



/ f£*f 





^e^u^tx/ 




<^c± 



4) 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



MR. WILLIAM MORRIS'S WORKS. i 

— ♦— ■ 

THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A Collection of Tales in Verse. 

Parts I. and II. Prologue, March, April, May, June, July, and August, 

containing the Stories of — 

The Wanderers. The Writing on the Image. 

Atalanta's Race. The Love of Alcbstis. 

The Man born to be King. The Lady of the Land. 

The Doom of King Acrisius. The Son of Crcesus. 

The Proud King. The Watching of the Falcon. 

Cupid and Psyche. Pygmalion and the Image. 

Ogier the Dane. 

Part III. September, October, and November, containing the 

Stories of — 

The Death of Paris. The Man who never laughed 

The Land East of the Sun and again. 

West of the Moon. The Story of Rhodope. i 

Accontius and Cydippe. The Lovers of Gudrun. 

Part IV. December, January, and February, Epilogue and L'Envoi, 

containing the Stories of — i 

The Golden Apples. The Ring given to Venus. ' 

The Fostering of Aslaug. Bellerophon in Lycia. 

Bellerophon at Argos. The Hill of Venus. 

COMPLETE IN THREE VOLUMES. 

Crown 8vo Edition. Green vellum cloth, bevelled boards, gilt top, price $9.00. 
x6mo Edition. Green and wine vellum cloth, bevelled boards, gilt top, 

price $6.75. ' 

Popular Edition. i6mO} cloth, neat, price $4.50. 

Sets of Mr. Morris's Works, containing " The Earthly Paradise " and " The 
Life and Death of Jason," 4 vols., i6mo, cloth, gilt top, price $8.50 ; 4 vols., 
i6mo, cloth, neat, price $6.00. 



Sixth Edition. i6mo. Cloth, price $1.50; gilt top, price J 1.75. 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON. 

A Poem, in Seventeen Books. 



IN PREPARATION. 
A New Edition of 

THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE, 

And other Early Poems, 
With the addition of some Pieces not hitherto collected. 



Mailed, postpaid, by the Publishers, 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston. 



THE 



EARTHLY PARADISE 



A POEM. 



By WILLIAM MORRIS, 

AUTHOR OF " THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON." 



PART IV. 



BOSTON: 

ROBERTS BROTHERS. 

1871. 




author's edition. 



CAMBRIDGE : 
PRESS OP JOHN WILSON AND SON. 



A TABLE OF CONTENTS. 





Page 

DECEMBER 2 

The Golden Apples 5 

The Fostering of Aslaug 28 

JANUARY 80 

Bellerophon at Argos 83 

The Ring given to Venus 165 

FEBRUARY 210 

Bellerophon in Lycia 213 

The Hill op Venus 335 



Epilogue 393 

L'envoi 397 



/ 1 



I 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



DECEMBER, JANUARY, FEBRUARY. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



DECEMBER. 

T^VEAD lonely night and all streets quiet now, 

-*-^ Thin o'er the moon the hindmost cloud swims past 

Of that great rack that brought us up the snow ; 

On earth strange shadows o'er the snow are cast ; 

Pale stars, bright moon, swift cloud, make heaven so vast 

That earth left silent by the wind of night 

Seems shrunken 'neath the gray unmeasured height 

Ah ! through the hush the looked-for midnight clangs ! 
And then, e'en while its last stroke's solemn drone 
In the cold air by unlit windows hangs, 
Out break the bells above the year foredone, 
Change, kindness lost, love left unloved alone ; 
Till their, despairing sweetness makes thee deem 
Thou once wert loved, if but amidst a dream. 

O thou who clingest still to life and love, 
Though nought of good, no God thou mayst discern, 
Though nought that is, thine utmost woe can move, 
Though no soul knows wherewith thine heart doth yearn, 
Yet, since thy weary lips no curse can learn, M 

Cast no least thing thou lovedst once away, * 

Since yet perchance thine eyes shall see the day. 



DECEMBER. 



T"YECEMBER came, with mirth men needs must make 

-*-^ E'en for the empty days and leisures' sake 

That earth's cold leaden sleep doth bring ; so there 

Our elders sat within the guest-hall fair, 

Not looking older for the snow without ; 

Cheery enough ; remembering not old doubt, 

A gnawing pain once, grown too hard to bear, 

And so cast by ; not thinking of old fear, 

That conquering once, e'en with its victory 

Must fade away, and, like all things else, die. 

Not thinking of much else than that they had 

Enough of life to make them somewhat glad 

When all went well with them. 

Now so it fell 
That mariners were there, who 'gan to tell 
Mishaps betid upon the winter seas, 
Which set some younger men amidst of these 
To ask the Wanderers of their voyage vain, 
As knowing scarce the tale thereof. Small pain 
It gave them now to answer : yet belike 
On the old men, their hosts, the thing did strike 
In jarring wise, this turning o'er and o'er 
Of memories once so bitter sharp and sore : 
Wherefore at last an elder said, " Let be, 
My masters ! if about the troublous sea 
Ye needs must hear, hearken a tale once told 
By kin of ours in the dim days of old, 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Whose thoughts when turning to a peaceful home 

Unto this very west of ours must come — 

— Scarce causelessly meseems when all is said, 

And I remember that years bow my head, 

And not the trouble of those days of war, 

Of loss and wrong that in old stories are.' 1 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 

This tale tells of the voyage of a ship of Tyre, that, against the will of the 
shipmen, bore Hercules to an unknown land of the West, that he might 
accomplish a task laid on him by the Fates. 

A S many as the leaves fall from the tree, 
-^** From the world's life the years are fallen away 
Since King Eurystheus sat in majesty 
In fair Mycenae ; midmost of whose day 
It once befell that in a quiet bay 
A ship of Tyre was swinging nigh the shore, 
Her folk for sailing handling rope and oar. 

Fresh was the summer morn, a soft wind stole 
Down from the sheep-browsed slopes the cliffs that 

crowned, 
And ruffled lightly the long gleaming roll 
Of the peaceful sea, and bore along the sound 
Of shepherd-folk and sheep and questing hound ; 
For in the first dip of the hillside there 
Lay bosomed 'mid its trees a homestead fair. 

Amid regrets for last night, when the moon, 
Risen on the soft dusk, shone on maidens' feet 
Brushing the gold-heart lilies to the tune 
Of pipes complaining, o'er the grass down-beat 
That mixed with dewy flowers its odor sweet, 
The shipmen labored, till the sail unfurled 
Swung round the prow to meet another world. 



6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But ere the anchor had come home, a shout 
Rang from the strand, as though the ship were hailed. 
Whereat the master bade them stay, in doubt 
That they without some needful thing had sailed ; 
When, lo ! from where the cliffs' steep gray sides failed 
Into a ragged stony slip, came twain 
Who seemed in haste the ready keel to gain. 

Soon they drew nigh, and he who first came down 
Unto the surf was a man huge of limb, 
Gray- eyed, with crisp-curled hair 'twixt black and brown ; 
Who had a lion's skin cast over him, 
So wrought with gold that the fell showed but dim 
Betwixt the threads, and in his hand he bore 
A mighty club with bands of steel done o'er. 

Panting there followed him a gray old man, 
Bearing a long staff, clad in gown of blue, 
Feeble of aspect, hollow-cheeked and wan, 
Who, when unto his fellow's side he drew, 
Said faintly : " Now, do that which thou shouldst do ; 
This is the ship." Then in the other's eye 
A smile gleamed, and he spake out merrily : 

" Masters, folk tell me that ye make for Tyre, 
And after that still nearer to the sun ; 
And since Fate bids me look to die by fire, 
Fain am I, ere my worldly day be done, 
To know what from earth's hottest can be won ; 
And this old man, my kinsman, would with me. 
How say ye, will ye bear us o'er the sea ? " 




r 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 

" What is thy name ? " the master said : " And know 
That we are merchants, and for nought give nought ; 
What wilt thou pay? — thou seem'st full rich, I trow." 
The old man muttered, stooped adown and caught 
At something in the sand : " E'en so I thought," 
The younger said, " when I set out from home — 
As to my name, perchance in days to come 

" Thou shalt know that — but have heed, take this toy, 
And call me the Strong Man." And as he spake 
. The master's deep-brown eyes 'gan gleam with joy, 
For from his arm a huge ring did he take, 
And cast it on the deck, where it did break 
A water-jar, and in the wet shards lay 
Golden, and gleaming like the end of day. 

But the old man held out a withered hand, 
Wherein there shone two pearls most great and fair, 
And said, " If any nigher I might stand, 
Then might'st thou see the things I give thee here — 
And for name — a many names I bear, 
But call me Shepherd of the Shore this tide, 
And for more knowledge with a good will bide." 

From one to the other turned the master's eyes ; 
The Strong Man laughed as at some hidden" jest, 
And wild doubts in the shipman's heart did rise ; 
But thinking on the thing, he deemed it best 
To bid them come aboard, and take such rest 
As they might have of the untrusty sea, 
'Mid men who trusty fellows still should be. 



8 THE BARTHLT PARADISE. 

Then no more words the Strong Man made, but straight 
Caught up the elder in his arms, and so, 
Making no whit of all that added weight, 
Strode to the ship, right through the breakers low, 
And catching at the rope that they did throw 
Out toward his hand, swung up into the ship : 
Then did the master let the hawser slip. 

The shapely prow cleft the wet mead and green. 
And wondering drew the shipmen round to gaze 
Upon those limbs, the mightiest ever seen ; 
And many deemed it no light thing to face - 
The splendor of his even, though they did blaze 
With no wrath now, no hate for them to dread, 
As seaward 'twixt the summer isles they sped. 

Freshened the wind, but ever fair it blew 
Unto the south-east ; but as failed the land, 
Unto the plunging prow the Strong Man drew, 
And, silent, gazing with wide eyes did stand, 
As though his heart found rest ; but 'mid the band 
Of shipmen in the stern the old man sat, 
Telling them tales that no man there forgat. 

As one who had beheld, he told them there 
Of the sweet singer, who, for his song's sake, 
The dolphins back from choking death did bear ; 
How in the mid sea did the vine outbreak 
O'er that ill bark when Bacchus 'gan to wake ; 
How anigh Cyprus, ruddy with the rose 
The cold sea grew as any June-loved close ; 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 

While on the flowery shore all things alive 
Grew Jfeint with sense of birth of some delight, 
And the nymphs waited trembling there, to give 
Glad welcome to the glory of that sight : 
He paused then, ere he told how, wild and white, 
Rose ocean, breaking o'er a race accurst, 
A world once good, now come unto its worst 

And then he smiled, and said, * And yet ye won, 
Ye men, and tremble not on days like these, 
Nor think with what a mind Prometheus' son 
Beheld the last of the torn reeling trees 
From high Parnassus : slipping through the seas 
Ye never think, ye men-folk, how ye seem 
From down below through the green waters' gleam." 

Dusk was it now when these last words he said, 
And little of his visage might they see, 
But o'er their hearts stole vague and troublous dread, 
They knew not why ; yet ever quietly 
They sailed that night ; nor might a morning be 
Fairer than was the next morn ; and they went 
Along their due course after their intent. 

The fourth day, about sunrise, from the mast 
The watch cried out he saw Phoenician land ; 
Whereat the Strong Man on the elder cast 
A look askance, and he straight took his stand 
Anigh the prow, and gazed beneath his hand 
Upon the low sun and the scarce-seen shore, 
Till cloud-flecks rose, and gathered and drew o'er. 



io THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The morn grown cold ; then small rain 'gan to fall, 
And all the wind dropped dead, and hearts of men 
Sank, and their bark seemed helpless now and small ; 
Then suddenly the wind 'gan moan again ; 
Sails flapped, and ropes beat wild about ; and then 
Down came the great east wind ; and the ship ran 
Straining, heeled o'er, through seas all changed and wan. 

Westward, scarce knowing night from day, they drave 
Through sea and sky grown one ; the Strong Man wrought 
With mighty hands, and seemed a god to save ; 
But on the prow, heeding all weather nought, 
The elder stood, nor any prop he sought, 
But swayed to the ship's wallowing, as on wings 
He there were set above the wrack of things. 

And westward still they drave ; and if they saw 
Land upon either side, as on they sped, 
'Twas but as faces in a dream may draw 
Anigh, and fade, and leave nought in their stead ; 
And in the shipmen's hearts grew heavy dread 
To sick despair ; they deemed they should drive on 
Till the world's edge and empty space were won. 

But 'neath the Strong Man's eyes e'en as they might 
They toiled on still ; and he sang to the wind, 
And spread his arms to meet the waters white, 
As o'er the deck they tumbled, making blind 
The brine-drenched shipmen ; nor with eye unkind 
He gazed up at the lightning ; nor would frown 
When o'er the wet waste Jove's bolt rattled down. 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. u 

And they, who at the last had come to think 
Their guests were very gods, with all their fear 
Feared nought belike that their good ship would sink 
Amid the storm ; but rather looked to hear 
The last moan of the wind that them should bear 
Into the windless stream of ocean gray, 
Where they should float till dead was every day* 

Yet their fear mocked them ; for the storm 'gan die 
About the tenth day, though unto the west 
They drave on still ; soon fair and quietly 
The morn would break ; and though amid their rest 
Nought but long evil wandering seemed the best 
That they might hope for ; still, despite their dread, 
Sweet was the quiet sea and goodlihead . 

Of the bright sun at last come back again ; 
And as the days passed, less and less fear grew, 
If without cause, till faded all their pain ; 
And they 'gan turn unto their guests anew, 
Yet durst ask nought of what that evil drew 
Upon their heads ; or of returning speak. 
Happy they felt, but listless, spent, and weak. 

And now as at the first the elder was, 
And sat and told them tales of yore agone ; 
But ever the Strong Man up and down would pass 
About the deck, or on the prow alone 
Would stand and stare out westward ; and still on 
Through a fair summer sea they went, nor thought 
Of what would come when these days turned to nought 



12 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And now when twenty days were well passed o'er 
They made a new land ; cloudy mountains high 
Rose from the sea at first ; then a green shore 
Spread fair below them : as they drew anigh 
No sloping, stony strand could they espy, 
And no surf breaking ; the green sea and wide 
Wherethrough they slipped was driven by no tide. 

Dark fell ere they might set their eager feet 
Upon the shore ; but night-long their ship lay 
As in a deep stream, by the blossoms sweet 
That flecked the grass whence flowers ne'er passed away. 
But when the cloud-barred east brought back the day, 
And turned the western mountain-tops to gold, 
Fresh fear the shipmen in their bark did hold. 

For as a dream seemed all ; too fair for those 
Who needs must die ; moreover they could see, 
A furlong off, 'twixt apple-tree and rose, 
A brazen wall that gleamed out wondrously 
In the young sun, and seemed right long to be ; 
And memory of all marvels lay upon 
Their shrinking hearts now this sWeet place was won. 

But when unto the nameless guests they turned, 
Who stood together nigh the plank shot out 
Shoreward, within the Strong Man's eyes there burned 
A wild light, as the other one in doubt 
He eyed a moment ; then with a great shout 
Leaped into the blossomed grass ; the echoes rolled 
Back from the hills, harsh still and over-bold. 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 13 

Slowly the old man followed him, and still 
The crew held back : they knew now they were brought 
Over the sea the purpose to fulfil 

Of these strange men ; and in their hearts they thought, 
" Perchance we yet shall live, if, middling nought 
With dreams, we bide here till these twain come back ; 
But prying eyes the fire-blast seldom lack." 

Yet 'mongst them were two fellows bold and young, 
Who, looking each upon the. other's face, 
Their hearts to meet the unknown danger strung, 
And went ashore, and at a gentle pace 
Followed the strangers, who unto the place 
Where the wall gleamed had turned ; peace and desire 
Mingled together in their hearts, as nigher 

They drew unto that wall, and dulled their fear : 
Fair wrought it was, as though with bricks of brass ; 
And images upon its face there were, 
Stories of things a long while come to pass : 
Nor that alone — as looking in a glass 
Its maker knew the tales of what should be, 
And wrought them there for bird and beast to see. 

So on they went ; the many birds sang sweet 
Through all that blossomed thicket from above, 
And unknown flowers bent down before their feet ; 
The very air, cleft by the gray-winged dove, 
Throbbed with sweet scent, and smote their souls with 

love. 
Slowly they went till those twain stayed before 
A strangely-wrought and iron-covered door. 



i 4 THE BARTHLT PARADISE. 

They stayed, too, till o'er noise of wind, and bird, 
And falling flower, there rang a mighty shout 
As the Strong Man his steel-bound club upreared, 
And drave it 'gainst the hammered iron stout, 
Where 'neath his blows flew bolt and rivet out, 
Till shattered on the ground the great door lay, 
And into the guarded place bright poured the day. 

The Strong Man entered, but his fellow stayed 
Leaning against a tree-trunk as they deemed. 
They faltered now, and yet all things being weighed 
Went on again ; and thought they must have dreamed 
Of the old man, for now the sunlight streamed 
Full on the tree he had been leaning on, 
And him they saw not go, yet was he gone ~ 

Only a slim green lizard flitted there 
Amidst the dry leaves ; him they noted nought, 
But, trembling, through the doorway 'gan to peer, 
And still of strange and dreadful saw not aught, 
Only a garden fair beyond all thought. 
And there, 'twixt sun and shade, the Strong Man went 
On some long-sought-for end belike intent. 

They 'gan to follow down a narrow way 
Of green-sward that the lilies trembled o'er, 
And whereon thick the scattered rose-leaves lay ; 
But a great wonder weighed upon them sore, ( 

And well they thought they should return no more ; 
Yet scarce a pain that seemed ; they looked to meet ' 

Before they died things strange and fair and sweet. 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 15 

So still to right and left the Strong Man thrust 
The blossomed boughs, and passed on steadily, 
As though his hardy heart he well did trust, 
Till in a while he gave a joyous cry, 
And hastened on, as though the end drew nigh ; 
And women's voices then they deemed they heard, 
Mixed with a noise that made desire afeard. 

Yet through sweet scents and sounds on did they bear 
Their panting hearts, till the path ended now 
In a wide space of green ; a streamlet clear 
From out a marble basin there did flow, 
And close by that a slim-trunked tree did grow, 
And on a bough low o'er the water cold 
There hung three apples of red-gleaming gold. 

About the tree, new risen e'en now to meet 
The shining presence of that mighty one, 
Three damsels stood, naked from head to feet 
Save for the glory of their hair, where sun 
And shadow flickered, while the wind did run 
Through the gray leaves o'erhead, and shook the grass 
Where nigh their feet the wandering bee did pass. 

But 'midst their delicate limbs and all around 
The tree-roots, gleaming blue black could they see 
The spires of a great serpent, that, enwound 
About the smooth bole, looked forth threateningly, 
With glittering eyes and raised crest, o'er the three 
Fair heads fresh crowned, and hissed above the speech 
Wherewith they murmured softly each to each. 



16 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Now the Strong Man amid the green space stayed, 
And, leaning on his club, with eager eyes 
But brow yet smooth, in voice yet friendly said : 
" O daughters of old Hesperus the Wise, 
Well have ye held your guard here ; but time tries 
The very will of gods, and to my hand 
Must give this day the gold fruit of your land." 

Then spake the first maid — sweet as the west wind 
Amidst of summer noon her sweet voice was : 
" Ah, me ! what knows this place of changing mind 
Of men or gods ? here shall long ages pass, 
And clean forget thy feet upon the grass, 
Thy hapless bones amid the fruitful mould ; 
Look at thy death envenomed swift and cold ! " 

Hiding new flowers, the dull coils, as she spake, 
Moved near her limbs : but then the second one, 
In such a voice as when the morn doth wake 
To song of birds, said, " When the world foredone 
Has moaned its last, still shall we dwell alone 
Beneath this bough, and have no tales to tell 
Of things deemed great that on the earth befell." 

■ * 
Then spake the third, in voice as of the flute 
That wakes the maiden to her wedding morn : 
" If any god should gain our golden fruit, 
Its curse would make his deathless life forlorn. 
Lament thou, then, that ever thou wert born ; 
Yet all things, changed by joy or loss or pain, 
To what they were shall change and change again." 



r 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 17 

i " So be it," he said, " the Fates that drive me on 

[ Shall slay me or shall save ; blessing or curse 

That followeth after when the thing is won 
Shall make my work no better now nor worse ; 
And if it be that the world's heart must nurse 
Hatred against me, how then shall I choose 
To leave or take ? — let your dread servant loose ! " 

E'en therewith, like a pillar of black smoke, 
Swift, shifting ever, drave the worm at him ; 
In deadly silence now that nothing broke, 
Its folds were writhing round him trunk and limb, 
Until his glittering gear was nought but dim 
E'en in that sunshine, while his head and side 
And breast the fork-tongued, pointed muzzle tried. 

Closer the coils drew, quicker all about 
The forked tongue darted, and yet stiff he stood, 
E'en as an oak that sees the straw flare out 
And lick its ancient bole for little good : 
Until the godlike fury of his mood 
Burst from his heart in one great shattering cry, 
And rattling down the loosened coils did lie ; 

And from the torn throat and crushed dreadful head 
Forth flowed a stream of blood along the grass ; 
Bright in the sun he stood above the dead, 
Panting with fury ; yet as ever was 
The wont of him, soon did his anger pass, 
And with a happy smile at last he turned 
To where the apples o'er the water burned. 



18 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Silent and moveless ever stood the three ; 
No change came o'er their faces, as his hand 
Was stretched aloft unto the sacred tree ; 
Nor shrank they aught aback, though he did stand 
So close that tresses of their bright hair, fanned 
By the sweet garden breeze, lay light on him, 
And his gold fell brushed by them breast and limb. 

He drew adown the wind-stirred bough, and took 
The apples thence ; then let it spring away, 
And from his brow the dark hair backward shook, 
And said : " O sweet, O fair, and shall this day 
A curse upon my life henceforward lay — 
This day alone ? Methinks of doming life 
Somewhat I know, with all its loss and strife. 

" But this I know, at least : the world shall wend 
Upon its way, and, gathering joy and grief 
And deeds done, bear them with it to the end ; 
So shall it, though I lie as last year's leaf 
Lies 'neath a summer tree, at least receive 
My life gone by, and store it, with the gain 
That men alive call striving, wrong, and pain. 

"So for my part I rather bless than curse, 
And bless this fateful land ; good be with it ; 
Nor for this deadly thing's death is it worse, 
Nor for the lack of gold ; still shall ye sit 
Watching the swallow o'er the daisies flit ; 
Still shall your wandering limbs ere day is done 
Make dawn desired by the sinking sun. 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 19 

" And now, behold ! in memory of all this 
Take ye this girdle that shall waste and fade 
As fadeth not your fairness and your bliss, 
That when hereafter 'mid the blossoms laid 
Ye talk of days and men now nothing made, 
Ye may remember how the Theban man, 
The son of Jove, came o'er the waters wan." 

Their faces changed not aught for all they heard ; 
As though all things now fully told out were, 
They gazed upon him without any word : 
Ah ! craving kindness, hope, or loving care, 
Their fairness scarcely could have made more fair, 
As with the apples folded in his fell 
He went, to do more deeds for folk to tell. 

Now as the girdle on the ground was cast, 
Those fellows turned and hurried toward the door ; 
And as across its broken leaves they passed 
The old man saw they not, e'en as before ; 
But an unearthed blind mole bewildered sore 
Was wandering there in fruitless, aimless wise, 
That got small heed from their full-sated eyes. 

Swift gat they to their anxious folk ; nor had 
More time than just to say, " Be of good cheer, 
For in our own land may we yet be glad," 
When they beheld the guests a-drawing near; 
And much bewildered the two fellows were 
To see the old man, and must even deem 
That they should see things stranger than a dream. 



20 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

But when they were aboard the elder cried, 
" Up sails, my masters, fair now is the wind ; 
Nor good it is too long here to abide, 
Lest what ye may not loose your souls should bind." 
And as he spake, the tall trees left behind 
Stirred with the rising land-wind, and the crew, 
Joyous thereat, the hawsers shipward drew. 

Swift sped the ship, and glad at heart were all, 
And the Strong Man was merry with the rest, 
And from the elder's lips no word did fall 
That did not seem to promise all the best ; 
Yet with a certain awe were men oppressed, 
And felt as if their inmost hearts were bare, 
And each man's secret babbled through the air. 

Still oft the old man sat with them and told 
Tales of past time, as on the outward way ; 
And now would they the face of him behold 
And deem it changed ; the years that on him lay 
Seemed to grow nought, and no more wan and gray 
He looked,- but ever glorious, wise and strong, 
As though no lapse of time for him were long. 

At last, when six days through the kindly sea 
Their keel had slipped, he said : " Come hearken now, 
For so it is that things fare wondrously 
E'en in these days ; and I a tale can show 
That, told by you unto your sons shall grow 
A marvel of the days that are to come : 
Take heed and tell it when ye reach your home. 



J 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 

" Yet living in the world a man there is 
Men call the Theban King Amphitryon's son, 
Although perchance a greater sire was his ; 
But certainly his lips have hung upon 
Alcmena's breasts : great deeds this man hath won 
Already, for his name is Hercules, 
And e'en ye Asian folk have heard of these. 

" Now ere the moon, this eve in his last wane, 
Was born, this Hercules, the fated thrall 
Of King Eurystheus, was straight bid to gain 
Gifts from a land whereon no foot doth fall 
Of mortal man, beyond the misty wall 
Of unknown waters ; pensively he went 
Along the sea on his hard life intent. 

" And at the dawn he came into a bay 
Where the sea, ebbed far down, left wastes of sand, 
Walled from the green earth by great cliffs and gray ; 
Then he looked up, and wondering there did stand, 
For strange things lay in slumber on the strand ; 
Strange counterparts of what the firm earth hath 
Lay scattered all about his weary path : 

" Sea-lions and sea-horses and sea-kine, 
Sea-boars, sea-men strange-skinned, of wondrous hair ; 
And in their midst a man who seemed divine 
For changeless eld, and round him women fair, 
Clad in the sea-webs glassy green and clear, 
With gems on head and girdle, limb and breast, 
Such as earth knoweth not among her best 



21 



22 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" A moment at the fair and wondrous sight 
He stared ; then, since the heart in him was good, 
He went about with careful steps and light 
Till o'er the sleeping sea-god now he stood ; 
And if the white-foot maids had stirred his blood 
As he passed by, now other thoughts had place 
Within his heart when he beheld that face. 

" For Nereus now he knew, who knows all things ; 
And to himself he said, < If I prevail, 
Better than by some god-wrought eagle-wings 
Shall I be holpen ; ' then he cried out : « Hail, 
O Nereus ! lord of shifting hill and dale ! 
Arise and wrestle ; I am Hercules ! 
Not soon now shalt thou meet the ridgy seas.' 

" And mightily he cast himself on him ; 
And Nereus cried out shrilly ; and straightway 
That sleeping crowd, fair maid with half-hid limb, 
Strange man and green-haired beast, made no delay, 
But glided down into the billows gray, 
And, by the lovely sea embraced, were gone, 
While they two wrestled on the sea-strand lone. 

" Soon found the sea-god that his bodily might 
Was nought in dealing with Jove's dear one there ; 
And soon he 'gan to use his magic sleight : 
Into a lithe leopard, and a hugging bear, 
He turned him ; then the smallest fowl of air 
The straining arms of Hercules must hold, 
And then a mud-born wriggling eel and cold. 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 23 

" Then as the firm hands mastered this, forth brake 
A sudden rush of waters all around. 
Blinding and choking : then a thin green snake 
With golden eyes ; then o'er the shell-strewn ground 
Forth stole a fly, the least that may be found ; 
Then earth and heaven seemed wrapped in one huge 

flame, 
But from the midst thereof a voice there came : 

" ' Kinsman and stout-heart, thou hast won the day, 
Nor to my grief: what wouldst thou have of me ? ' 
And therewith to an old man small and gray 
Faded the roaring flame, who wearily 
Sat down upon the sand and said, * Let be ! 
I know thy tale ; worthy of help thou art ; 
Come now, a short way hence will there depart 

" * A ship of Tyre for the warm southern seas, 
Come we a-board ; according to my will 
Her way shall be.' Then up rose Hercules, 
Merry of face, though hot and panting still ; 
But the fair summer day his heart did fill 
With all delight ; and so forth went the twain, 
And found those men desirous of all gain. 

" Ah, for these gainful men — somewhat indeed 
Their sails are rent, their bark beat ; kin and friend 
Are wearying for them ; yet a friend in need 
They yet shall gain, if at their journey's end, 
Upon the last ness where the wild goats wend 
To lick the salt-washed stones, a house they raise 
Bedight with gold in kindly Nereus' praise." 



24 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Breathless they waited for these latest words, 
That like the soft wind of the gathering night 
Were grown to be : about the mast flew birds 
Making their moan, hovering long-winged and white ; 
And now before their straining anxious sight 
The old man faded out into the air, 
And from his place flew forth a sea-mew fair. 

Then to the Mighty Man, Alcmena's son, 
With yearning hearts they turned till he should speak. 
And he spake softly : " Nought ill have ye done 
In helping me to find what I did seek : 
The world made better by me knows if weak 
My hand and heart are : but now, light the fire 
Upon the prow and worship the gray sire." 

So did they ; and such gifts as there they had 
Gave unto Nereus ; yea, and sooth to say, 
Amid the tumult of their hearts made glad, 
Had honored Hercules in e'en such way ; 
But he laughed out amid them, and said, " Nay, 
Not yet the end is come ; nor have I yet 
Bowed down before vain longing and regret 

" It may be — who shall tell, when I go back 
There whence I came, and looking down behold 
The place that my once eager heart shall lack, 
And all my dead desires a-lying cold, 
But I may have the might then to enfold 
The hopes of brave men in my heart ? — but long life 
Lies before first with its change and wrong." 



THE GOLDEN APPLES. 2$ 

So fair along the watery ways they sped 
In happy wise, nor failed of their return ; 
Nor failed in ancient Tyre the ways to tread, 
Teaching their tale to whomsoe'er would learn, 
Nor failed at last the flesh of beasts to burn 
In Nereus' house, turned toward the bright day's end 
On the last ness, round which the wild goats wend 



26 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



HE made an end, and gazed about the place, 
With rest enow upon his ancient face, 
And smiling ; but to some the tale did seem 
Like to the middle of some pleasant dream, 
Which, waked from, leaves upon the troubled mind 
A sense of something ill that lurked behind, 
If morn had given due time to dream it out. 

- Yet as the women stirred, and went about 
The board with flask and beaker, and the scent 
Of their soft raiment 'mid the feasters went, 
The hill-side sun of autumn-tide at least 
Seemed to come back unto their winter feast ; 
Rest, half remembering time past, did they win, 
And somewhat surely wrought the tale therein. 



DECEMBER. 27 



TN late December shone the westering sun 
■"■ Through frosty haze of the day nearly done, 
Without the hall wherein our elders were : 
Within, the firelight gleamed on raiment fair, 
And heads far fairer ; because youth and maid 
Midwinter words of hope that day had said 
Before the altars ; and were come at last, 
No worse for snowy footways over-past, 
Or for the east wind upon cheek and brow, 
Their fairness to the ancient folk to show ; 
And, dance and song being done, at end of day, 
With ears pricked up, amid the furs they lay, 
To have reward of tale for sound and sight 
So given erewhile. 

The flickering firelight, 
And the late sun still streaming through the haze, 
Made the hall meet enow for tale of days 
So long past over : nigh the cheery flame 
A wanderer sat, and a long sunbeam came 
On to his knees, then to the hearth fell down. 
There in the silence, with thin hands- and brown 
Folded together, and a dying smile 
Upon his face, he sat a little while, 
Then somewhat raised his bright eyes, and began 
To name his people's best beloved man. 



1 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 

ARGUMENT. 

Aslaug, the daughter of Sigurd who slew the Dragon, and of BrynhUd 
whom he loved, lost all her friends and kin, and was nourished amid great 
misery ; yet in the end her fortune, her glory, and her beauty prevailed, 
and she came to mighty estate. 

A FAIR tale might I tell to you 
■**■ Of Sigurd, who the dragon slew 
Upon the murder-wasted heath, 
And how love led him unto death, 
Through strange wild ways of joy and pain ; 
Then such a story should ye gain, 
If I could tell it all aright, 
As well might win you some delight 
From out the wofullest of days ; 
But now have I no heart to raise 
That mighty sorrow laid asleep, 
That love so sweet, so strong and deep, 
That as ye hear the wonder told 
In those few strenuous words of old, 
The whole world seems to rend apart 
When heart is torn away from heart. 
But the world lives still, and to-day 
The green Rhine wendeth on its way 
Over the unseen golden curse 
That drew its lords to worse and worse, 
Till that last dawn in Atli's hall, 
When the red flame flared over all, 
Lighting the leaden, sunless sea 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 29 

Yet so much told of this must be, 
That Sigurd, while his youth was bright 
And unstained, 'midst the first delight 
Of Brynhild's love — that him did gain 
All joy, all woe, and very bane — 
Begat on her a woman-child. 
In hope she bore the maid, and smiled 
When of its father's face she thought ; 
But when sad time the change had brought, 
And she to Gunnar's house must go, 
She, thinking how she might bestow 
The memory of that lovely eve, 
That morn o'er-sweet, the child did leave 
With Heimir, her old foster-sire, 
A mighty lord ; then, with the fire 
Of her old love still smouldering, 
And brooding over many a thing, 
She went unto her life and death. 
Nought, as I said, the story saith 
Of all the wrong and love that led 
Her feet astray : together dead 
They lie now on their funeral pile, 
And now the little one doth smile 
Upon the glittering war-array 
Of the men come the sooth to say 
To Heimir of that bitter end. 

Silent he stared till these did wend 
Into the hall to fire and board. 
Then by the porch without a word 
Long time he sat : then he arose 
And drew his sword, and hard and close 



30 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Gazed on the thin-worn edge, and said : 

" Smooth cheeks, sweet hands, and art thou dead ? 

me thy glory ! Woe is me ! 

1 thought once more thine eyes to see — 
Had I been young three years agone, 
When thou a maiden burd-alone, 
Hadst eighteen summers ! " 

As he spake, 
He gat him swiftly to the brake 
Of thorn-trees nigh his house : and some, 
When calm once more he sat at home, 
Deemed he had wept : but no word more 
He spake thereof. 

A few days more, 
And now alone he oft would be 
Within his smithy ; needfully 
He guarded it, that none came in ; 
Nor marvelled men ; " For he doth win 
Some work of craftsmanship," said they, 
" And such before on many a day 
Hath been his wont." 

So it went on 
That a long while he wrought alone ; 
But on the tenth day bore in there 
Aslaug, the little maiden fair, 
Three winters old ; and then the thing 
A little set folk marvelling ; 
Yet none the less in nought durst they 
To watch him. So to end of day 
Time drew, and still unto the hall 
He came not, and a dread 'gan fall 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 31 

Upon his household, lest some ill 
The quiet of their lives should kill ; 
And so it fell that the next morn 
They found them of their lord forlorn, 
And Aslaug might they see no more ; 
Wide open was the smithy door, 
The forge a-cold, and hammering tools 
Lay on the floor, with woodwright's rules, 
And chips and shavings of hard wood. 
Moreover, when they deemed it good 
To seek for him, nought might they do, 
The tale says, for so dark it grew 
Over all ways, that no man might 
Know the green meads from water white. 
So back they wended sorrowfully, 
And still most like it seemed to be, 
That Odin had called Heimir home ; 
And nothing strange it seemed to some 
That with him the sweet youngling was, 
Since Brynhild's love might bring to pass 
E'en mightier things than- this, they said, 
And sure the little gold-curled head, 
The pledge of all her earthly weal, 
In Freyia's house she longed to feel. 

Further the way was than they deemed 
Unto that rest whereof they dreamed, 
Both to the graybeard and the child ; 
For now by trodden way and wild 
Goes Heimir long : wide-faced is he, 
Thin-cheeked, hooked-nosed, e'en as might be 
An ancient erne ; his hair falls down 
From 'neath a wide slouched hat of brown, 



33 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And mingles white with his white beard ; 

A broad brown brand, most men have feared, 

Hangs by his side, and at his back 

Is slung a huge harp, that doth lack 

All fairness certes, and so great 

It is, that few might bear its weight ; 

Yea, Heimir even, somewhat slow 

Beneath its burden walketh now, 

And looketh round, and stayeth soon. 

On a calm sunny afternoon, 
Within a cleared space of a wood, 
At last the huge old warrior stood 
And peered about him doubtfully ; 
Who, when nought living he might see, 
But 'mid the beech-boughs high aloft 
A blue-winged jay, and squirrel soft, 
And in the grass a watchful hare, 
Unslung his harp and knelt down there 
Beside it, and a little while 
Handled the hollow with a smile 
Of cunning, and behold, the thing 
Opened, as by some secret spring, 
And there within the hollow lay, 
Clad in gold-fringed well-wrought array, 
Aslaug, the golden-headed child, 
Asleep and rosy ; but she smiled 
As Heimir's brown hand drew a-near, 
And woke up free from any fear, 
And stretched her hands out towards his face. 

He sat him down in the green place, 
With kind arms round the little one, 




THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 33 

Till, fully waked now, to the sun 

She turned, and babbling, 'gainst his breast 

Her dimpled struggling hands she pressed : 

His old lips touched those eyes of hers, 

That Sigurd's hope and Brynhild's tears 

Made sad e'en in her life's first spring ; 

Then sweet her chuckling laugh did ring, 

As down amid the flowery grass 

He set her, and beheld her pass 

From flower to flower in utter glee ; 

Therewith he reached out thoughtfully, 

And cast his arms around the harp, 

That at the first most strange and sharp 

Rang through the still day, and the child 

Stopped, startled by that music wild : 

But then a change came o'er the strings, 

As, tinkling sweet, of merry things 

They seemed to tell, and to and fro 

Danced Aslaug, till the tune did grow 

Fuller and stronger, sweeter still, 

And all the woodland place did fill 

With sound, not merry now nor sad, 

But sweet, heart-raising, as it had 

The gathered voice of that fair day 

Amidst its measured strains ; her play 

Amid the flowers grew slower now, 

And sadder did the music grow, 

And yet still sweeter : and with that, 

Nigher to where the old man sat 

Aslaug 'gan move, until at last 

All sound from the strained strings there passed 

As into each other's eyes they gazed ; 

2* 



34 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

Then, sighing, the young thing he raised, 
And set her softly on his knee, 
And laid her round cheek pitifully 
Unto his own, and said : 

" Indeed, 
Of such as I shalt thou have need, 
As swift the troubled days wear by, 
And yet I know full certainly 
My life on earth shall not be long : 
And those who think to better wrong 
By working wrong shall seek thee wide 
To slay thee ; yea, belike they ride 
E'en now unto my once-loved home. 
Well, to a void place shall they come, 
And I for thee thus much have wrought — - 
For thee and Brynhild — yea, and nought 
I deem it still to turn my face 
Each morn unto some unknown place 
Like a poor churl — for, ah ! who knows 
Upon what wandering wind that blows 
Drives Brynhild's spirit through the air ; 
And now by such road may I fare 
That we may meet ere many days." 

Again the youngling did he raise 
Unto his face, for to the earth 
Had she slipped down ; her babbling mirth 
Had mingled with his low deep speech ; 
But now, as she her hand did reach 
Unto his beard, nor stinted more 
Her babble, did a change come o'er 
His face ; for through the windless day 
Afar a mighty horn did bray ; 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 35 

Then from beneath his cloak he drew 
A golden phial, and set it to 
Her ruddy lips in haste, and she 
Gazed at him awhile fearfully, 
As though she knew he was afraid ; 
But silently the child he laid 
In the harp's hollow place, for now 
Drowsy and drooping did she grow 
'Neath the strong potion ; hastily 
He shut the harp, and raised it high 
Upon his shoulder, set his sword 
Ready to hand, and with no word 
Stalked off along the forest glade ; 
But muttered presently : 

" Afraid 
Is a strange word for me to say ; 
But all is changed in a short day, 
And full of death the world seems grown. 
Mayhap I shall be left alone 
When all are dead beside, to dream 
Of happy life that once did seem 
So stirring 'midst the folk I loved. 
Ah ! is there nought that may be moved 
By strong desire ? yea, nought that rules 
The very Gods who thrust earth's fools, 
This way and that as foolishly, 
For aught I know thereof, as I 
Deal with the chess when I am drunk ? " 

His head upon his breast was sunk 
For a long space, and then again 
He spake : " My life is on the wane ; 



36 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

Somewhat of this I yet may learn 
Ere long ; yet I am fain to earn 
My rest by reaching Atli's land ; 
For surely 'neath his mighty hand 
Safe from the Niblungs shall she be, 
Safe from the forge of misery, 
Grimhild the Wise-wife." 

As a goad 
That name was to him ; on he strode 
Still swifter, silent But day wore 
As fast between the tree-stems hoar 
He went his ways ; belike it was 
That he scarce knew if he did pass 
O'er rough or smooth, by dark or light, 
Until at last the very night 
Had closed round him as thinner grew 
The wood that he was hurrying through ; 
And as he gained a gray hill's brow 
He felt the sea-breeze meet him now, 
And heard the low surf's measured beat 
Upon the beach. He stayed his feet, 
And through the dusky gathering dark 
Peered round and saw what seemed a spark 
Along the hill's ridge ; thitherward 
He turned, still warily on guard, 
Until he came unto the door 
Of some stead, lone belike and poor : 
There knocking, was he bidden in, 
And needfully he raised the pin, 
And entering stood with blinking gaze 
Before a fire's unsteady blaze. 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 37 

There sat a woman all alone 
Whom some ten years would make a crone, 
Yet would they little worsen her : 
Her face was sorely pinched with care, 
Sour and thin-lipped she was ; of hue 
E'en like a duck's foot ; whitish-blue 
Her eyes were, seeming as they kept 
Wide open even when she slept. 

She rose up, and was no less great 
Than a tall man, a thing of weight 
Was the gaunt hand that held a torch 
As Heimir, midmost of the porch, 
Fixed his deep gray and solemn eyes 
Upon that wretched wife's surprise. 

" Well," said she, " what may be your will ? 
Little we have your sack to fill, 
If on thieves' errand ye are come ; 
But since the goodman is from home 
I know of none shall say you nay 
If ye have will to bear away 
The goodwife." 

As on a burned house 
Grown cold, the moon shines dolorous 
From out the rainy lift, so now 
A laugh must crease her lip and brow. 

" I am no thief, goodwife," he said. 
" But ask wherein to lay my head 
To-night" 

" Well, goodman, sit," said she : 
" Thine ugly box of minstrelsy 



38 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

With thine attire befits not ill ; 

And both belike may match thy skill." 

So by the fire he sat him down, 
And she too sat, and coarse and brown 
The thread was that her rock gave forth 
As there she spun ; of little worth 
Was all the gear that hall did hold. 

Now Heimir new-come from the cold 
Had set his harp down by his side, 
And, turning his gray eyes and wide 
Away from hers, slouched down his hat 
Yet farther o'er his brows, and sat . 
With hands outstretched unto the flame. 
But had he noted how there came 
A twinkle into her dead eyes, 
He had been minded to arise, 
Methinks ; for better company 
The wild-wood wolf had been than she. 
Because, from out the hodden gray 
That was the great man's poor array, 
Once and again could she behold 
How that the gleam of ruddy gold 
Came forth : so therewith she arose, 
And, wandering round the hall, drew close 
Unto the great harp, and could see 
Some fringe of golden bravery 
Hanging therefrom. — And the man too, 
In spite of patch and clouted shoe. 
And unadorned sword, seemed indeed 
Scarce less than a great king in need, 
So wholly noble was his mien. 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 39 

So, with these things thus thought and seen, 
Within her mind grew fell intent 
As to and fro the hall she went, 
And from the ark at last did take 
Meal forth for porridge and for cake, 
And to the fire she turned, and 'gan 
To look still closer on the man 
As with the girdle and the pot 
She busied her, and doubted not 
That on his arm a gold ring was ; 
For presently, as she did pass, 
Somewhat she brushed the cloak from him, 
And saw the gold gleam nowise dim. 
Then sure, if man might shape his fate, 
Her greed impatient and dull hate 
Within her eyes he might have seen, 
And so this tale have never been. 
But nought he heeded ; far away 
His thoughts were. 

Therewith did she lay 
The meal upon the board, and said, 
" Meseems ye would be well apaid 
Of meat and drink, and it is here, 
Fair lord — though somewhat sorry cheer ; 
Fall to now." 

Whining, with a grin 
She watched, as one who sets a gin, 
If at the name of lord at all 
He started, but no speech did fall 
From his old lips, and wearily 
He gat to meat, and she stood by, 
And poured the drink to him, and said : 



4© THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

" To such a husband am I wed 
That ill is speech with him, when he 
Comes home foredone with drudgery ; 
And though indeed I deem thee one 
Who deeds of fame full oft hath done 
And would not fear him, yet most ill 
'Twould be the bliss of us to spill 
In brawl with him, as might betide 
If thou his coming shouldst abide. 
Our barley barn is close hereby, 
Wherein a weary man might lie 
And be no worse at dawn of day." 

" Well, good wife," said he, " lead the way ! 
Worse lodging have I had than that, 
Where the wolf howled unto the bat, 
And red the woodland stream did run." 

She started back, he seemed as one 
Who might have come back from the dead, 
To wreak upon her evil head 
Her sour ill life, but nought the more 
He heeded her ; " Go on before," 
He said, " for I am in no case 
To-night to meet an angry face 
And hold my hand from my good sword." 

So out she passed without a word, 
Though when he took in careful wise 
The heavy harp, with greedy eyes 
And an ill scowl she gazed thereon 
Yet durst say nought. But soon they won 




THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 

Unto the barn's door — he turned round, 
And, gazing down the rugged ground, 
Beheld the sea wide reaching, white 
Beneath the new-risen moon, and bright 
His face waxed for a little while, 
And on the still night did he smile, 
As into the dark place he went, — 
And saw no more of the gray bent, 
Or sea, or sky, or morrow's sun. 
Unless perchance when all is done, 
And all the wrongs the Gods have wrought 
Come utterly with them to nought, 
New heavens and earth he shall behold, 
And peaceful folk, and days of gold, 
When Baldur is come back again 
O'er an undying world to reign. 

For when the carl came home that night, 
In every ill wise that she might, 
She egged him on their guest to slay 
As sleeping in the barn he lay; 
And, since the man was no ill mate 
For her, and heedless evil fate 
Had made him big and strong enow, 
He plucked up heart to strike the blow, 
Though but a coward thief he was. 
So at the gray dawn did he pass 
Unto the barn, and entered there ; 
But through its dusk therewith did hear 
The sound of harp-strings tinkling : then, 
As is the wont of such-like men, 
Great fear of ghosts fell on his heart ; 



43 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet, trembling sore, he thrust apart 
The long stems of the barley-straw, 
And, peering round about, he saw 
Heimir asleep, his naked brand 
Laid o'er his knees, but his right hand 
Amid the harp-strings, whence there came 
A mournful tinkling ; and some name 
His lips seemed muttering, and withal 
A strange sound on his ears did fall 
As of a young child murmuring low 
The muffled sounds of passing woe. 
Nought dreadful saw he ; yet the hair 
'Gan bristle on his head with fear, 
And twice was he at point to turn 
His bread by other craft to earn ; 
But in the end prevailed in him 
His raging greed 'gainst glimmerings dim 
Of awe and pity ; which but wrought 
In such wise in him that he thought 
How good it were if all were done, 
And day, and noise, and the bright sun 
Were come again : he crept along, 
Poising a spear, thick shafted, strong, 
In his right hand ; and ever fast 
His heart beat as the floor he passed, 
And o'er his shoulder gazed for fear 
Once and again ; he raised the spear, 
As Heimir's hand the string still pressed, 
And thrust it through his noble breast, 
Then turned and fled, and heard behind 
A sound as of a wildered wind, 
Half moan, half sigh ; then all was still. 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 43 

But yet such fear his soul did fill 
That he stayed not until he came 
Into the hall, and cried the name 
Of his wife, Grima, in high voice. 

" Ah well," she said, " what needs this noise, 
Can ye not see me here ? — Well then ? " 

" Wife," said he, " of the sons of men 
I deem him not, rather belike 
Odin it was that I did strike." 

She laughed an ill laugh. " Well," she said, 
" What then, if only he be dead ? " 

" What if he only seemed to die ? " 
He said, u and when night draweth nigh 
Shall come again, grown twice as great, 
And eat where yesternight he ate ? 
For certes, wife, that harp of his, 
No earthly minstrelsy it is, 
Since as in sleep the man was laid 
Of its own self a tune it played ; 
Yea, yea, and in a man's voice cried; 
Belike a troll therein doth bide." 

"An ugly, ill-made minstrel's tool," 
She said ; « thou blundering, feint-heart fool ! 
Some wind moaned through the barn belike, 
And the man's hand the strings did strike." 

And yet she shivered as she spake, 
As though some fear her heart did take, 



44 THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

And neither durst to draw anigh 
The barn until the sun was high, 
Then in they went together, and saw 
The old man lying in the straw, 
Scarce otherwise than if asleep, 
Though in his heart the spear lay deep, 
And round about the floor was red. 
Then Grima went, and from the dead 
Stripped off the gold ring, while the man 
Stood still apart ; then she began 
To touch the harp, but in no wise 
Might open it to reach the prize. 
Wherefore she bade her husband bring 
Edge-tools to split the cursed thing. 
He brought them trembling, and the twain 
Fell to, and soon their end did gain ; 
But shrank back trembling to see there 
The youngling, her gray eyes and clear 
Wide open, fearless ; but the wife 
Knew too much of her own sour life 
To fear the other world o'ermuch, 
And soon began to pull and touch 
The golden raiment of the may ; 
And at the last took heart to say : 

" Be comforted ! we shall not die ; 
For no work is this certainly 
Wrought in the country never seen, 
But raiment of a Hunnish queen — 
Gold seest thou, goodman ! gems seest thou ! 
No ill work hast thou wrought I trow. 
But, for the maiden, we must give 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 45 

Victuals to her that she may live ; 
For though to-day she is indeed 
But one more mouth for us to feed, 
Yet as she waxeth shall she do 
Right many a thing to help us two ; 
Yea, whatso hardest work there is, 
That shall be hers — no life of bliss 
Like sewing gold mid bower-mays ; 
She shall be strong, too, as the days 
Increase on her." 

Then said the man : 
" Get speech from her, for sure she can 
Tell somewhat of her life and state " 

But whatso he or his vile mate 
Might do, no word at all she spake 
Either for threat or promise sake ; 
Until at last they deemed that she 
Was tongue-tied : so now presently 
Unto the homestead was she brought, 
And her array all golden-wrought 
Stripped from her, and in rags of gray 
Clad was she. But from light of day 
The carl hid Heimir dead, and all 
Into dull sodden life did fall. 



jfi THE EARTH Lr PARADISE. 



SO with the twain abode the may, 
Waxing in beauty day by day, 
But ever as one tongue-tied was, 
What thing soever came to pass ; 
And needs the hag must call her Crow : 
"A name," she said, " full good enow 
For thee — my mother bore it erst." 
So lived the child that she was nursed 
On little meat and plenteous blows ; 
Yet nowise would she weep, but close 
Would set her teeth thereat, and go 
About what work she had to do, 
And ever wrought most sturdily ; 
Until at last she grew to be 
More than a child. And now the place 
That once had borne so dull a face 
Grew well-nigh bright to look upon, 
And whatso thing might shine there shone ; 
Yea, all but her who brought about 
That change therein — for, past all doubt, 
Years bettered in nowise our hag, 
And ever she said that any rag 
Was good enough to clothe the Crow. 
And still her hate did grow and grow 
As Aslaug grew to womanhood ; 
Oft would she sit in murderous mood 
Long hours, with hand anigh a knife, 
As Aslaug slept, all hate at strife 
With greed within her ; yet withal 



J 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 47 

Something like fear of her did fall 

Upon her heart, and heavy weighed 

That awful beauty, that oft stayed 

Her hand from closing on the hilt, 

E'en more than thought of good things spilt. 

Hard words and blows this scarce might stay, 

For like the minutes of the day, 

Not looked for, noted not when gone, 

Were all such things unto the crone, 

And, smitten or unsmitten, still 

The Crow was swift to work her will. 

In spring-tide of her seventeenth year, 
On the hill-side the house anear 
Went Aslaug, following up her goats : 
On such a day as when Love floats 
Through the soft air unseen, to touch 
Our hearts with longings overmuch 
Unshapen into hopes, to make 
All things seem fairer for the sake 
Of that which cometh, who doth bear 
Who knows how much of grief and fear 
In his fair arms. So Aslaug went, 
On vague and unnamed thoughts intent, 
That seemed to her full sweet enow, 
And ever greater hope did grow, 
And sweet seemed life to her and good, 
Small reason why : into the wood 
She turned, and wandered slim and fair 
'Twixt the dark tree-boles : strange and rare 
The sight was of her golden head, 
So good, uncoifed, unchapleted, 






48 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Above her sordid dark array, 

That over her fair body lay 

As dark clouds on a lilied hill. 

The wild things well might gaze their fill, 

As through the wind-flowers brushed her feet, 

As her lips smiled when those did meet 

The lush-cold blue-bells, or were set 

Light on the pale dog-violet 

Late April bears : the red-throat jay 

Screamed not for nought, as on her way 

She went, light-laughing at some thought ; 

If the dove moaned 'twas not for nought, 

Since she was gone too soon from him, 

And e'en the sight he had was dim 

For the thick budding twigs. At last 

Into an open space she passed, 

Nigh filled with a wide, shallow lake, 

Amidmost which the fowl did take 

Their pastime ; o'er the firmer grass, 

'Twixt rushy ooze, swift did she pass, 

Until upon a bank of sand 

Close to the water did she stand, 

And gazed down in that windless place 

Upon the image of her face ; 

And as she gazed laughed musically 

Once and again ; nor heeded she 

Her straying flock : her voice, that none 

Had heard since Heimir was undone 

Within that wretched stead, began 

Such speech as well had made a man 

Forget his land and kin to make 

Those sweet lips tremble for his sake : 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 49 



a 



Spring bringeth love," she said, " to all." 
She sighed as those sweet sounds did fall 
From her unkissed lips : " Ah," said she, 
" How came that sweet word unto me, 
Among such wretched folk who dwell, 
Folk who still seem to carry hell 
About with them ? — That ancient man 
They slew, with whom my life began, 
I deem he must have taught me that, 
And how the steel-clad maiden sat 
Asleep within the ring of flame, 
Asleep, and waiting till Love came, 
Who was my father : many a dream 
I dream thereof, till it doth seem 
That they will fetch me hence one day. 
Somewhere I deem life must be gay, 
The flowers are wrought not for the sake 
Of those two murderers." 

While she spake 
Her hands were busy with her gown, 
And at the end it slipped adown 
And left her naked there and white 
In the unshadowed noontide light. 
Like Freyia in her house of gold, 
Awhile her limbs did she behold 
Clear mirrored in the lake beneath ; 
Then slowly, with a shuddering breath, 
Stepped in the water cold, and played 
Amid the ripple that she made, 
And spoke again aloud, as though 
The lone place of her heart might know : 
" Soothly," she said, " if I knew fear, 

3 



1 



5o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Scarcely should I be sporting here ; 

But blinder surely has the crone 

In those last months of winter grown. 

Nor knows if I be foul or sweet, 

Or sharp stripes might I chance to meet, 

As heretofore it hath been seen 

When I have dared to make me clean 

Amid their foulness : loathes her heart 

That one she hates should have a part 

In the world's joy. — Well, time wears by, 

I was not made for misery. 

Surely if dimly do mine eyes 

Behold no sordid tale arise, 

No ill life drawing near — who knows 

But I am kept for greater woes, 

Godlike despair that makes not base, 

Though like a stone may grow the face 

Because of it, yea, and the heart 

A hard-wrought treasure set apart 

For the world's glory ? " 

Therewith she 
Made for the smooth bank leisurely, 
And, naked as she was, did pass 
Unto the warm and flowery grass 
All unashamed, and fearing not 
For aught that should draw nigh the spot : 
And soothly had some hunter been 
Near by and all her beauty seen, 
He would have deemed he saw a fay 
And hastened trembling on his way. 
But when full joyance she had had 
Of sun and flowers, her limbs she clad 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 51 

In no long time, forsooth, and then 
Called back her wandering flock again 
With one strange dumb cry, e'en as though 
Their hearts and minds she needs must know. 
For hurrying back with many a bleat 
They huddled round about her feet 
And back she went unto the stead, 
Strange visions pressing round her head, 
So light of heart and limb, that though 
She went with measured steps and slow, 
Each yard seemed but a dance to her. 

So now the thick wood did she clear, 
And o'er the bent beheld the sea, 
And stood amazed there suddenly, 
For a long ship, with shield- hung rail, 
And fair-stained flapping raven-sail, 
And golden dragon-stem, there lay 
On balanced oars amidst the bay, 
Slow heaving with the unrippled swell. 
With a strange hope she might not tell 
Her eyes ran down the strand, and there 
Lay beached a ship's boat painted fair, 
And on the shingle by her side 
Three blue-clad axemen did abide 
Their fellows, sent belike ashore 
To gather victuals for their store. 

She loqkecl not long ; with heart that beat 
More quickly and with hurrying feet 
Unto the homestead did she pass, 
And when anigh the door she was 



$2 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

She heard men's voices deep and rough ; 
Then the shrill crone, who said, " Enough 
Of work I once had done for you, 
But now my days left are but few 
And I am weak ; I prithee wait, 
Already now the noon is late, 
My daughter, Crow, shall soon be here." 
" Nay," said a shipman, "have no fear, 
Goodwife, a speedy death to get, 
Thou art a sturdy carline yet: 
Howbeit we well may wait awhile." 

Thereat Aslaug, with a strange smile, 
Fresh from that water in the wood, 
Pushed back the crazy door, and stood 
Upon the threshold silently ; 
Bareheaded and barefoot was she, 
And scarce her rags held each to each, 
Yet did the shipmen stay their speech 
And open-mouthed upon her stare, 
As with bright eyes and face flushed fair 
She stood ; one gleaming lock of gold 
Strayed from her fair head's plaited fold, 
Fell far below her girdlestead, 
And round about her shapely head 
A garland of dog-violet 
And wind-flowers meetly had she set : 
They deemed it little scathe indeed 
That her coarse homespun ragged weed 
Fell off from her round arms and lithe 
Laid on the door-post, that a withe 
Of willows was her only belt ; 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 53 

And each as he gazed at her felt 
As some gift had been given him. 

At last one grumbled, " Nowise dim 
It is to see, goodwife, that this 
No branch of thy great kinship is." 

Grima was glaring on the may, 
And scarce for rage found words to say : 
" Yea, soothly is she of our kin ; 
Sixty-five winters changeth skin. 
And whatsoever she may be, 
Though she is dumb as a dead tree, 
She worketh ever double-tide. 
So, masters, ope your mealsacks wide 
And fall to work ; enow of wood 
There is, I trow." 

And there she stood, 
Shaking all o'er, and when the may 
Brushed past her going on her way, 
From off the board a knife she caught, 
And well-nigh had it in her thought 
To end it all Small heed the men 
Would take of her, forsooth ; and when 
They turned their baking-work to speed, 
And Aslaug fell the meal to knead, 
He was the happiest of them all 
Unto whose portion it did fall 
To take the loaves from out her hand ; 
And gaping often would he stand, 
And ever he deemed that he could feel 
A trembling all along the peel 



_£- 



54 TUB EARTH LT PARADISE. 

Whenas she touched it — sooth to say, 
Such bread. as there was baked that day 
Was never seen : such as it was 
The work was done, and they did pass 
Down toward the ship, and as they went 
A dull place seemed the thymy bent, 
Gilded by sunset ; the fair ship, 
That soft in the long swell did dip 
Her golden dragon, seemed nought worth, 
And they themselves, all void of mirth, 
Stammering and blundering in their speech, 
Still looking back, seemed each to each 
Ill-shapen, ugly, rough and base 
As might be found in any place. 

Well, saith the tale, and when the bread 
Was broken, just as light as lead 
Men found the same, as sweet as gall, 
Half baked and sodden ; one and all 
Men gave it to the devil ; at last 
Unto their lord the story passed, 
Who called for them, and bade them say 
Why they had wrought in such a way ; 
They grinned and stammered, till said one : 
" We did just e'en as must be done 
When men are caught ; had it been thou 
A-cold had been the oven now." 

"Ye deal in riddles," said the lord, 
" Enough brine is there overboard 
To fill you full if even so 
Ye needs must have it." 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 55 

" We did go," 
The man said, " to a house, and found 
That lack of all things did abound ; 
A yellow-faced and bleared-eyed crone 
Was in the sooty hall alone ; 
But as we talked with her, and she 
Spake to us ill and craftily, 
A wondrous scent was wafted o'er 
The space about the open door, 
And all the birds drew near to sing, 
And summer pushed on into spring, 
Until there stood before our eyes 
A damsel clad in wretched guise, 
Yet surely of the gods I deem, 
So fair she was ; — well then this dream 
Of Freyia on midsummer night, 
This breathing love, this once-seen sight, 
Flitted amidst us kneading meal, 
And from us all the wits did steal ; — 
Hadst thou been wise ? " 

" Well," said the lord, 
" This seemeth but an idle word ; 
Yet since ye all are in one tale 
Somewhat to you it may avail — 
Speak out ! my lady that is dead — 
Thora, the chief of goodlihead — 
Came this one nigh to her at all ? " 

One answer from their mouths did fell, 
That she was fairest ever seen. 
" If two such marvellous things have been 



56 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Wrought by the gods, then have they wrought 
Exceeding well," the lord said ; " nought 
Will serve me now but to have sight 
Of her, and hear the fresh delight 
Of her sweet voice." 

" Nay, nay," one cried, 
" The carline called the maid tongue-tied 
E'en from her birth." 

But thoughtfully 
The lord spake : " Then belike shall be 
Some wonder in the thing. Lo now, 
Since I, by reason of my vow 
Made on the cup at Yule, no more 
May set foot upon any shore 
Till I in Micklegarth have been, 
And somewhat there of arms have seen, 
Go ye at earliest morn and say 
That I would see her ere the day 
Is quite gone by ; here shall she come 
And go as if her father's home 
The good ship were, and I indeed 
Her very brother. Odin speed 
The matter in some better wise, 
Unless your words be nought but lies ! " 

So the next morn she had the word 
To come unto their king and lord ; 
She answered not, but made as though 
Their meaning she did fully know, 
And gave assent : the crone was there, 
And still askance at her did glare, 
And 'mid her hatred grew afeard . 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 57 

Of what might come, but spoke no word ; 
And ye may well believe indeed 
That those men gave her little heed. 
But stared at Aslaug as she stood 
Beside the greasy, blackened wood 
Of the hall's uprights, fairer grown 
Than yesterday, soft 'neath her gown 
Her fair breast heaving, her wide eyes 
'Mid dreams of far-off things grown wise, 
The rock dropped down in her left hand ; — 
There mazed awhile the men did stand, 
Then gat them back. And so the sun 
Waxed hot and waned, and, day nigh done. 
Gleamed on the ship's side as she lay 
Close in at deepest of the bay, 
Her bridge gold-hung on either hand 
Cast out upon the hard white sand ; 
While o'er the bulwarks many a man 
Gazed forth ; and the great lord began 
To fret and fume, till on the brow 
Of the low cliff they saw her now, 
Who stood a moment to behold 
The ship's sun-litten flashing gold ; 
Then slowly 'gan to get her down 
A steep path in the sea-cliff brown, 
Till on a sudden did she meet 
The slant sun cast about its feet, 
And flashed as in a golden cloud ; 
Since scarcely her poor raiment showed 
Beneath the glory of her hair, 
Whose last lock touched her ankles bare. 

3* 



58 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

For so it was that as she went 
Unto this meeting, all intent 
Upon the time that was to be, 
While yet just hidden from the sea, 
She stayed her feet a little while, 
And, gazing on her raiment vile, 
Flushed red, and muttered, — 

" Who can tell 
But I may love this great lord well ? 
An evil thing then should it be 
If he cast loathing eyes on me 
This first time for my vile attire." 

Then, while her cheek still burned like fire, 
She set hand to her hair of gold 
Until its many ripples rolled 
All over her, and no great queen 
Was e'er more gloriously beseen ; 
And thus she went upon her way. 

« 

Now when the crew beheld the may 
Set foot upon the sand there rose 
A mighty shout from midst of those 
Rough seafarers ; only the lord 
Stood silent gazing overboard 
With great eyes, till the bridge she gained, 
And still the color waxed and waned 
Within his face ; but when her foot 
First pressed the plank, to his heart's root 
Sweet pain there pierced, for her great eyes 
Were fixed on his in earnest wise, 
E'en as her thoughts were all of him. 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 59 

And somewhat now all things waxed dim, 
As unto her he stretched his hand, 
And felt hers ; and the twain did stand 
Hearkening each other's eager breath. 
But she was changed, for pale as death 
She was now as she heard his voice. 

" Full well may we this eve rejoice, 
Fair maid, that thou hast come to us ; 
That this gray shore and dolorous 
Holds greater beauty than the earth 
'Mid fairer days may bring to birth, 
And that I hold it now. But come 
Unto the wind-blown woven home, 
Where I have dwelt alone awhile, 
And with thy speech the hours beguile." 

For nothing he remembered 
Of what his men unto him said, 
That she was dumb. Not once she turned 
Her eyes from his ; the low sun burned 
Within her waving hair, as she 
Unto the poop went silently 
Beside him, and with faltering feet, 
Because this hour seemed over sweet, 
And still his right hand held her hand. 

But when at last the twain did stand 
Beneath the gold-hung tilt alone, 
He said : " Thou seemest such an one 
As who could love ; thou lookst on me 
As though thou hopedst love might be 



60 THE EARTHLY PARADISB> 

Betwixt us — thou art pale, my sweet, 
Good were it if our lips should meet." 

Then mouth to mouth long time they stood, 
And when they sundered the red blood 
Burnt in her cheek, and tenderly 
Trembled her lips, and drew anigh 
His lips again : but speech did break 
Swiftly from out them, and she spake : 
" May it be so, fair man, that thou 
Art even no less happy now 
Than I am." 

With a joyous cry 
He caught her to him hastily ; 
And 'mid that kiss the sun went down, 
And colder was the dark world grown. 
Once more they parted ; " Ah, my love," 
He said, " I knew not aught could move 
My heart to such joy as thy speech." 

She made as if she fain would reach 
Her lips to his once more ; but ere 
They touched, as smitten by new fear, 
She drew aback and said : " Alas ! 
It darkens, and I needs must pass 
Back to the land, to be more sad 
Than if this joy I ne'er had had. 
And thou — thou shalt be sorry too, 
And pity me that it is so." 

" To-morrow morn comes back the day," 
He said, " if we should part, sweet may : 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 61 

Yet why should I be left forlorn 
Betwixt this even and the morn ? " 

His hand had swept aback her hair, 
And on her shoulder, gleaming bare 
From midst her rags, was trembling now ; 
But she drew back, and o'er her brow 
Gathered a troubled thoughtful frown, 
And on the bench she sat her down 
And spake : " Nay, it were wise to bide 
Awhile. Behold, the world is wide, 
Yet have we found each other here, 
And each to other seems more dear 
Than all the world else. — Yet a king 
Thou art, and I am such a thing, 
By some half-dreamed-of chance cast forth 
To live a life of little worth, 
A lonely life — and it may be 
That thou shouldst weary soon of me 
If I abode here now — and I, 
How know I? All unhappily 
My life has gone ; scarce a kind word 
Except in dreams my ears have heard 
But those thy lovely lips have said : 
It might be when all things were weighed 
That I too light of soul should prove 
To hold for ever this great love." 

Down at her feet therewith he knelt, 
And round her his strong arms she felt 
Drawing her to him, as he said : 
" These are strange words for thee, O maid ; 



62 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Are those sweet loving lips grown cold 
So soon ? Yet art thou in my hold, 
And certainly my heart is hot 
What help against me hast thou got ? " 

Each unto each their cheeks were laid, 
As in a trembling voice she said : 
" No help, because so dear to me 
Thou art, and mighty as may be ; 
Thou hast seen much, art wiser far 
Than I am ; yet strange thoughts there are 
In my mind now — some half-told tale 
Stirs in me, if I might avail 
To tell it" 

Suddenly she rose, 
And thrust him from her ; " Ah, too close ! 
Too close now, and too far apart 
To-morrow ! — and a barren heart, 
And days that ever fall to worse, 
And blind lives struggling with a curse 
They cannot grasp ! Look on my face, 
Because I deem me of a race 
That knoweth such a tale too well. 
Yet if there be such tale to tell 
Of us twain, let it e'en be so, 
Rather than we should fail to know 
This love — ah me, my love forbear ! 
No pain for thee and me I fear ; 
Yet strive we e'en for more than this ! 
Thou who hast given me my first bliss 
To-day, forgive me, that in turn 
I see the pain within thee burn, 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 63 

And may not help — because mine eyes 
The Gods make clear. I am grown wise 
With gain of love, and hope of days 
That many a coming age shall praise." 

Awhile he gazed on her, and shook 
With passion, and his cloak's hem took 
With both hands as to rend it down ; 
Yet from his brow soon cleared the frown : 
He said : " Yea, such an one thou art, 
As needs alone must nil my heart 
If I be like my father's kin, 
And have a hope great deeds to win ; 
And surely nought shall hinder me 
From living a great life with thee — 
Say now what thou wouldst have me do." 

" Some deed of fame thou goest to," 
She said, " for surely thou art great ; 
Go on thy way then, and if fate 
So shapen is, that thou mayst come 
Once more unto this lonely home, 
There shalt thou find me, who will live 
Through whatso days that fate may give, ' 
Till on some happy coming day 
Thine oars again make white the bay." 

" If that might be remembered now," 
He said, " last Yule I made a vow 
In some far land to win me fame. 
Come nigher, sweet, and hear my name 
Before thou goest ; that if so be 



64 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Death take me and my love from thee, 
Thou mayst then think of who I was, 
Nor let all memory of me pass 
When thou to some great king art wed : 
Then shalt thou say, ' Ragnar is dead, 
Who was the son of Sigurd Ring, 
Among the Danes a mighty king. 
He might have had me by his side,' 
Then shalt thou say, ' that hour he died ; 
But my heart failed and not his heart.' " 

" Nay, make it not too hard to part," 
She said, when once again their lips 
Had sundered ; "as gold-bearing ships 
Foundered amidmost of the sea, 
So shall the loves of most men be, 
And leave no trace behind. God wot 
This heart of mine shall hate thee not 
Whatso befall ; but rather bless 
Thee and this hour of happiness ; 
And if this tide shall come again 
After hard longing and great pain, 
How sweet, how sweet ! O love, farewell, 
Lest other tale there be to tell : 
Yet heed this now lest afterward 
It seem to thee a thing too hard 
To keep thy faith to such as me ; 
I am belike what thou dost see, 
A goatherd girl, a peasant maid, 
Of a poor wretched crone afraid 
From dawn to dusk ; despite of dreams 
In morning tides, and misty gleams 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 65 

Of wondrous stories, deem me such 

As I have said, nor overmuch 

Cast thou thy love upon my heart 

If even such a man thou art 

As needs must wed a great man's child." 

He stepped aback from her and smiled, 
And, stooping 'neath the lamp, drew forth 
From a great chest a thing of worth — 
A silken sark wrought wondrously 
In some far land across the sea. 
" One thing this is of many such 
That I were fain thy skin should touch," 
He said, " if thou wouldst have it so." 
But his voice faltered and sank low, 
As though her great heart he 'gan fear. 
She reached her fine strong hand anear 
The farfetched thing ; then smiling said : 
" Strange that such fair things can be made 
By men who die ; and like it is 
Thou think'st me worthy of all bliss ; 
But our rough hills and smoky house 
Befit not aught so glorious, 
E'en if thou come again to me ; 
And if not, greater grief to see 
The gifts of dead love ! — what say I, 
Our crone should wear these certainly 
If I but brought them unto land." 

He flushed red, and his strong right hand 
Fell to his sword-hilt. "Nay," she said, 
" All that is nought if rightly weighed ; 
Hope and desire shall pass the days 



66 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

If thou come back." 

Grave was her face 
And tremulous : he sighed ; " Then take 
This last gift only for my sake." 
And once again their lips did touch 
And cling together. " O many such, 1 ' 
She said, " if the time did not fail, 
And my heart too : of what avail 
Against the hand of fate to strive ? 
Let me begin my life to live, 
As it must be a weary space." 

The moon smote full upon her face, 
As on a trembling sea, as now 
From the lamp-litten gold tilt low 
She stepped into the fresher air, 
He with her. Slow the twain did fare 
Amidst the wondering men, till they 
Had reached the bridge ; then swift away 
She turned, and passed the gold-hung rail, 
And o'er the sands the moon made pale 
Went gleaming, all alone : and he 
Watched till her light feet steadily 
Stepped up upon the dark cliff's brow ; 
But no one time she turned her now, 
But vanished from him into night 
So there he watched till changing light 
Brought the beginning of the tide 
Of longing that he needs must bide ; 
Then he cried out for oars and sail, 
And ere the morning star did fail 
No more those cliffs his bird beheld, 
As 'neath the wind the broad sail swelled. 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 67 / 



DUT for the maiden, back she went 

Unto the stead, and her intent 
She changed in nought : no word she spake 
What wrath soe'er on her might break 
From the fell crone, on whom withal 
Still heavier did that strange awe fall ; 
As well might be, for from the may 
Had girlish lightness passed away 
Into a sweet grave majesty, 
That scarce elsewhere the world might see. 

So wore the spring, and summer came 
And went, and all the woods did flame 
With autumn, as in that old tide 
When slowly by the mirk hill-side 
Went Heimir to his unseen death : 
Then came the first frost's windless breath, 
The steaming sea, the world all white, 
And glittering morn and silent night, 
As when the little one first felt 
The world a-cold ; and still she dwelt 
Unchanged since that first spark of love 
Wrought the great change, that so did move 
Her heart to perfect loveliness. 
Nor overmuch did the days press 
Upon her with the weary waste 
Of short life, that too quick doth haste 



68 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

When joy is gained : if any thought 

Thereof unto her heart was brought, 

Rather it was, " Ah, overlong 

For brooding over change and wrong 

When that shall come ! Good gain to me 

My love's eyes one more time to see, 

To feel once more his lips' delight, 

And die with the short summer night, 

Not shamed nor sorry ! But if I 

Must bear the weight of misery 

In the after days, yet even then 

May I not leave to unborn men 

A savor of sweet things, a tale 

That midst all woes shall yet prevail 

To make the world seem something worth ? n 

So passed the winter of the North, 
And once again was come the spring ; 
Then whiles would she go loitering 
Slow-footed, and with hanging head, 
Through budding brake, o'er flowery mead, 
With blood that throbbed full quickly now 
If o'er the flowers her feet were slow, 
And bonds about her seemed to be. 
Yet more the spring past lingeringly 
Till on a morn of latter May, 
When her soft sleep had passed away, 
Nought but the bright-billed sweet-throat bird 
Within the thorn at first she heard ; 
But, even as her heart did meet 
The first wave of desire o'ersweet, 
The winding of a mighty horn 






THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 69 

Adown the breeze of May was borne, 
And throbbing hope on her did fall : 
Yet from her bed she leapt withal, 
And clad herself, and went about 
Her work, as though with ne'er a doubt 
That this day e'en such like should be 
As was the last ; and so while she 
Quickened the fire and laid the board, 
Mid the crone's angry, querulous word 
Of surly wonder, the goodman, 
With axe on shoulder, swiftly ran 
Adown the slope ; but presently 
Came breathless back : 

" Ah, here they be ! 
Come back again for something worse, " 
Said he. " This dumb maid is some curse 
Laid on us." 

" Well," the goodwife said, 
" Who be they ? " " They who baked their bread 
Within this house last spring," said he. 
" Oft did I marvel then why she, 
This witch-maid, went unto the strand 
That eve." 

* Nay, maybe comes to hand 
Some luck," the crone said. " Hold thy peace," 
He said. " What goodhap or increase 
From that ill night shall ever come ? 
Rather I deem that now come home 
Those fifteen years of murder : lo, 
The worst of all we soon shall know, 
I hear their voices." 

Silently, 



1 



70 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

If somewhat pale, Aslaug passed by 
From fire to board, as though she heard 
And noted nothing of that word, 
Whate'er it was : yet now, indeed, 
The clink of sword on iron weed, 
And voices of the seafarers, 
Came clear enow unto her ears; 
Nor was it long or e'er the door 
Was darkened, as one stood before 
The light and cried : 

" Hail to this house, 
If here still dwells the glorious 
Fair maiden, that across the seas 
We come for ! " 

Aslaug on her knees 
Knelt by the brightening fire and dropped 
The meal into the pot, nor stopped 
For all their words, but with her hand 
Screened her fair face. Then up did stand 
The goodman, quaking : 

" Well," he said, 
" Good be my meed ! for we have fed 
This dumb maid all for kindness* sake." 
" No need," he said, " long words to make, 
And little heed we thy lies now, 
But if she doom thee to the bough. 
— All hail, our Lady and our Queen ! " 

For she, arisen, with glorious mien 
Was drawing near the board,' and bare 
The porridge-bowl and such-like gear 
Past where the men stood ; tremblingly 



» 



i 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 71 

The leader of them drew anigh, 
And would have taken them, but she 
Swerved from his strong hand daintily, 
Smiled on him and passed by, and when 
They were set down turned back again 
And spoke, and well then might rejoice 
That dusky place to hear her voice 
For the first time : 

" I doubt me not, 

seafarers, but ye have got 

A message from that goodly lord 
Who spake last year a pleasant word 
Hard to believe for a poor maid" 

Trembled the twain at what she said 
Less than the unexpected sound, 
For death seemed in the air around. 
But the man spake : " E'en thus he saith, 
That he, who heretofore feared death 
In no-wise, feared this morn to come 
And seek thee out in thy poor home, 
Lest he should find thee dead or gone ; 
For scarce he deemed so sweet a one 
Could be for him : ' But if she live,' 
He said, * and still her love can give 
To me, let her make no delay, 
For fear we see no other day 
Wherein to love.' " 

She said : " Come, then ! 
It shames me not that of all men 

1 love him best. But have ye there 
Somewhat these twain might reckon dear ? 



72 "■ THE EAR THL Y PARADISE. 

Their life is ill enow to live 

But that withal they needs must strive 

With griping want when I am gone." 

He answered, " O thou goodly one, 
Here have we many a dear-bought thing, 
Because our master bade us bring * 

All queenly gear for thee, and deems 
That thou, so clad as well beseems 
That lovely body, wouldst aboard ; 
But all we have is at thy word 
To keep or spend." 

" Nay, friends," she said, 
"If thy lord loves my goodlihead, 
Fain would I bear alone to him 
What wealth I have of face or limb, 
For him to deck when all is his ; 
So full enow shall even this 
That I am dight with be for me. 
But since indeed of his bounty 
He giveth unto me to give — 
Take ye this gold, ye twain, and live 
E'en as ye may — small need to bless 
Or curse your sordid churlishness, 
Because methinks, without fresh curse, 
Each day that comes shall still be worse 
Than the past day, and worst of all 
Your ending day on you shall fall. 
Yet, if it may be, fare ye well, 
Since in your house I came to dwell 
A certain time of my life-days." 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 73 

E'en as she spake, her glorious face 
Shone the last time on that abode, 
And her light feet the daisies trod 
Outside the threshold. But the twain 
Stood 'mazed above the bounteous gain 
Of rings and gems and money bright, 
And a long while, for mere affright 
And wonder, durst not handle it 

But while the butterfly did flit 
White round about the feet of her, 
Above the little May-flowers fair, 
She went adown the hill with these, 
Until the low wash of the seas 
They heard, and murmuring of the men 
Who manned the long-ships ; quickly then 
They showed above the gray bent's brow, 
And all the folk beheld them now 
'Twixt oar and gunwale that abode, 
And to the sky their shout rose loud. 
But when upon the beach she came, 
A bright thing in the sun did flame 
'Twixt sun and ship-side, and the sea 
Foamed, as one waded eagerly 
Unto the smooth and sea-beat sand, 
And for one moment did she stand 
Breathless, with beating heart, and then 
To right and left drew back the men ; 
She heard a voice she deemed well known, 
Long waited through dull hours bygone, 
And round her mighty arms were cast : 
But when her trembling red lips passed 

4 



I 



74 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

From out the heaven of that dear kiss, 
And eyes met eyes, she saw in his 
Fresh pride, fresh hope, fresh love, and saw 
The long sweet days still onward draw, 
Themselves still going hand in hand, 
As now they went adown the strand. 



"VTEXT morn, when they awoke to see 
-*■ ^ Each other's hands draw lovingly 
Each unto each, awhile they lay 
Silent, as though night passed away 
They grudged full sore : till the King said 
Unto the happy golden head 
That lay upon his breast : " What thought 
By those few hours of dark was brought 
Unto thy heart, my love ? Did dreams 
Make strange thy loving sleep with gleams 
Of changing days that yet may be ? " 

She answered, but still dreamily : 
" In sleep a little while ago 
O'er a star-litten world of snow 
I fared, till suddenly nearby 
A swirling fire blazed up on high ; 
Thereto I went, and without scathe 
Passed through the flame, as one doth bathe 
Within a summer stream, and there 
I saw a golden palace fair 




THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 75 

Ringed round about with roaring flame. 

Unto an open door I came, 

And entered a great hall thereby, 

And saw where 'neath a canopy 

A King and Queen there sat, more fair 

Than the world knoweth otherwhere : 

And much methought my heart smiled then 

Upon that goodliest of all men, 

That sweetest of all womankinck 

Then one methought a horn did wind 

Without, and the King turned and spake : 

"'Wherewith do the hall pillars shake, 
O Queen, O love ? ' 

She moved her head, 

And in a voice like music said : 
'This is the fame of Ragnar's life, 
The breath of all the glorious strife 
Wherewith his days shall wear.' 

Then he : 

'What is the shadow that I see 

Adown the hall ? ' 

Then said the Queen : 

' Our daughter surely hadst thou seen 
If thine eyes saw as clear as mine : 
Well worth she is our love divine, 
And unto Ragnar is she wed, 
The best man since that thou wert dead, 
My King, my love, mine own, mine own ! ' 

" Then the twain kissed upon the throne, 
And the dream passed and sleep passed too." 



! 



76 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Therewith the King her body drew 
Nearer to him, if it might be, 
And spake : " A strange dream came to me. 
Upon a waste at dawn I went 
And wandered over vale and bent, 
And ever was it dawn of day, 
And still upon all sides there lay 
The bones of men, and war-gear turned 
To shards and rust ; then far off burned 
A fire, and thither quick I passed. 
And when I came to it at last 
Dreadful it seemed, impassable ; 
But I, fain of that land to tell 
What things soever might be known, 
Went rdund about, and up and down, 
And gat ho passing by the same ; 
Until, methought, just where the flame 
Burned highest, through the midst I saw 
A man and woman toward me draw, 
Even as through a flowery wood : 
So came they unto where I stood, 
And glad at heart therewith I grew, 
For such fair folk as were the two 
Ne'er had I seen ; then the man cried : 

" * Hail to thee, Ragnar ! well betide 
This dawn of day. Stretch forth thine hand.' 

" E'en as he bade me did I stand, 
Abiding what should hap, but he 
Turned to the woman lovingly, 
And from her bosom's fresh delight 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 77 

Drew forth a blooming lily white, 
And set it in mine hand, and then 
Both through the flame went back again. 

" Then afterwards in earth I set 
This lily, and with soft regret 
Watched for its fading ; but withal 
Great light upon the world did fell, 
And fair the sun rose o'er the earth, • 
And blithe I grew and full of mirth : 
And no more on a waste I was, 
But in a green world, where the grass 
White lily-blooms well-nigh did hide ; 
O'er hill and valley far and wide 
They waved in the warm wind ; the sun 
Seemed shining upon everyone, 
As though it loved it : and with that 
I woke, and up in bed I sat 
And saw thee waking, O my sweet ! " 

With that last word their lips did meet, 
And even the fresh May morning bright 
Was noted not in their delight. 

Let be — as ancient stories tell 
Full knowledge upon Ragnar fell 
In lapse of time, that this was she 
Begot in the felicity 
Swift-fleeting of the wondrous twain, 
, Who afterwards through change and pain 
Must live apart to meet in death. 






78 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But, would ye know what the tale saith, 
In the old Danish tongue is writ 
Full many a word concerning it, — 
The days through which these lovers passed, 
Till death made end of all at last. 
But so great Ragnar's glory seemed 
To Northern folk, that many deemed 
That for his death, when song arose 
From that Northumbrian adder-close, 
England no due atonement paid 
Till Harald Godwinson was laid 
Beside his fallen banner, cold 
Upon the blood-soaked Sussex mould, 
And o'er the wrack of Senlac field 
Full-fed the gray-nebbed raven wheeled. 



TN the dim place that the sun knew no more 
■* He rose up when his tale was fully o'er, 
And 'gan to pace the long hall to and fro 
With old eyes looking downward, e'en as though 
None else were there : at last with, upraised face 
He walked back swiftly to his fire-lit place, 
And sat him down, and turned to the young folk 
Smiling perforce ; then from their lips outbroke 
The murmuring speech his moody looks had stilled, 
And with a sweet so und was the hall fulfilled ; 
E'en like the noise that from the thin wood's side 
Swims through the dawning day at April-tide 



THE FOSTERING OF ASLAUG. 79 

Across the speckled eggs, when from the brown 
Soft feathers glittering eyes are looking down 
Over the dewy meads, too fresh and fair 
For aught but lovely feet to wander there. 

Drag on, long night of winter, in whose heart, 
Nurse of regret, the dead spring yet has part ! 
Drag on, O night of dreams ! O night of fears ! 
Fed by the summers of the bygone years ! 



8o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



JANUARY. • 

T^ROM this dull rainy undersky and low, 
•*- This murky ending of a leaden day, 
That never knew the sun, this half-thawed snow, 
These tossing black boughs faint against the gray 
Of gathering night, thou turnest, dear, away 
Silent, but with thy scarce-seen kindly smile 
Sent through the dusk my longing to beguile. 

There, the lights gleam, and all is dark without ! 
And in the sudden change our eyes meet dazed — 
O look, love, look again ! the veil of doubt 
Just for one flash, past counting, then was raised ! 
O eyes of heaven, as clear thy sweet soul blazed 
On mine a moment ! O come back again 
Strange rest and dear amid the long dull pain ! 

Nay, nay, gone by ! though there she sitteth still, 
With wide gray eyes so frank and fathomless — 
Be patient, heart, thy days they yet shall fill 
With utter rest — Yea, now thy pain they bless, 
And feed thy last hope of the world's redress — 
O unseen hurrying rack ! O wailing wind ! 
What rest and where go ye this night to find ? 



JANUAR r. 81 



'T^HE year has changed its name since that last tale ; 
"■■ Yet nought the prisoned spring doth that avail. 
Deep buried under snow the country lies ; 
Made dim by whirling flakes the rook still flies 
South-west before the wind ; noon is as still 
As midnight on the southward-looking hill, 
Whose slopes have heard so many words and loud 
Since on the vine the woolly buds first showed. 
The raven hanging o'er the farmstead gate, 
While for another death his eye doth wait, 
Hears but the muffled sound of crowded byre 
And winds' moan round the wall. Up in the spire 
The watcher set high o'er the half-hid town 
Hearkens the sound of chiming bells fall down 
Below him ; and so dull and dead they seem 
That he might well-nigh be amidst a dream 
Wherein folk hear and hear not. 

Such a tide, 
With all work gone from the hushed world outside, 
Still finds our old folk living, and they sit 
Watching the snow-flakes by the window flit 
Midmost the time 'twixt noon and dusk ; till now 
One of the elders clears his knitted brow, 
And says : 

" Well, hearken of a man who first 
In every place seemed doomed to be accursed ; 
To tell about his ill hap lies on me ; 

4* 



82 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Before the winter is quite o'er, maybe 
Some other mouth of his good hap may tell ; 
But no third tale there is, of what befell 
His fated life, when he had won his place ; 
And that perchance is not so ill a case 
For him and us ; for we may rise up, glad 
At all the rest and triumph that he had 
Before he died ; while he, forgetting clean 
The sorrow and the joy his eyes had seen, 
Lies quiet and well famed — and serves to-day 
To wear a space of winter-tide away." 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 



ARGUMENT. 

Hipponous, son of Glaucus King of Corinth, unwittingly slew his brother 
Beller, and, fleeing from his country, came to Prcetus King of Argos, 
who purified him of his guilt ; and thereafter was he called Bellerophon. 
He dwelt long with Prcetus, well loved by him, and receiving many 
good things at his hands ; but at last he lost the King's favor by the 
guile of the Queen Sthenoboea, and was sent to Jobates King of Lycia, 
her father, with a covert message of evil. 



TJRCETUS, the King of Argos, on a day 

■*■ In tangled forests drave the boar to bay, 

And had good hap, for ere the noon was o'er 

He set his foot upon the third huge boar 

His steel that day had reached ; then, fain of rest, 

The greensward 'jieath the spreading oak-trees pressed, 

And, king-like, feasted with his folk around. 

Nor lacked he for sweet music's measured sound, 

For when somewhat were men's desires appeased 

Of meat and drink, their weary limbs well eased, 

There 'gan an ancient hunter and his son 

To tell of glorious deeds in old days done 

Within the wood ; but as Lyaeus' gift, 

And measured words from common life did lift 

The thoughts of men, and noble each man seemed 

Unto his fellow, from afar there gleamed 

Sun-litten arms, and 'twixt the singer's word 



84 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The slow tramp of a great horse soon they heard ; 

And from a glade that pierced the thicket through 

In sight at last a mounted man there drew. 

Then the dogs growled, and* midst their weapons' clang 

Unto their feet the outmost hunters sprang, 

Handling their spears ; but still King Proetus lay, 

Till nigh the circle that lone man made stay, 

And with wild eyes gazed down upon the throng. 

Wearied he seemed, and his black war-horse strong 

On many a mile had left both sweat and blood, 

And panting now with drooping head he stood 

Forgetting all the eager joys of speed ; 

And tattered was his rider's lordly weed, 

His broken sheath now held a sword no more, 

With rust his armor bright was spotted o'er, 

Unkempt and matted was the yellow hair 

That crowned his head, nor was there helmet there j 

His face, that should have been as fair and bright 

And ruddy as a maid's, was deadly white, 

And drawn and haggard ; and his gray eyes stared, 

As though of something he were sore afeard 

That other folk saw not at all. But now 

A hunter cried out, " Nay, and who art thou ? 

What God or man pursues thee ? bide and speak ; 

Nor yet shalt thou for nought the King's rest break." 

A scared look did the man behind him fling, 

Then said, " Stand close around me : to your King, 

When I may see him, will I tell the tale ; 

Unless indeed, meanwhile, my life should fail." 

With that, as one who hath but little might, 
From off his wearied steed did he alight. 



. BBLLBROPHON AT ARGOS. 85 

They led him to the King, who 'gainst a tree 
Stood upright now, the new-come man to see ; 
Who brought unto him would not meet his eyes, 
But stood and stared distraught in dreamy wise ; 
Till cheerily the King of Argos said : 
" Cast somewhat off, O friend, thy drearyhead ; 
Sit thee and eat and drink, and be my guest ; 
I will not harm thee though thou be unblest ; 
Let Gods or men take vengeance as they can, 
Nor ask my help, who dwell a peaceful man 
'Twixt white-walled Argos and the rustling trees." 

The man turned round, as asking what were these, 
The words he said ; then, casting here and there 
A troubled look, as if not safe he were 
From some dread thing that followed even yet, 
He sat him down, and like a starved man ate : 
Yet did he tremble as he took the food, 
And in the cup he gazed, as though the blood 
Of man it held, and not the blood of earth, 
The stirrer up to kindly words and mirth. 

But when his hunger now was satisfied, 
Casting his hair aback the King he eyed, 
And in a choked and husky voice he said : 
" Now can ye see, O folk, I am not dead ? 
But tell me, King, how shall I name thee here, 
Since he in whose heart lieth any prayer, 
To nameless Gods will let no warm words flow ? " 

" To Prcetus pray for what thou wouldest now," 
The King said ; " by the soil of Argos pray : 
To no light matter will I say thee nay, 
For my heart giveth to thee : name thy name, 
And say whereby these evils on thee came." 



86 THE EAR THL Y PARADISE. . 

. With changing eyes now gazed the outcast man 

On Prcetus' cheery face, and color ran 

O'er his wan visage. " Thou art kind," he said ; 

" But kinder eyes I knew, that on the dead 

Must look for ever now ; and joy is gone : 

Best hadst thou cast forth such a luckless one ; 

For what I love I slay, and what I hate 

I strive to save from out the hands of Fate. 

Listen and let me babble : I have seen, 

Since that hour was, nought but the long leaves green, 

The tree-trunks, and the scared things of the wood." 

Then silently awhile he seemed to brood 
O'er what had been, but even as the King 
Opened his lips to mind him of the thing 
That he should tell, from his bent head there came 
Slow words, as if from one confessing shame, 
While nigher to his mouth King Prcetus drew. 

" Hipponoiis men have called me, ere I knew 
The hate of Gods and fear of men ; my life 
Went past at Corinth free from baneful strife, 
For there my father ruled from sea to sea, 
Glaucus the Great : and fair Eurymede, 
My mother, bare another son to him, 
Like unto me in mind and face and limb, 
Whom men called Beller ; and most true it is 
That I with him dwelt long in love and bliss, 
However long ago that seems to be. 
What plans we laid for joyous victory ! 
What lovely lands untitled we thought to win, 
And be together even as Gods therein, 
Bringing the monsters of the world to nought ! 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 87 

How eagerly from elders news we sought 
Of lands that lay anigh the ocean-stream ! 
And yet withal what folly then did seem 
Their cold words and their weary hopeless eyes, 
When this alone of all things then seemed wise, 
To know how sweet life was, how dear the earth, 
And only fluttering hope stayed present mirth — 
Ah, how I babble ! What a thing man is, 
Who, falling unto misery out of bliss, 
Thinks that new wisdom but the sole thing then 
That binds the many ways of toiling men ! 

" In one fair chamber did we sleep a-night, 
I and my brother — there, 'twixt light and light, 
Three nights together did I dream a dream, 
Where lying on my bed I still did seem 
E'en as I was indeed, when a cold hand 
Was laid upon me, and a shape did stand 
By my bed-head, a woman clad in gray, 
Like to the lingering time 'twixt night and day, 
And veiled her face was, and her tall gaunt form. 
She drew me from my peaceful bed and warm, 
And led me, shuddering, bare-foot, o'er the floor, 
Until, with beating heart, I stood before 
My brother's bed and knew what I should do ; 
For from beneath her shadowy robe she drew 
A well-steeled feathered dart, and that must I, 
Casting all will aside, clutch mightily, 
And, still unable with her will to strive, 
E'en as her veiled hand pointed, madly drive 
Into the heart of mine own mother's son, 
Striving to scream as that ill deed was done. 



1 



88 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" No cry came forth, but even with the stroke, 
With sick and fainting heart, I nigh awoke. 
And when the dream again o'er me was cast, 
Chamber, and all I knew, away had passed, 
Nor saw I more the ghost : alone I stood 
In a strange land, anigh an oaken wood 
High on a hill ; and far below my feet 
The white walls of a glorious town did meet 
A yellow strand and ship-beset green sea ; 
And all methought was as a toy for me, 
For I was King thereof and great enow. 

" But as I stood upon that hill's green brow, 
Rejoicing much, yet yearning much indeed 
For something past that still my heart must need, 
Once more was all changed ; by the windy sea 
Did men hold games with great solemnity 
In honor of some hero past away, 
Whose body dead upon a huge pile lay 
Waiting the torch, and people far and wide 
About the strand a name I knew not cried, 
Lamenting him who once had been their king ; 
But when I saw the face of the dead thing 
Over whose head so many a cry was thrown 
On to the wind, I knew it for mine own. 

" Cold pangs shot through me then, sleep's bonds I 
broke ; 
Shuddering with terror in my bed I woke, 
And when thought came again, a weight of fear 
Lay on my heart and still grew heavier. 
But when the next night and the third night came, 



SELLER OPHON AT AEG OS. 89 

And still in sleep my visions were the same, 
No longer in mine own heart could I hold 
The story of that marvel quite untold, 
For fear possessed me : good at first it seemed 
That I should tell the dream so strangely dreamed 
Unto my brother ; then I feared that he 
Might for that tale look with changed eyes on me, 
As deeming that some secret hope had wrought 
Within my false heart, and that pageant brought 
Before mine eyes ; or he might flee the land 
To save our house from some accursed hand ; 
And either way that-dream seemed hard to tell 
That yet, untold, made for my soul a hell. 

" But of a certain elder now I thought, 
Who much of lore to both of us had taught 
And loved us well ; Diana's priest was he, 
And in the wild woods served her faithfully, 
Dwelling with few folk in her woodland shrine. 
That from the hillside such a man sees shine 
As goes from Corinth unto Sicyon. 

" And now amid these thoughts was night nigh done, 
And the dawn glimmered ; I grew hot to go 
To that old priest these troublous things to show ; 
So from my bed I rose up silently, 
And with all haste I did my weed on me, 
And went unto the door ; but as I passed 
The fair porch through, I saw how 'gainst the last 
Brass-adorned pillar lay a feathered dart ; 
And therewith came new fear into my heart, 
For as the dart that I in dreams had seen 
So was it fashioned, and with feathers green 



OjO THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

And scarlet was the hinder end bedight, 
And round the shaft were bands of silver white. 
Then scarcely did I know if still I dreamed, 
Yet, looking at the shaft, withal it seemed 
Good unto me to take it in my hand, 
That the old man the more might understand 
How real my dream had been in very deed, 
And give me counsel better to my need. 

" With that I caught it up, and went my way, 
And almost ere the sun had made it day 
Was I within the woods, and hastening on, 
Afire until the old man's house was won ; 
And like a man who walks in sleep I went, 
Nor noted aught amid my strong intent. 

" But when I reached the little forest fane 
I found my labor had but been in vain ; 
For there the priest's folk told me he had gone 
The eve before to Corinth, all alone, 
And on some weighty matter, as they deemed ; 
For measurelessly troubled still he seemed. 
His trouble troubled me, because I thought 
That unto him sure knowledge had been brought 
Of some great danger hanging over me, 
And that he thither went my face to see, 
While I was seeking him ; and therewithal 
Great fear and heaviness on me did fall ; 
And all the life I once had thought so sweet 
Now seemed a troublous thing and hard to meet. 

" So cityward again I set my face, 
And through the woodland glades I rode apace, 
And halfway betwixt dawn and noon had I 
Unto the wood's edge once more come anigh ; 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 91 

And now upon the wind I seemed to hear 

The sound of mingled voices drawing near ; 

Whereon I Stayed to hearken and cried out, 

But feeble was the sound from my parched throat ; 

And listening afterward I heard not now 

Those sounds, and timorous did my faint heart grow, 

And tales of woodfolk my vexed mind did take. 

But just as I the well-wrought reins would shake, 

Grown nigher did I hear those sounds again, 

And drew aback the hand that held the rein ; 

And even therewith stalked forth into the way 

From out the thicket a huge wolf and gray, 

And stood with yellow eyes that glared on me ; 

And I stared too ; my folly made me see 

No wolfi but some dread deity, in him ; 

But trembling as I was in every limb, 

E'en as his growling smote upon my heart, 

Tighter my fingers clutched the dreadful dart, 

I made a shift in stirrups up to stand, 

And hurled the quivering shaft from out my hand ; 

Then fire seemed all around me, and a pang 

Crushed down my heart as from the thicket rang 

A dreadful cry : clear saw I, even as he 

Who meets the Father's visage suddenly ; 

No wolf was there ; but o'er the herbage ran 

With staggering steps a pale and bleeding man : 

His left hand on the shaft, Whose banded wood 

Over the barbs within his bosom stood, 

His right hand raised against me, as he fell 

Close to my horse-hoofs ; and I knew full well 

That this my brother's last farewell should be, 

And thus his face henceforward should I see. 



92 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

" What else ? it matters not ; the priest I saw, 
And armed men from the thicket toward me draw, 
With scared eyes fixed on mine ; I drew my sword, 
And sat there, waiting for a dreadful word, 
Bidding the rush of many men on me ; , 

But they began to draw round silently, 
And ere the circle yet was fully made, 
I, who at first might even thus have stayed 
For death and curses, felt the love of life 
Stir up my heart again to hope and strife ; 
Yea, even withal I saw in one bright gleam 
The latter ending of my dreaded dream. 
So, crying out, strongly my horse I spurred, 
And as he, rearing up, dashed forth, I heard 
Clatter of arms and cries ; a spear flew o'er 
My bended head, a well-aimed arrow tore 
My helm therefrom ; yet then a cry there came : 
' Take him alive, nor bring a double shame 
Upon the great house ! ' Even therewith I drave 
Against a mighty man as wave meets wave ; 
Back flew my right arm, and my sword was gone, 
Whirled off as from a sling the wave-worn stone, 
And my horse reeled, but he before me lay 
Rolled over, horse and man, and in my way 
Was no one now, as I spurred madly on : 
And so in no long time the race I won, 
For nobly was I mounted ; and I deem 
That to the most of those men did it seem 
No evil thing that I should 'scape away. 

" O king, I think this happed but yesterday, 
And now already do I deem that I 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 93 

Did no good deed in seeking not to die, 
For I am weary, and the Gods made me 
A luckless man among all folk to be — 
I care not if their purpose I undo, 
Since now I doubt not that the thing is so — 
— And yet am I so made, that, having life, 
Must I, though ever worsted in the strife, 
Cling to it still too much to gain the rest 
Which yet I know of all things is the best. 
Then slay me, King ! lo now, I pray for this, 
And no least portion of thy hoarded bliss ; 
Slay me, and let the oak-boughs say their say 
Over my bones through the wild winter day ! 
Slay me, for I am fain thereto to go, 
Where no talk is of either bliss or woe." 

" Nay," said the King, " didst thou not eat and drink 
When hunger drave thee e'en now ? yea, and shrink 
When my men's spears were pointed at thy breast ? 
Be patient ; thou indeed shalt gain thy rest, 
But many a thing has got to come ere then : 
For all things die, and thou midst other men 
Shalt scarce remember thou hast had a friend. 
At worst before thou comest to the end 
Joy shalt thou have, and sorrow : wherefore come ; 
With me thou well mayst have no hapless home. 
Dread not the Gods ; ere long time has gone by 
Thy soul from all guilt will we purify, 
And sure no heavy curse shall lie on thee. 
Nay, did their anger cause this thing to be ? 
Perchance in heaven they smile upon thy gain — 
— Lo, for a little while a burning pain, 



94 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then yearning unfulfilled a little space, 
Then tender memories of a well-loved face 
In quiet hours, and then — forgetfulness — 
How hadst thou rather borne, still less and less 
To love what thou hadst loved, till it became 
A thing to be forgotten, a great shame 
To think thou shouldst have wasted life thereon ? 
Come then — thou spakest of a kingdom won 
Thy dream foretold, and shall not this be too, 
E'en as the dreadful deed thou cam'st to do ? 
To horse ! and unto Argos let us wend, 
Begin thy life afresh with me for friend. 
Wide is the world, nor yet for many a day 
Will every evil thing be cleared away 
That bringeth scathe to men within its girth ; 
Surely a man like thee can win the mirth 
That cometh of the conquering of such things ; 
For not in vain art thou the seed of kings 
Unless thy face belie thee — nay, no more : 
Why speak I vain words to a heart still sore 
With sudden death of happiness ? yet come 
And ride with us unto our lovely home." 

Hipponous to the King's word answered nought, 
But sat there brooding o'er his dreary thought, 
Nor seemed to hear ; and when the Argive men 
Brought up to him his battle-steed again, 
Scarce witting of the company or place, 
He mounted, and with set and weary face 
Rode as they bade him at the King's left hand : 
Nor did the sight of the fair well-tilled land, 
When that they gained from out the tangled wood, 



BELLBROPHON AT ARGOS. 95 

Do aught in dealing with his mournful mood ; 
Nor Argos' walls as from the fields they rose, 
Such good things with their mightiness to close 
From chance of hurt ; scarce saw he the fair gate, 
Dainty to look on, yet so huge of weight ; 
Nor did the streets' well-ordered houses draw 
His eyes to look at them ; unmoved he saw 
The south-land merchants' dusky glittering train ; 
About the fountain the slim maids in vain. 
Drew sleek arms from the water, or turned round 
With shaded eyes at the great horn's hoarse sound. 
The sight of the King's house, deemed of all men 
A wonder 'mid the houses kings had then, 
Drew from him but a troubled frown, as though 
Men's toilsome folly he began to know ; 
The carven Gods within the banquet-hall, 
The storied hangings that bedight the wall, 
Made his heart sick to think of labor vain, 
Telling once more the oft- told tale of pain. 
Cold in the damsel's hand his strong hand lay, 
When to the steaming bath she led the way ; 
And when another damsel brought for him 
Raiment wherein the Tyrian dye showed dim 
Amid the gold lines of the broideries, 
Her face downcast because she might not please, 
He heeded not. When to the hall he passed, 
And by the high seat he was set at last, 
Then Proetus, smiling from his mild eyes, laid 
A hand upon his combed-out hair and said : 

" Surely for no good luck this golden hair 
Has come to Argos, and this visage fair, 



96 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

To make us, who were well enow before, 
Seem to our maids like churls at the hall-door, 
Prying about when men to war are gone 
And girls and children sit therein alone." 

But nought Hipponoiis heeded the King's say, 
But, turning, roughly put his hand away, 
And frowning muttered, and still further drew, 
As a man touched amid his dream might do. 

In sooth he dreamed, and dreary was his dream ; 
A bitter thing the world to him did seem ; 
The void of life to come he peopled now 
With folk of scornful eyes and brazen brow ; 
And one by one he told the tale of days 
Wherein an envious mock was the world's praise ; 
Where good deeds brought ill fame, and truth was not, 
Hate was remembered, love was soon forgot ; 
No face was good for long to look upon, 
And nought was worthy when it once was won ; 
And narrow, helpless, friendless was the way 
That led unto the last most hopeless day 
Of hopeless days, in tangled, troubled wise. 
So thought he, till the tears were in his eyes, 
Since he was young yet, for hope lying dead. 

But on his fixed eyes and his weary head 
The happy King of Argos gazed awhile, 
Till from his eye faded the scornful smile 
That lingered on his lips ; and now he turned, 
As one who long ago that task had learned, 
And unto the great men about him spoke, 
And was a merry king of merry folk. 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 97 

So passed the feast and all men drew to sleep, 
And e'en Hipponoiis his soul might steep 
In sweet forgetfulness a little while ; 
And somewhat did the fresh young day beguile 
His treasured sorrow when he woke next morn, 
And somewhat less he felt himself forlorn : 
Nor did the King forget him, but straight sent 
Unto the priests, and told them his intent 
That this his guest should there be purified, 
Since he with honor in his house should bide. 

So was Jove's house made ready for that thing, 
And thither amid songs and harp-playing, 
White-robed and barefoot, was Hipponoiis brought ; 
Who, bough in hand, for peace the God besought 
Noiseless the white bulls fell beneath the stroke 
Of the gold-girdled, well-taught temple folk : 
Up to the roof arose the incense-cloud ; 
The chanted prayer of men, now low now loud, 
Thrilled through the brazen leaves of the great door ; 
Thick lay the scattered herbs upon the floor, 
And in the midst at last the hero stood, 
Freed of the guilt of shedding kindred blood. 
And then the chief priest cried, " Bellerophon ! 
With this new hapless name that thou hast won, 
Go forth, go free, be happy once again, 
But no more called Hipponoiis of men." 

Then forth Bellerophon passed wearily, 
Although so many prayers had set him free ; 
Yet somewhat was he ready to forget, 
And turn unto the days that might be yet 

5 



98 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But when before King Proetus' throne he came, 
The King called out on him by his new name : 
" O fair Bellerophon, like me, be wise, 
And set things good to win before thine eyes, 
Lands and renown, and riches, and a life 
That knows from day to day so much of strife 
As makes men happy, since the age of gold 
Is past, if e'er it was, as a tale told." 

" O King," he said, "thou sittest in full day, \ 
Thou strivest to put thoughts of night away ; 
My life has not yet left the morning-tide, 
And I, who find the world that seemed so wide, 
Now narrowed to a little troublous space 
Where help is not, astonied turn my face 
Unto the coming hours, nor know at all 
What thing of joy or hope to me will fall. 
Be patient, King ; perchance within a while 
No marfeast I may be, but learn to smile 
Even as thou, who lovest life so much. 
Who knows but grief may vanish at a touch, 
As joy does ? and a long way off is death : 
Some folks seem glad even to draw their breath." 

" Yea," said the King, " thou hast it, for indeed 
I fain would live, like most men — but what need 
Unto a fevered man to talk of wine ? 
Thy heart shall love life when it grows like mine. 
But come thou hence, and I will show to thee 
What things of price the Gods have given to me. 
Not good it is to harp on the frayed string ; 




BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 99 

And thou, so seeing many a lovely thing, 
Mayst hide thy weary pain a little space." 

And therewith did King Proetus from that place 
Draw forth Bellerophon ; and so when he 
In his attire was now clad royally, 
From out the precinct to his palace fair 
Did the King bring him ; and he showed him there 
His stables, where the war-steeds stood arow 
Over the dusty grain : then did they go 
To armories, where sword and spear and shield 
Hung bloodless, ready for the fated field : 
The treasury showed he, where things richly wrought 
Together into such a place were brought, 
That he who stole the oxen of a God, 
For all his godlike cunning scarce had trod 
Untaken on its floor —withal he showed 
The chamber where the broidered raiment glowed, 
Where the spice lay, and scented unguents fit 
To touch Queen Venus' skin and brighten.it ; 
The ivory chairs and beds of ivory 
He showed him, and he bid his tired eyes see 
The stories wrought on brazen doors, the flowers 
And things uncouth carved on the wood of bowers ; 
The painted walls that told things old and new, 
Things come to pass, and things that onward drew. 

But all the while Bellerophon's grave face 
And soon-passed smile seemed unmeet for that place, 
And even Proetus felt a pang of fear, 
As if it told of times a-drawing near, 
When all the wealth and beauty that was his 



100 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Should not avail to buy one hour of bliss. 

And sometimes when he watched his wandering eyes 

And heard his stammering speech, would there arise 

Within his heart a feeling like to hate, 

Mingled with scorn of one so crushed by fate : 

For ever must the rich man hate the poor. 

Now at the last they stood before a door 
Adorned with silver, wrought of precious wood ; 
Then Proetus laughed, and said, u O guest, thy mood 
Is hard to deal with ; never any leech 
Has striven as I thy sickness' heart to reach ; 
And I grow weary and must get me aid." 

Therewith upon the lock his hand he laid 
And pushed the door aback, and then the twain 
The daintiest of all passages did gain ; 
And as betwixt its walls they passed along 
Nearer they drew unto the measured song 
Of sweet-voiced women ; and the King spake then : 
" Drive fire out with fire, say all wise men ; 
Here mayst thou set thine eyes on such an one, 
That thou no more wilt think of 4ays agone, 
But days to come ; for here indeed my spouse 
Watches the damsels in the weaving- house, 
Or in the pleasance sits above their play ; 
And certes here upon no long-passed day, 
Unless my eyes were bleared with coming eld, 
Fair sights for such as thou have I beheld." 

Across the exile's brow a frown there came, 
As though his sorrow of such things thought shame, 
Yet mayhap his eye brightened as he heard 
The song grow louder and the hall they neared ; 
But the King smiled, and swiftlier led him on, 
Until unto the door thereof they won. 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 101 



"VTOW noble was that hall and fair enow, 

■*-^ Betwixt whose slim veined pillars set arow, 

And marble lattice wrought like flowering trees, 

Showed the green freshness of the "summer seas 

Made cheery by the sun and many a ship 

Whose black bows smoothly through the waves did slip. 

In bowls whereon old stories pictured were 

The bright rose-laurels trembled in the air, 

That from the sea stole through the lattices, 

And round them hummed a few bewildered bees. 

Midmost the pavement wrought by toil of years, 
A tree was set, gold-leaved like that which bears 
Unto the maids of Hesperus strange fruit ; 
A many-colored serpent from the root 
Curled upward round the stem, and, reaching o'er 
A four-square silver laver, did outpour 
Bright glittering water from his throat of brass ; 
And at each corner of the basin was 
A brazen hart who seemed at point to drink ; 
And these the craftsman had not made to shrink 
Though in the midst Diana's feet pressed down 
The forest greensward, and her girded gown 
Cleared from the brambles fell about her thigh, 
And eager showed her terrible bright eye. 

. But 'twixt the pillars and that marvellous thing 
Were scattered those they had e'en now heard sing ; 
Their song had sunk now, and a murmuring voice 
But mingled with the clicking loom's sharp noise 



io2 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And splashing of the fountain, where a maid 
With one hand lightly on a brass deer laid, 
One clasped about her own foot, knelt to watch 
Her brazen jar the tinkling water catch ; 
Withal the wool-comb's sound within the fleece 
Began and grew, and slowly did decrease, 
And then began as still it gat new food ; 
And by the loom an ancient woman stood 
And grumbled o'er the web ; and on the floor 
Ten spindles twisted ever ; from the store 
Raised on high pillars at the gable end 
Adown a steep stair did a maiden wend, 
Who in the wide folds of her gathered gown 
Fresh yarn bright-dyed unto the loom bare down. 

But on the downy cushions of a throne, 
Above all this sat the fair Queen alone, 
Who heeded not the work, nor noted aught ; 
Nor showed indeed that there was any thought 
Within her heaving breast ; but though she moved 
No whit the limbs a god might well have loved, 
Although her mouth was as of one who lies 
In peaceful sleep, though over her deep eyes 
No shadow came to trouble her white brow, 
Yet might you deem no rest was on her now ; 
Rather too weary seemed she e'en to sigh 
For foolish life that joyless passed her by. 

So thus the King Bellerophon led in 
Just as the old song did again begin 
From the slim maids, that by the loom's side spun ; 
But ere it had full sway, the nighest one 
Unto the door stopped singing suddenly, 



BELLEROPHON AT AEG OS. 103 

And pressed her neighbor's arm, that she might see 

What new folk were come in ; and therewithal 

An angry glance from the Queen's eyes did fall 

Upon the maid ; so that Bellerophon 

A cruel visage had to look upon, 

When first he saw the Queen raised high above 

The ordered tresses of that close of love. 

But when the women knew the King indeed 
They did him reverence, and with lowly heed 
Made way for him, while a girl here and there 
Made haste to hide what labor had made bare 
Of limb or breast ; and the King smiled through all, 
And now and then a wandering glance let fall 
Upon some fairest face ; and so at last 
Through the sweet band unto the Queen they passed, 
Who rose and waited them by her fair throne 
With eyes wherefrom all care once more had gone 
Of life and what it brought : then the King said — 

" O Sthenobcea, hither have I led 
A man, who, from a happy life down-hurled, 
Looks with sick eyes upon this happy world ; 
Not knowing how to stay here or depart : 
Thou know'st and I know how the wounded heart 
Forgetteth pain and groweth whole again, 
Yet is the pain that passes no less pain. 

" But since this man is noble even as we, 
And help begets help, and withal to me 
Worthy he seems to be a great King's friend, 
Now help me to begin to make an end 
Of his so heavy mood ; for though indeed 
This daintiness may nowise help his need, 
Yet may kind words avail to make him kind 



104 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Unto himself; kind eyes may make him blind 
Unto the ugly, tangled whirl of life ; 
Or in some measured image of real strife 
He may forget the things that he has lost, 
Nor think of how he needs must yet be tost 
Like other men from wave to wave of fate." 

Gravely she set herself the end to wait 
Of the King's speech ; and what of scorn might be 
Within her heart changed nowise outwardly 
Her eyes that looked with scorn on every thing ; 
And yet withal while still the cheery King 
Let his tale flow, unto the exile's place 
She glanced with scornful wonder at his face 
At first, because she deemed it soft and kind ; 
Yet was he fair, and she — she needs must find 
Something that drew her to his wide gray eyes ; 
And presently as with some great surprise 
Her heart 'gan beat, and she must strive in vain 
To crush within it a sweet rising pain, 
She deemed to be that pity that she knew 
As the last folly wise folk turn unto. 
For pain was wont to rouse her rage, and she 
Was like those beasts that slaughter cruelly 
Their wounded fellows — truth she knew not of, 
And fain had killed folk babbling over love ; 
Justice she thought of as a thing that might 
Balk some desire of hers, before the night 
Of death should end it all : nor hope she knew, 
Nor what fear was, how ill soe'er life grew. 

This wisdom had she more than most of folk, 
That through the painted cloud of lies she broke 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 105 

To gain what brought her pleasure for a while, 
However men might call it nought and vile ; 
Nor was she one to make a piteous groan 
O'er bitter pain amid her pleasure grown. 

But she was one of those wrought by the gods 
To be to foolish men as sharpest rods 
To scourge their folly ; wrought so daintily 
That scarcely could a man her body see 
Without awaking strife 'twixt good and ill 
Within him ; and her sweet, soft voice would fill 
Men's hearts with strange desires, and her great eyes, 
Truthful to show her to the cold and wise 
E'en as she was, would make some cast aside 
Whatever wisdom in their breasts might hide ; 
And still despite what long ill days might prove, 
They called her languid hate the soul of love. 

But now that fire that to her eyes arose 
She cast aback awhile to lie all close 
About her heart ; her full lips trembled not, 
And from her cheek faded the crimson spot 
That erst increased thereon. 

" O Prince," she said, 
" Strive to get back again thy goodlihead ; 
Life fiitteth fast, and while it still abides, 
Our folly many a good thing from us hides, 
That else would pierce our hearts with its delight 
Unto the quick, in all the gods' despite." 

He gazed upon her wondering, for again 
That new-born hope, that sweet and bitter pain, 

5* 



106 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Flushed her smooth cheek, and glittered in her eyes, 
And wrought within her lips ; yet was she wise, 
And gazing on his pale and wondering face, 
In his frank eyes she did not fail to trace 
A trouble like unto a growing hate, 
That, yet unknown to him, her love did wait ; 
Then once more did she smother up that flame, 
Calm grew she, from her lips a false voice came. 

" Yea, and bethink thee, mayest thou not be born 
To raise the crushed and succor the forlorn, 
And in the place of sorrow to set mirth, 
Gaining a great name through the wondering earth ? 
Now surely has my lord the King done well 
To bring thee here thy tale to me to tell ; 
Come, then, for nearby such a bower there is 
As most men deem to be a place of bliss ; 
There, when thy tale is o'er that I am fain 
To hearken, may sweet music ease thy pain 
Amidst our feast ; or of these maids shall one 
Read of some piteous thing the gods have done 
To us poor folk upon the earth that dwell. 
Yea, and the reader will I choose so well, 
That such an one herself shall seem to be 
As she of whom the tale tells piteously. 
And thou shalt hear when all is past and o'er, 
And with its sorrow still thine heart is sore, 
The Lydian flutes come nigher and more nigh, 
Till glittering raiment cometh presently, 
And thou behold'st the dance of the slim girls, 
Wavering and strange as the leaf-wreath that whirls 
Down in the marble court we walk in here 



BBLLBROPHON AT ARGOS: 107 

Mid sad October, when the rain draws near : 
So delicate therewith, that when all sound 
Of sobbing flute has left the air around, 
And, panting, lean the dancers against wall 
And well-wrought pillar, you hear nought at all 
But their deep breathing ; so are all men stilled, 
So full their hearts with all that beauty filled." 



Coldly and falsely was her speech begun, 
But she waxed warm ere all the tale was done ; 
Nay, something soft was in her voice at last, 
As round his soul her net she strove to cast 
Almost despite herself. 

Unmoved he stood, 
But that some thought did cross his weary mood 
That made him knit his brow, and therewith came 
A flush across his face as if of shame 
Because of that new thought ; but when an end 
Her speech had, then he spake : 

" What, love or friend 
Can do me good ? God-hated shall I be, 
And bring to no man aught but misery ; 
And thou, O royal man, and thou, O Queen, 
Who heretofore in bliss and mirth have been, 
Hearken my words, and on your heads be all 
The trouble that from me shall surely fell 
If I abide with you : yet doubt it not 
That this your love shall never be forgot 
Wherewith ye strive to win a helpless man, 
And ever will I labor as I can 
To make my ill forebodings come to nought." 



108 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But midst these things, pleased by some hidden 
thought, 
The King smiled, turning curious eyes on them, 
And smoothing down his raiment's golden hem 
As one who hearkens music ; then said he, 
" Wilt thou give word for our festivity, 
O Sthenoboea ? But come thou, O guest, 
And by the great sea we will take our rest, 
Speaking few words." 

So from her golden throne 
She passed to do what things must needs be done, 
And with firm feet amid her maids she went 
On this new tyrannous sweetness all intent ; 
So did it work in her, that scarcely she 
Might bear the world now, as she turned to see 
The stranger and the King a-going down 
By marble stairs unto the foreshores brown. 
So slipped the morn away, and when the sun 
His downward course some three hours had begun, 
Summoned by sound of horns they took their way 
Unto a bower that looking westward lay, 
Yet was by trellised roses shaded so 
That little of the hot sun did it know 
But what the lime-trees' honey-sweet scent told, 
And their wide wind-stirred leaves, turned into gold 
Against the bright rays of the afternoon. 

So to that chamber came the fair Queen soon, 
Well harbingered by flutes ; nor had she spared 
To veil her limbs in raiment that had fared 
O'er many a sea, before it had the hap 
The Lycian's smooth skin in its folds to lap. 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 109 

But as she entered there in queenly guise, 
With firm and haughty step, and careless eyes 
Over the half-hid beauty of her breast, 
One moment on the exile did they rest, 
And softened to a meek, imploring gaze — 
One moment only ; as with great amaze 
His eyes beheld her, doubtful what was there, 
All had gone thence, but the proud empty stare 
That she was wont to turn on every thing. 

Withal she sat her down beside the King, 
And the feast passed with much of such delight 
As makes to happy men the world seem bright, 
But from the hapless draws but hate and scorn, 
Because the gods both happy and forlorn 
Have set in one world, each to each to be 
A vain rebuke, a bitter memory. 

Yet the Queen held her word, and when that they 
had heard the music sing adown the day, 
After the dancing women had but left 
Sweet honeyed scents behind, or roses, reft 
By their own hands from head or middle small, 
Then came with hurried steps into the hall 
The reader and her scroll ; sweet-.eyed was she, 
And timid as some loving memory 
Midst the world's clamor : clad in gown of wool 
She sat herself adown upon a stool 
Anigh the proud feet of the Lycian Queen, 
And straight, as if no soul she there had seen, 
With slender hand put back her golden hair, 
And 'gan to read from off the parchment fair. 
In a low voice, and trembling at the first, 
She read a tale of lovers' lives accurst 



} 



no THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

By cruel gods and careless foolish men : 
Like dainty music was her voice, and when 
From out her heart she sighed, as she must read 
Of folk unholpen in their utmost need, 
Still must the stranger turn kind eyes on her. 
At last awhile she paused, as she drew near 
The bitter end of spilt and wasted bliss, 
And death unblessed at last by any kiss ; 
Her voice failed, and adown her book did sink, 
And midst them all awhile she seemed to think 
Of the past days herself; but still so much 
Her beauty and the tale their hearts did touch, 
Folk held their breath till she began again, 
And something 'twixt a pleasure and a pain 
It was when all the sweet tale was read o'er 
And her voice quivered through the air no more. 

Then round the maiden's neck King Prcetus cast 
A golden chain, and from the hall she passed, 
And yet confused and shamefaced ; for the Queen, 
Who at the first the Prince's eyes had seen 
Upon the maid, and then would look no more, 
But kept her eyes fixed on the marble floor 
As listening to the tale, her head now raised, 
And with cold scorn upon the maiden gazed 
As she bent down the golden gift to take ; 
And meanwhile, for her tender beauty's sake, 
Over the exile's face a pleased smile came. 

But she departed to the bliss or shame 
Life had for her, and all folk left the bower ; 
For now was come the summer night's mid-hour : 
The great high moon that lit the rippling sea 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. in 

'Twixt the thin linden-trees shone doubtfully 
Upon the dim gray garden ; the sea-breeze 
Stooped down on the pleached alleys ; the tall trees 
Over the long roofs moved their whispering leaves, 
Nor woke the dusky swifts beneath the eaves. 



"VTOW from that fair night wore the time away, 

-*-^ Until with lapse of many a quiet day, 

And stirring times withal, Bellerophon 

To love of life and hope of joy was won. 

Still grave and wise he was beyond his years, 

No eager man among his joyous peers 

To snatch at pleasure ; careful not to cheat 

His soul with vain desires all over sweet ; 

A wary walker on the road of life ; 

E'en as a man who in a garden, rife 

With flowers, has gone unarmed, and found that there 

Are evil things amid the blossoms fair, 

And paid with wounds for folly : yet when he 

Is whole once more, since there he needs must be, 

And has no will its sweets to cast aside, 

Well armed he walks there 'ware of beasts that hide 

Beneath the shade of those vine-trellises, 

Amid the gray stems of the apple-trees. 

Yet at his heart, about the root of it, 
Strange thoughts there lay, which at sweet times would 
flit 



U2 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Before his eyes, as things grown palpable ; 

Strange hopes that made the weltering world seem well 

While he abode there : therefore was he kind 

To man and maid, and all men's hearts did bind 

With bonds of love ; for 'mid the struggling folk, 

The forgers and the bearers of the yoke, 

Weary with wronging and with wrongs, he seemed 

As one on whom a light from heaven had beamed, 

That changed him to a god yet being alive. 

But midst all folk there did King Prcetus give 
Great gifts to him ; great trust in him he had, 
And ever by his sight was he made glad : 
For well did all things prosper in his hand, 
Nor was there such another in the land 
For strength or goodliness. 

Now so it was, 
That he on matters of the King would pass 
About the country here and there, nor dwell 
At Argos much, and that thing pleased him well ; 
For while all else grew better, ye shall know 
That greater in his heart the fear did grow 
That sprung up therein on that summer eve ; 
And though sometimes the Queen would make believe 
To heed him nought — yea, or depart ma3'be 
At whiles, when he the King would come to see — 
Yet was this but at whiles ; the next day came, 
And scarce would she hold parley with her shame. 

One noon of the late autumn, when the sun 
Brightened the parting year, so nearly done, 
With rays as hot as early June might shed, 
Dawn past an hour, upon the tulip-bed, 



BBLLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 113 

In the great pleasance, 'neath a wall of yew, 
Walked the Corinthian, pondering what to do 
In some great matter late given unto him. 
So clad he was, that both on breast and limb 
Steel glittered, though his head as yet was bare ; 
But in his face was just so much of care 
As seemed to show he had got that to do 
He feared but little well to carry through, 
But which must have his heed a little while : 
And still in going would he stop and smile, 
And seem to cast the shreds of thought away 
In honor of the bright fresh autumn day 
And all the pleasure of the lovely place. 

But at the last, turning about his face 
Unto the sunny garden's other side, 
He saw where, down a grassy path and wide, 
The Queen came, with her head bent down to earth, 
As though 'mid thoughts she were that slew her mirth. 
Slowly she went, with two maids following her, 
Who in their delicate slim hands did bear, 
The one a cithern and some verse-book old, 
The other a white osier maund, to hold 
Some of such flowers as still in fear and doubt 
Against the sickness of the year held out. 

But as they went, nigh to the Prince they drew, 
And soon the maidens' eyes his beauty knew, 
And one at other glanced, smiling and glad, 
For soft love of him in their hearts they had ; 
Yet nought they said, nor did the Queen turn round, 
But kept her eyes still bent upon the ground. 
So in their walk they came to where there stood 
A thin-leaved apple-tree, where, red as blood, 



1 14 THE EAR THL Y PARADISE. 

Yellow as gold, a little fruit hung yet, 
The last rays of the fainting sun to get ; 
And a tall clump of autumn flowers, cold-gray, 
Beneath it, mocked the promise of the day, 
And to them clung a hapless bee or twain, 
A butterfly spread languid wings in vain 
Unto the sun, that scarce could heat her now. 

There the Queen stayed awhile her footsteps slow, „ 
And to the flowers wandered her slender hand ; 
But with her eyes cast down she still did stand, 
And pondered. 

Full of melody and peace 
About her was the lingering year's decease ; 
Strange spicy scents there were that yet were sweet, 
Green was the grass about her gold-shod feet, 
And had no memory of the dawn's white rime ; 
Loud was the birds' song in that windless time, 
Strange the sharp crying of the missel-thrush 
Within the close heart of the hawthorn-bush, 
Strange the far-off rooks' sweet tumultuous voice 
That in the high elms e'en now must rejoice 
And know not why — peace e'en if end of peace. 

The while her burning heart did never cease - 
To give words to such longings, as she knew 
To swift destruction all her glory drew. 

"Ah ! mine, mine, mine ! " she thought, "ah ! mine a 
while ! 
Ah ! mine a little day, if all be vile 
The coming years can bring unto my heart ! 
Ah ! mine this eve, if we to-morn must part ! 
Mine, that a sweet hour I may know at last 






BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 115 

How soon soever all delight is passed ! 
Ah ! mine, mine, mine, if for a little while ! 

So stood she, that her parted lips did smile 
As if of one that memories make half sad ; 
Her breast heaved, as no stronger wish she had 
Than for some careless lover, lightly won, 
And soon forgot, to lay his lips thereon ; 
The flower-stem that her finger-tips did hold 
Was crushed not, and within her shoe of gold 
Lightly her foot. was laid upon the grass ; 
No tremors through her dainty limbs did pass, 
And healthy life alone did paint her cheek : 
For if indeed at first she had felt weak, 
Ere well she knew what she was bent upon, 
Now at the last, when every doubt was gone, 
She would not show the net unto the prey 
. Until she deemed that in her toils he lay. 

She raised her eyes at last with a light sigh, 
Despite herself a flush passed suddenly 
Over her face, and then all pale she grew ; 
For now withal Bellerophon she knew, 
Though at that very point of time the sun 
Along his upraised steel-clad arm had run, 
And made an earthly sun that dazzled her. 
Yet cast she back her trembling hope and fear 
Into her heart, and as before she went 
Slowly, with head a little downward bent, 
But when she had gone on a few yards' space, 
• Once more unto the Prince she raised her face ; 
Then stopped again, and turning round, she said, 



n6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

From lips wherein all passion now seemed dead : 

" Damsels, go home again ; thou, Mysian, go 
Unto the little treasury thou dost know 
Anigh my bower, and, taking this gold key, 
Draw forth that ancient prophet's book for me 
Which shows the stars : for that I fain would show 
To Prince Bellerophon, who bides me now 
Ere he goes forth to bring the island folk 
Once more beneath King Proetus' equal yoke. 
And thou, Leucippe, bide our coming there, 
And bid our folk set forth a feast as fair 
As may be done ; for we within awhile 
May need thy cithern dull thoughts to beguile." 

E'en as they turned she passed on carelessly 
Toward the Prince, nor looked aback to see 
That they were gone ; but he indeed had heard 
Through the calm air her clearly-spoken word, 
And saw the maidens go, and felt as one 
Who bideth, when the herald's speech is done, 
The word that bids the grinded spears fall down. 
But she, with slim hand folded in her gown, 
Went o'er the dewy grass to where he stood, 
And in despite the fire within her blood 
Was calm, and smiled on him, till nigh he thought 
That surely all his fear was vain and nought. 

He bowed before her as she drew anear, 
But she held out her right hand, and in clear 
Sweet tones she cried : " O fair Bellerophon, 
Would that the victory were already won, 
And thou wert back again at this thy home 
We have made glad for thee : behold ! I come 



BELLBROPHON AT ARGOS. 117 

To say farewell — yet come a little way — 
Tor something else indeed I had to say." 

And still she held his hand, but yet durst not 
Clasp as she would the treasure she had got. 

Then to a place together did they pass, 
Where yew-trees hemmed around a plot of grass, 
And kept it scarce touched by the faint sun's rays — 
A place well made for burning summer days, 
But cheerless now. There on a marble seat 
She bade him sit ; while she with restless feet 
Paced to and fro, while from the yew-twigs close, 
With his scared cry the creeping blackbird rose. 
But he, with eyes cast down upon the ground, 
Deemed that his battle easier would be found 
Than this. 

And so at last she stayed by him 
And cried : " The cup is full unto the brim ; 
For now thou goest where thou mayst be slain : 
I speak then — and, alas ! I speak in vain — 
Thy cold eyes tell me so — How shall I move 
Thy flinty heart my curse has made me love ? 
For what have other women done, when they 
Were fair as I, and love before them lay ? 
Was not a look enough for them, a word 
Low murmured, midst the hum of men scarce heard ? 
What have I left undone that they have done ? 
What askest thou of me, O heart of stone ? " 

Choked by her passion here awhile she stayed, 
And he from off the bench sprang up dismayed, 
And turned on her to speak 5 but she withal 



1 



n8 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Before him on her knees made haste to fall, 

And cried out loud and shrilly : " Nay, nay, nay, — 

Say not the word thou art about to say ; 

Let me depart, and things be still as now ; 

So that my dreams sweet images may show, 

As they have done — that waking I may think, 

i If he, my love, from looks of love did shrink, 

That was because I had not prayed him then 

To be my love alone of living men ; 

Because he did not know that I, a Queen, 

Who hitherto but loveless life have seen, 

Could kneel to him, and pray upon my knees 

To give me my first pleasure, my first peace ' — 

Thou knewest not — nay, nay, thou know'st not now 

Thou with the angry eyes and bended brow ! — 

Surely I talk my mother-tongue no more, 

Therefore thou knowest not that I implore 

Thy pity, that I give myself to thee, 

Thy love, thy slave, thy castaway to be — 

Hear'st thou ? thy castaway ! when in a while 

Thou growest weary of my loving smile ! 

Oh, take me, madman ! In a year or twain 

I will not thwart thee if thou lov'st again, 

Nor eye the£ sourly when thou growest cold ; 

— Or art thou not the man that men call bold, 

And fear'st thou ? Then what better time than this 

For we twain to begin our life of bliss ? 

Thy keel awaits thee, and to thee alone, 

Not to the wretched dastard on the throne, 

Thy men will hearken — Nay, thou shalt not speak, 

My feeble reed of hope thou shalt not break ! — 

Let me be gone, thou knowest not of love, 






I 



BBLLEROPHON AT AUG OS. 119 

Thou semblance of a man that nought can move ! 
O wise, wise man, I give thee good farewell : 
Gather fresh wisdom, thinking of my hell." 



She sprang up to her feet and turned away 
Trembling, and no word to her could he say 
For grief and pity ; and the Queen did go 
A little way with doubtful steps and slow, 
Then turned about, and once again did stand 
Before his troubled face, hand laid in hand, 
And sobbing now as if her heart would break ; 
But when from his grieved soul he fain would speak, 
Again from midst her tears she cried : " No, no — 
Do I not know what thou wouldst bid me do ? 
And yet forgive me ! — thou art wise and good. 
Surely some evil thing has turned my blood, 
That even now I wished that thing to slay 
That I of all things only till this day 
Have loved. Ah, surely thou wilt not be slain ! 
Come back, and I will tell thee once again 
How much I love thee, and will not forget 
To say such things as might have moved thee yet, 
Could I have told thee now, couldst thou have seen 
These lips that love thee as they might have been. 
— Farewell, I durst not pray thee for one kiss ! " 

Nearer she drew to him as she spake this, 
Yet, when she ended, turned about again, 
And still, as hoping all was not in vain, 
Lingered a little while, and then at last, 
With raging heart, swiftly therefrom she passed. 



120 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But, she clean vanished now, Bellerophon 
Went slowly toward the palace, all alone, 
And pondering on these things : and shamed he felt, 
E" en as a just man who in sleep has dealt 
Unjustly ; nor had all her prayers and tears 
Moved love in him, but rather stirred his fears, 
For ever was he wise among wise men ; 
And though he doubted not her longing, when 
She turned and spake soft words, he knew that she 
So spake midst hope of what things yet might be, 
And yet had left another kind of word, 
Whereby a friendless man might well be feared ; 
Lonely he felt thereat, as one accurst, 
With whom all best things still must turn to worst, 
And e'en sweet love curdle to bitter hate. 
Yet was he one not lightly crushed by fate, 
And when at last he had his helmet on, 
And heard the folk cry out " Bellerophon ! " 
As toward the ship he passed, kind the world seemed, 
Nor love so far away indeed he deemed 
When he some gentle maiden's kind gray eyes 
Fixed on his own he did at whiles surprise, 
Or when his godlike eyes, on some maid turned 
More fair than most, set fire to thoughts that burned 
On breast and brow of her. So forth he passed, 
And reached the border of the sea at last, 
And there took ship, and hence is gone a space. 

But for the Queen, when she had left that place, 
About the pleasance paths did she go still, 
So 'wildered in her mind because her will 
Might not be done, that at the first she knew 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 121 

No more what place she might be passing through 

Than one who walks in sleep. Yet hope and shame, 

Twain help, at last unto her spirit came ; 

Yea, her bright gown, soiled with the autumn grass, 

Told her the tale of what had come to pass, 

And to her heart came hatred of the spot 

Where she had kneeled to one who loved her not 

And even therewith his image did she see 

As he had been ; then cried she furiously : 

" Ah, fool ! ah, traitor ! must I love thee then, 

When in the world there are so many men 

My smile would drive to madness ? — for I know 

What things they are that men desire so, 

And which of all these bear I not with me ? 

Hast thou not heart and eyes to feel and see ? 

Then shalt thou die, then shalt thou die, at least, 

Nor sit without me at life's glorious feast, 

While I fall ever unto worse and worse. — 

, Ah me ! I rave ! — what folly now to curse 

That which I love, because its loveliness 

Alone has brought me unto this distress ! 

I know not right nor wrong, but yet through all 

Know that the gods a just man him would call ; 

Nay, and I knew it, when I saw him first, 

And in my heart sprang up that glorious thirst. — 

And should he, not being base, yield suddenly, 

And as the basest man, not loving me, 

Take all I gave him, and cast all his life 

Into a tangled and dishonored strife ? 

Nay, it could never be — but now, indeed, 

Somewhat with pity of me his heart may bleed, 

Since he is good ; and he shall think of me, 

6 



n 



122 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

And day by day and night by night shall see 
The image of that woman on her knees, 
Whom men here liken to the goddesses. 
And certainly shall he come back again : 
Nor shall my next speech to him be so vain." 

She smiled, and toward the house made swiftly on 
In triumph, even as though the game were won : 
For, now his face was gone, she, blind with love, 
Deemed but his honor she had got to move 
From its high place, before his heart should fall 
A prey unto her ; e'en as when the wall 
By many a stroke of stones is battered down, 
And all may work their will upon the town. 



"VTOW of Bellerophon must it be said 

■*" ^ That, what by wisdom, what by hardihead, 

His task was done, and great praise gained thereby ; 

So he at last, midst shouts and minstrelsy, 

In the first days of spring, passed up once more 

Unto the palace from the thronging shore. 

Him Proetus met half-way, and, in the face 

Of all the people, in a straight embrace 

Held him awhile, and called him his dear son, 

Praising the gods for all that he had done ; 

Then hand in hand did they go up the street, 

And on their heads folk cast the spring-flowers sweet, 

And bands of maids met them with joyous song 

And gracious pageants as they went along : 



SELLER OPHON A T AR GOS. 123 

And all this for the brave Corinthian's sake — 
Such joy did his return in all hearts make. 

But though the man, once from his home driven forth, 
Was so much loved and held of so much worth, 
And though he throve thereby, and seemed to be 
Scarcely a man but some divinity 
To people's eyes, yet in his soul no less 
There lingered still a little heaviness, 
And therefrom hardly could he cast away 
The memory of that sunny autumn day 
And of the fear it brought ; and one more fear 
He had besides, and as they drew anear 
The palace, therewith somewhat faltering, 
He needs must turn awhile, and of the King 
Ask how the Lycian fared ; the King laughed low, 
And said : 

" Nay, surely she is well enow, 
As her wont is to be ; for, sooth to say, 
She for herself is ever wont to pray, 
And heedeth nothing other grief and wrong : 
And be thou sure, my son, that such live long 
And lead sweet lives ; but those who ever think 
How he and she may fare, and still must shrink 
From sweeping any foe from out the way, 
These — living other people's lives, I say, 
Besides their own, and most of them forlorn — 
May hap to find their lives of comfort shorn 
And short enow — let pass, for as to me, 
I weep for others' troubles certainly, 
But for mine own would weep a little more, 
And so I jog on somehow to the shore 



I 



124 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Whence I shall not return. — Thou laughest — well, 

I deem I was not made for heaven or hell, 

But simply for the earth ; but thou, O son, 

I deem of heaven, and all hearts hast thou won — 

Yea, and this morn the Queen is merrier, 

Because she knoweth that thou art anear." 

The Prince smiled at his words and gladder felt, 
Yet somewhat of his old fear by him dwelt 
And shamed him midst his honor. But withal, 
With shouts and music, entered they the hall, 
And there great feast was made ; but ere the night 
Had 'gun to put an end to men's delight, 
A maid came up the hall with hurrying feet, 
And there in lowly wise the King did greet, 
And bid him know that Sthenobaea had will 
* The joyance of that high-tide to fulfil, 
And Prince Bellerophon to welcome home. 
And even as she spoke the Queen was come 
Unto the door, and through the hall she passed, 
And round about her ever looks she cast, 
As though her maidens, howsoever fair 
And lovesome unto common eyes they were, 
Were fashioned in another wise than she, 
They made for time, she for eternity. 
So 'twixt the awed and wondering folk she moved, 
Hapless and proud, glorious and unbeloved, 
And hating all folk but her love alone : 
And he a shadow seemed, one moment shown 
Unto her longing eyes, then snatched away 
Ere yet her heart could win one glorious day. 
Cruel and happy was she deemed of men — 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 125 

Cruel she was, but though tormented then 
By love, still happier than she ere had been. 

Now when she saw the Prince, with such-like mien 
She greeted him^but as a Queen might greet 
Her husband's friend fresh from a glorious feat ; 
Frank-seeming were her words, and in her face 
No sign of all that storm the Prince could trace 
That had swept over her — and yet therefore 
Amidst his joy he did but fear her more. 

So time slipped by, and still was she the same, 
Till he 'gan deem she had forgot the shame 
Of having shameful gifts cast back to her, 
That scorned love was a burden light to bear. 
Yea, and the moody ways that once she had 
Seemed changing into life all frank and glad ; 
She saw him oft now, and alone at.whiles ; 
But still, despite her kind words and her smiles, 
No word of love fell from her any more. 

But when the lush green spring was now passed o'er, 
And the green lily-buds were growing white, 
A feast they held for pastime and delight 
Within the odorous pleasance on a tide, 
And down the hours the feast in joy did glide. 
Venus they worshipped there, her image shone 
Above the folk from thoughts of hard life won ; 
About her went the girls in ordered bands, 
And scattered flowers from out their slender hands, 
And with their eager voices, sweet but shrill, 
Betwixt the o'erladen trees the air did fill ; 
Or, careless what their dainty limbs might meet, 



i 2 6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Ungirded and unshod, with hurrying feet, 
Mocked cold Diana's race betwixt the trees, 
Where the long grass and sorrel kissed their knees, 
About the borders of the neighboring field ; 
Or in the garden were content to yield 
Unto the sun, and by the fountain-side, 
Panting, love's growing languor would abide. 

Surely the goddess in the warm wind breathed, 
Surely her fingers wrought the flowers that wreathed 
The painted trellises — some added grace 
Her spirit gave to every limb and face, 
Some added scent to raiment long laid hid 
Beneath the stained chest's carven cypress lid ; 
Fairer the girdle round the warm side clung, 
Fairer the dainty folds beneath it hung, 
Fairer the gold upon the bosom lay 
Than was their wont ere that bewildering day, 
When fear and shame, twin rulers of the earth, 
Sat hoodwinked in the maze of short-lived mirth. 

Songs cleft the air, and little words therein 
Were clean changed now, and told of honeyed sin, 
And passionate words seemed fire, and words, that had 
Grave meaning once, were changed, and only bade 
The listeners' hearts to thoughts they could not name. 
Shame changed to strong desire, desire seemed shame, 
And trembled ; and such words the lover heard 
As in the middle of the night afeard 
He once was wont alone to whisper low 
Unto himself, for fear the day should know 
What his love really was ; the longing eyes 
That unabashed were wont to make arise 
The blush of shame to bosom and grave brow, 



BELLEROPHON AT AEGOS. 127 

Beholding all their fill, were downcast now ; 

The eager heart shrank back, the cold was moved, 

Wooed was the wooer, the lover was beloved. 

But yet indeed from wise Bellerophon 
Right little by Queen Venus' wiles was won : 
Joyous he was, but nowise would forget 
That long and changing might his life be yet, 
Nor deemed he had to do with such things now, 
So let all pass, e'en as a painted show. 
But the Queen hoped belike, and many a prayer 
That morn had made to Venus 7 image fair ; 
And as the day wore, hushed she grew at whiles 
And pale ; and sick and scornful were her smiles, 
Nor knew her heart what words her lips might say. 

So through its changing hours went by the day, 
And when at last they sang the sun a-down, 
And, singing, watched the moon rise, and the town 
Was babbling through the clear eve, saddened now, 
And faint and weary went, with footsteps slow, 
The lover and beloved, to e'en such rest 
As they might win ; and soon the daisies, pressed 
By oft-kissed dainty feet and panting side, 
Now with the dew were growing satisfied, 
And sick blind passion now no more might spoil 
The place made beautiful by patient toil 
Of many a man. And now Bellerophon 
Slept light and sweetly as the night wore on, 
Nor dreamed about the morrow ; but the Queen 
Rose from her bed, and, like a sin unseen, 
Stole from the house, and, barefoot as she was, 



128 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Through the dark belt of whispering trees did pass 
That girt the fair feast's pleasant place around : 
And when she came unto that spot of ground 
Whereas she deemed Bellerophon had lain, 
Then low adown she lay, and as for pain 
She moaned, and on the dew she laid her cheek, 
Then raised her head, and cried : 

" Now may I speak, 
Now may I speak, since none can hear me now 
But thou, O Love, thou of the bitter bow. 
Didst thou not see, O Citheraea's son, 
Thine image, that men call Bellerophon ? 
Thine image, with the heart of stone, the eyes 
Of fire, those forgers of all miseries ? 
And shall I bear thy burden all alone, 
In silent places making my low moan ? 
Nay, but once more I try it — help thou me, 
Or on the earth a strange deed shalt thou see. 
Lo, now ! thou knowest what my will has been : 
Day after day his fair face have I seen 
And made no sign — thus had I won him soon. 
But thou, the dreadful sun, the cruel moon, 
The scents, the flowers, the half-veiled nakedness 
Of wanton girls, my heart did so oppress. 
That now the chain is broken. — Didst thou see 
How when he turned his cruel face on me 
He laughed ? — he laughed, nor would behold my heart — 
He laughed, to think at last he had a part 
In joyous life without me : here, e'en here, 
He drank, rejoicing much, still drawing near, 
As the fool thought, to riches and renown. 
And such an one wilt thou not cast adown 



SELLER OPMON AT ARGOS. 129 

When thou rememberest how he came to me 
With wan worn cheek ? — Ah, sweet he was to see ! 
I loved him then — how can I love him now, 
So changed, so changed ? 

" But thou — what doest thou ? 
Hast thou forgotten how thy temples stand, 
Made rich with gifts, in many a luckless land ? 
Hast thou forgotten what strange rites are done 
To gain thy goodwill underneath the sun ? — 
Thou art asleep, then ! Wake ! — the world will end 
Because thou sleepest — e'en now doth it wend 
Unto the sickening end of all delights ; 
Black, black the days are, dull gray are the nights, 
No more the night hides shame, no more the day 
Unto the rose-strewn chamber lights the way ; 
And folk begin to curse thee : ' Love is gone, 
Gray shall the earth be, filled with rocks alone, 
Because the generations shall die out; 
Gray shall the earth be, lonely, wrapped about 
With cloudy memories of the moans of men? 
Thus, thus they curse. Shall I not curse thee then, 
Thou who tormentest me and leav'st me lone, 
Nor thinkest once of all that thou hast done ? — 
Spare me ! What cruel god taught men to speak, 
To cast forth words that for all good are weak 
And strong for all undoing ?— thou know'st this, 
O lovely one ! take not all hope of bliss 
Away from me, because my eager prayer 
Grows like unto a curse. O great and fair, 
Hearken a little, for to-morn must I 
Speak once again of love to him, or die ; 
Hast thou no dream to send him, such as thou 

6* 



t 3 o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Hast shown to me so many a time or now ? 

Wilt thou not make him weep without a cause, 

As I have done, as sleep her dark veil draws 

From off his head ? or his awaking meet 

With lovely images, so soft and sweet 

That they, forgotten quite, yet leave behind 

Great yearning for bright eyes and touches kind ? 

Alas, alas ! wilt thou not change mine eyes, 

Or else blind his, the cold, the over-wise ? 

O Love, he knows my heart, and what it is — 

No fool he is to cast away his bliss 

On such as me : nay, rather he will take 

Some gray-eyed girl to love him for his sake, 

Not for her own — he. knows me, and therefore 

I, grovelling here where he has lain, the more 

Must burn for him — he knows me ; and thou, too, 

Better than I, knowest what I shall do. 

O Love, thou knowest all, yet since I live 

A little joyance hope to me doth give ; 

Wilt thou not grant me now some sign, O Love ; 

Wilt thou not redden this dark sky, or move 

Those stark hard walls, or make the spotted thrush 

Cry as in morn through this dark scented hush ? " 

She ceased, and leaned back, kneeling, and all spent 
And panting, with her trembling fingers rent 
The linen from her breast, and, with shut eyes, 
Waited awhile as for some great surprise, 
But yet heard nothing stranger or more loud 
Than the leaves' rustle ; a long bank of cloud 
Lay in the south, low down, and scarcely seen 
'Gainst the gray sky, and when at last the Queen 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 131 

Opened her eyes, she started eagerly, 
Although the strangest thing her eyes could see 
Was but the summer lightning playing there ; 
Then she put back her overhanging hair, 
And in a hard and grating voice she said : 

" O Sthenoboea, art thou then afraid 
Of a god's presence ? — did a god e'er come 
To help a good and just man when his home 
Was turned to hell ? I was but praying here 
Unto myself, who to myself am dear 
Alone of all things, mine own self to aid. 
And therewithal I needs must grow afraid 
E'en of myself. — O wretch, unholpen still, 
To-morrow early thou shalt surely fill 
The measure of thy woe — and then — and then — 
Alas for me ! What cruellest man of men 
Had made me this, and left me even thus ? " 

Unto the sky wild eyes and piteous 
She turned, and gat unto her feet once more, 
And, led by use, came back unto the door 
Whence she went out, and with no stealthy tread, 
Careless of all things, gat her to her bed, 
And there at last, in grief and care's despite, 
Slept till the world had long forgotten night. 

Bellerophon arose the morrow morn 
Unlike the man that once had been forlorn ; 
Bright-eyed and merry was he, and such fear 
As yet clung round him did but make joy dear ; 
And more in hope he was, and knew not why, 
Than any day that yet had passed him by. 



132 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Now ere the freshness of the morn had died, 

Restless with happiness, he thought to ride 

Unto a ship, that in a little bay 

Anigh to Phlius, bound for outlands, lay, 

Unto whose Phrygian master had the King 

Given commands to buy him many a thing, 

And soon he sailed, since fair was grown the wind. 

But as Bellerophon in such a mind 
Passed slow along the marble cloister-wall, 
He heard a voice his name behind him call, 
And turning, saw the,Thracian maiden fair, 
Leucippe, coming swiftly toward him there, 
Who when she reached him stayed, and drawing breath 
As one who rests, said : " Sir, my mistress saith 
That she awhile is fain to speak with thee 
Before thou goest down unto the sea ; 
And i,n her bower for thee doth she abide." 
He gave her some light word, and side by side 
The twain passed toward the bower, he all the while 
Noting the Thracian with a well-pleased smile ; 
For his fear slept, or he felt strong enow 
Things good and ill unto his will to bow. 
Yet was the gentle Thracian pale that day, 
And still she seemed as she some word would say 
Unto him, that her lips durst not to frame ; 
And when unto the Queen's bower-door they came, 
And he passed there, and it was shut on him, 
She lingered still, and through her body slim 
A tremor ran, her pale face waxed all red, 
And her lips moved as though some word they said 
She durst not utter loud ; then she looked down 
Upon her bare feet and her slave's wool gown, 
And to her daily task straight took her way. 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 133 

Now on his throne King Proetus judged that day, 
And heard things dull, things strange, but when at last 
The summer noon now by an hour had passed, 
He went to meat, and thought to see thereat 
Bellerophon's frank face, who ever sat 
At his right hand ; but empty was his place. 
And when the King, who fain had seen his face, 
Asked whither he was gone, a certain man 
Said : " King, I saw the brave Corinthian, 
Two hours agone, pass through the outer door, 
And in his face there seemed a trouble sore, 
So that I needs must ask him what was wrong ; 
But staring at me as he went along, 
Silent he passed, as if he heard me not ; 
Afoot he was, nor weapon had he got." 

The King's face clouded, but the meal being done, 
In his fair chariot did he get him gone 
Unto the haven, where the Phrygian ship 
Was waiting his last word her ropes to slip ; 
Restless he was, and wished that night were come. 
But ere he left the fair porch of his home, 
Unto the Queen a messenger he sent, 
And bade her know whereunto now he went, 
And prayed her go with him ; but presently 
Back came the messenger, and said that she 
Was ill at ease and in her bower would bide, 
For scarcely she upon that day might ride. 

So at that word of hers the Argive King 
Went on his way, but somewhat muttering, 
For heavy thoughts were gathering round his heart ; 
But when he came where, ready to depart, 
The ship lay, with the bright-eyed master there 



i 3 4 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Some talk he had, who said the wind was fair 

And all things ready ; then the King said : " Friend, 

To-morrow's noon I deem will make an end 

Of this thy lingering ; I will send to thee 

A messenger to tell the certainty 

Of my last wishes, who shall bring thee gold 

And this same ring that now thou dost behold 

Upon my finger, for a token sure — 

Farewell, and may thy good days long endure." 

He turned, but backward sent his eyes awhile, 
Sighing, though on his lips there was a smile ; 
The half-raised sail that clung unto the mast, 
The tinkling ripple 'gainst the black side cast, 
The thin blue smoke that from the poop arose, 
The northland dog that midst of ropes did doze, 
The barefoot shipmen's eyes upon him bent, 
Curious and half-defiant, as they went 
About their work — all these things raised in him 
Desire for roving — stirred up thoughts that, dim 
At this time, clear at that, still oft he had, 
That there his life was not so overglad ; 
And as toward Argos now he rode along 
By the gray. sea, the shipment broken song 
Smote on his ear and with the low surfs fall 
Mingled, and seemed to him perchance to call 
To freedom and a life not lived in vain. 

But even so his palace did he gain, 
And the dull listless day slipped into night, 
And smothering troublous thoughts e'en as he might, 
Did he betake himself to bed, and there 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 135 

Lay half-asleep beneath the tester fair, 
Waiting until the low-voiced flutes gave sign 
That thither drew the Lycian's feet divine — 
For so the wont was, that she still was led 
Unto her chamber as a bride new-wed. 

Of that sweet sound nought heard the King at all, 
But straightway into a short sleep did fall ; 
Then woke as one who knoweth certainly 
That all the hours he now shall hear pass by, 
Nor sleep until the sun is up again. 
So, waking, did he hear a cry of pain 
Within the chamber, and thereat adrad 
He turned him round, and saw the Queen, so clad 
That on her was her raiment richly wrought, 
Yet in such case as though hard fate had brought 
Some bane of Kings into the royal place, 
And with that far-removed and dainty grace 
The rough hands of some outland foe had dealt ; 
For dragged athwart her was the jewelled belt, 
Rent and disordered the Phoenician gown, 
The linen from her shoulders dragged adown, 
Her arms and glorious bosom made half-bare, 
And furthermore such shameful signs were there, 
As though not long past hands had there been laid 
Heavier than touches of the tiring-maid. 

So swiftly through the place from end to end 
She paced, but yet stopped now and then to send 
Low bitter moans forth on the scented air ; 
And through the King's heart shot a bitter fear, 
Nor could he move — he had believed her cold, 



136 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

And wise to draw herself from pleasure's hold 

When it began to sting the heart — but now 

What shameful thing would these last minutes show ? 

Now as she went a look askance she cast 
Upon the King, and turning at the last, 
With strange eyes drew anigh the royal bed, 
And, with clasped hands, before him stood, and said : 

" Thou wakest, then ? thou wonderest at this sight ? 
I have a tale to tell to thee this night 
I cannot utter, unless words are taught 
Unto my lips to draw forth all my thought. — 
Thou wonderest at my words ? Then ask, then ask \ 
The sooner will be done my heavy task." 

Upright in bed the King sat, pale with doubt 
And gathering fear ; his right hand he stretched out 
To take the Queen's hand, but aback she drew, 
Shuddering ; and half he deemed the truth he knew, 
As o'er her pale face and her bosom came 
Beneath his gaze a flush as if of shame : 
" Wilt thou not speak, and make an end ? " she cried. 
Then he spake slowly : " Why dost thou abide 
Without my bed to-night ? why dost thou groan, 
Whom I ere now no love-sick girl have known ? " 

She covered up her face at that last word ; 
The thick folds of her linen gown were stirred 
As her limbs writhed beneath them — nought she said, 
As though the word was not remembered 
She had to say ; and, loath the worst to hear, 
The King awhile was tongue-tied by his fear. 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 137 

At last the words came : "Thou bad'st ask of thee 
Why thou to-night my playmate wouldst not be — 
What hast thou done ? Speak quickly of the thing ! " % 

She drew her hands away, and cried : " O King, 
Art thou awake yet, that this shameful guise 
Seems nothing strange unto thy drowsy eyes, 
Wilt thou not ask why this and this is torn ? 
Why this is bruised ? Lo, since the long-passed morn 
Thus have I sat, that thou e'en this might see, 
And ask what madness there has been in me. 
Thus have I sat, and cursed the God who made 
The day so long, the night so long delayed. 

" Ask ! thou art happy that the Lycian sod 
Unwearied oft my virgin feet have trod 
From dawn to dusk ; that in the Lycian wood 
Before wild things untrembling I have stood ; 
That this right arm so oft the javelin threw — 
These fingers rather the gray bowstring knew 
Than the gold needle : even so, indeed, 
Of more than woman's strength had I had need 
If with a real man I had striven to-day ; 
But he who would have shamed thee went his way 
Like a scourged woman — thou wilt spare him, then — 
Lay down thy sword ! — that is for manly men." 

For while she spake, and in her eyes did burn 
The fires of hate, the King's face had waxed stern, 
And ere her bitter speech was fully o'er, 
He had arisen, and from off the floor 
Had gat his proven sword into his hand, 
And eager by the trembling Queen did stand, 



138 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And cried : " Nay, hold ! for surely I know well 

What tale it is thy lips to-night would tell ; 

Therefore my sword befits me, the tried friend 

'that many a troublous thing has brought to end. 

Yet fear not, for another friend have I 

To help me deal with this new villany, 

Even the godlike man Bellerophon ; 

So with one word thy heavy task is done. 

. — O Sthenoboea, speak the name of him 

Who wrought this deed, then let that name wax dim 

Within thy mind till it is dead and past ; 

For, certes, yesterday he saw the last 

Of setting suns his doomed eyes shall behold." 

Pale as a corpse she waxed, and stony cold 
Amidst these words ; silent awhile she was 
After the last word from the King did pass, 
But in a low voice at the last she said : 

" Yea, for this deed of his must he be dead ? 
And must he be at peace, because he strove 
To take from me honor, and peace, and love ? 
Must a great King do thus ? or hast thou not 
Some lightless place in mighty Argos got 
Where nought can hap to break the memory 
Of what he hoped in other days might be ? 
For great he has been, and of noble birth 
As any man who dwelleth on the earth. 
— Thou hast forgotten that the dead shall rest, 
Whate'er they wrought on earth of worst or best" 

But the King gazed upon her gloomily, 
And said : " Nay, nay ; — the man shall surely die — 



* 

BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 139 * 

His hope die with him, is it not enow ? 

But no such mind I bear in me as thou, 

Who speakest not as a great Queen should speak, 

But rather as a girl made mad and weak 

By hope delayed and love cast back again, 

Who knoweth not her words are words and vain. 

Content thee, thou art loved and honored still — 

Speak forth the name of him who wrought the ill, 

For I am fain to meet Bellerophon, 

So that we twain may do what must be done." 

He spake, but 'mid the tumult of her mind 
She heard him not, and deaf she was and blind 
To all without, nor knew she if her feet 
The marble cold or red-hot iron did meet 
She moved not and she felt not, but a sound 
Came from her lips, and smote the air around 
With slow hard words : 

" Ah ! thou hast named him then 
Twice in this hour alone of earthly men ; — 
That same Bellerophon, that all folk love, 
In manly wise this morn against me strove ! " 

Ah, how the world was changed, as she went by 
The King, bewildered with new misery — 
Ah, and how little time it was agone 
When all that deed of hers was not yet done, 
When yet she might have died for him, and made 
A little love her lonely tomb to shade 
Spring up within his heart — when hope there was 
Of many a thing that yet might come to pass ; — 
And now, and now — those spoken words must be 



"1 



140 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A part of her, an unwrought misery 

That would not let her rest till all was o'er, — 

Nay, nay, no rest upon the shadowy shore. 

Slowly she left the chamber, none the less 
With measured steps her feet the floor did press 
As a Queen's should, nor fainted she at all, 
But straight unto the door 'twixt wall and wall 
She went, and still perchance had forced a smile 
Had she met any one ; and all the while 
Set in such torment as men cannot name, 
If she did think, wondered that still the same 
Were all things round her as they had been erst — 
That the house fell not — that the feet accurst 
To carry her yet left no sign in blood 
Of where the wretchedest on earth had stood — 
That round about her still her raiment clung — 
That no great sudden pain her body stung, 
No inward flame her false white limbs would burn, 
Or into horror all her beauty turn — 
That still the gentle sounds of night were there 
As she had known them : the light summer air 
Within the thick-leaved trees, as she passed by 
Some open window, and the nightbird's cry 
From far ; the gnat's thin pipe about her head, 
The wheeling moth delaying to be dead 
Within the taper's flame — yea, certainly 
Shall things about her as they have been be, 
And even that a torment now has grown. 

Yet must she reap the grain that she has sown ; 
No thought of turning back was in her heart, 



BELLEROPHON AT AEG OS. 141 

No more in those past days can she have part ; 
Nay, when her glimmering bower she came unto, 
She muttered through the dusk, " As I would do 
So have I done — so would I do again." 

Lo, thus in unimaginable pain 
Leave we her now, and to the King turn back ; 
Who stood there overwhelmed by sudden lack 
Of what he leaned on — with his life left bare 
Of a great pleasure that was growing there. 
A storm of rage swept through his heart, to think 
That he of. such a cup as this must drink ; 
For if he doubted aught, this was his doubt, 
That all the tale was not told fully out — 
That for Bellerophon the Queen's great scorn 
And loathing was a thing but newly born — 
That bitter hate was but a lover's hate, 
Which even yet beneath the hand of fate 
Might turn to hottest love. He groaned thereat, 
And staggering back, upon the bed he sat ; 
His bright sword from his hand had fallen down 
When that last dreadful word at him was thrown, 
And now, with head sunk 'twixt his hands, he sought 
Some outlet from the weary girth of thought 
That hemmed him in. 

" And must I slay him then, 
Him whom I loved above all earthly men ? 
Behold, if now I slept here, and next morn, 
Ere the day's memory should be fully born 
From out of sleep, men came and said to me, 
' Sire, the Corinthian draweth nigh to thee,' 
My first thought, would be joy that he had come. 



1 



142 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

And yet I am a King, nor shall my home 
Become a brothel before all men's eyes. 
He who drinks deadly poison surely dies, 
And he hath drunk, and must abide the end. 
Yet hath the image of him been my friend — 
What shall I do ? Not lightly can I bear 
The voice of men about these things to hear : 
' He trusted him, he thought himself right wise 
To look into men's souls through lips and eyes — 

— Behold the end ! — ' Yea, and most certainly 
I will not bear once more his face to see ; 

Nor in the land where he was purified 
Shall grass or marble by his blood be dyed, 
Since he must go — green grew a bough of spring 
Amidst the barren death of many a thing ; 
Not barren it, since poison fruits it bore. — 
Behold now, I, who loved my life of yore, 
Begin to weary that I e'er was born ; 
But let it pass — rather let good men mourn ; 
Great men, the earth's salt, wear their lives away 
In weeping for the ne'er-returning day : 
For surely all is good enough for me. 
" And yet alas ! what truth there seemed in thee ! 

— What can I do ? Might he not die in war ? — 
Nay, but at peace through him my borders are. 
He shall not die here — the deep sea were good 
To hide the story of his untamed blood — 

Or, further — O thou fool, that so must make 
My life so dull, e'en for a woman's sake ! 
There in that land, then, shall thy bones have rest 
Beneath the sod her worshipped feet have pressed. 
In Lycia shalt thou die ; her father's hand 



SELLER OPH ON AT AXGOS. 143 

Shall draw the sword, or his lips give command 

To make an end of thee. — So shall it be, 

And that swift Phrygian ready now for sea 

Shall bear thee hence. — Would I had known thee not ; 

A new pain hast thou been — a heavy lot 

My life in early morn to me shall seem, 

When I have dreamed that all was but a dream, 

And waked to truth again and lonely life. 

" Let be ; now must I forge the hidden knife 
Against thee, and I would the thing were done. 
Thou mayst not die so ; thou art such an one 
As the gods love, whatever thou mayst do, 
Perchance they pay small heed to false or true 
In such as we are. But the lamps burn low, 
The night wears, gray the eastern sky doth grow ; 
I must forget thee : fellow, fare thee well, 
Who might have turned my feet from lonely hell ! n 

So saying, slowly, as a man who needs 
Must do a deed that woe and evil breeds, 
He rose, and took his writing tools to him. 
And ere the day had made the tapers dim, 
Two letters with his own hand had he made, 
And open was the first one, and it said 
These words : 

Unto the wise Bellerophon — 
To Lycia the Gods call thee, O my son; 
So when thou hast this letter in thine hand, 
Abide no longer in the Argive land 
Than if thoufleddest some avenging man. 
But make good speed to that swift Phrygian 
Who for the southlands saileth this same day. 



1 



144 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

Take thou this gold for furtherance aud stay, 
And this for his reward who rules the keel, 
And for a token show him this my seal. 
This casket to the Lycian king bear forth, 
That hath in it a thing of greatest worth; 
And let no hand be laid on it but thine 
Till in Jobates* hands its gold doth shine. 
Then bid him mind how that he had of me 
When last I saw his face the fellow key 
To that which in mine hands doth open it — 

Awhile the King had stayed when this was writ^ 
And on the gathering grayness of the morn 
Long fixed his eyes, unseeing and forlorn, 
Then o'er the tablets moved his hand again. 

Mayst thou do well among these outland men. 
Perchance my face thou never more shall see, 
Perchance but little more remains to thee 
Of thy loved life — thou wert not one to cry 
Curses on all because life passeth by. 
If woe befalls thee there, think none the less 
That I erewhile have wrought thee happiness ; 
Farewell! and ask thou not to see me first: 
Life worsens here, and ere it reach the worst. 
Unto the Jove that may be would I speak 
To help my people, wandering blind and weak* 

Another letter by the King's side lay, 
But closed and sealed ; so in the twilight gray 
Now did he rise, and summoned presently 
A slumbering chamberlain that was thereby, 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 145 

And bade him toward the treasury lead, and take 

Two leathern bags for that same errand's sake. 

So forth the twain went to that golden place ; 

But when they were therein, a mournful face 

Still the King seemed to see, e'en as it was 

When he from room to room with him did pass 

Who now had wronged him ; then the gold waxed dim, 

For bitter pain his vexed heart wrought for him, 

And filled with unused tears his hard wise eyes. 

But choking back the thronging memories, 

He laid the letter that he erst did hold 

Within a casket wrought of steel and gold, 

Which straight he locked ; then bade his fellow fill 

The bags he bore from a great golden hill, 

Then to his room, made cold with morn, returned ; 

And since for change and some swift deed he yearned, 

He bade his chamberlain bring hunter's weed, 

And saddle him straightway his fleetest steed : 

" And see," said he, " before the Prince arise 

Ye show this letter to his wakwig eyes, 

And give into his hands these things ye see ; 

And make good speed, the time grows short for me." 

So spake he, and there grew on him a thought 
That thither might Bellerophon be brought 
Ere he could get him gone ; and therewithal 
At last the low sun topped the garden-wall, 
And o'er the dewy turf long shadows threw ; 
Then, being new clad, the porch he hurried to, 
And paced betwixt its pillars feverishly, 
Until he heard the horse-boys' cheery cry 
And the sharp clatter of the well-shod feet ; 
Then he ran out, the joyous steed to meet, 

7 



146 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And mounted, and rode forth, he scarce knew where, 
Until the town was passed, and 'twixt the fair 
Green corn-fields of the June-tide he drew rein, 
To ponder on his life, so spoiled and vain. 

But when Bellerophon awoke that morn, 
Weary he felt, as though he long had borne 
Some heavy load, and his perplexed heart 
Must chide the life wherein he had a part. 
But ere he gat him down to meet the day 
With its new troubles, 'thwart his weary way 
Was come that chamberlain, who bade him read, 
And say what other thing he yet might need. 

He read, and knit his anxious brows in thought, 
For in his mind great doubt that letter brought 
If yet he were in friendship with the King ; 
And therewith came a dark imagining 
Of unseen dangers, and great anger grew 
Within his soul, as»if the worst were true 
Of all he thought might be ; and in his mind 
It was, that going, he might leave behind 
A bitter word to pay for broken troth : 
And still the King's man saw that he was wroth, 
And watched him curiously, till he had read 
The letter thrice, but nought to him he said. 

At last he spake : " Sir, even as the King 
Now bids me, will I make no tarrying ; 
And as I came to Argos, even so, 
Unfriended, bearing nothing, will I go ; 
And few farewells are best to-day, I deem, 
For like a banished man I would not seem 
Among these folk that love me : get we gone, 
And tell the King his full will shall be done." 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 147 

So forth they ride, and ever as the way 
Lengthened behind them, and the summer day 
Grew hotter on the lovely teeming earth, 
The fresh soft air and sounds and sights of mirth 
Wrought on Bellerophon, until it seemed 
That things might not be e'en as he had deemed 
At first " What thoughts are mine ; have I not. had 
Gifts from his hands — hath he not made me glad 
When I was sorry ? Therefore will I take 
What chance there lies herein for honor's sake. 
Nay, more, and may not friendship lie herein ? — 
May he not drive me forth from shame and sin 
And evil fate ? Well, howsoe'er it is, 
But little evil do I see in this : 
Yea, I may see his face again once more, 
And crowned with honor come back to this shore, 
For now I fear nought — if he thinks to see 
Some evil thing that nowise is in me, 
Another day the truth of all will show. 
Let pass, again from out the place I go 
Wherein the sport of fortune I have tried ; 
If it has failed me, yet the world is wide 
And I am young. Now go I forth alone 
To do what in my life must needs be done, 
And in my own hands lies my fate, I think, 
<S And I shall mix the cup that I must drink : 
So be it ; thus the world is merrier, 
And I shall be a better man than here." 

Amid these thoughts, unto the ship he came, 
And higher yet sprang up the new-stirred flame 
Of great desires when first he saw the sea 



148 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Leap up against her black sides lovingly, 

And heard the sails flap, and the voice of folk, 

Who at the sight of him in shouts outbroke, 

Since they withal were eager to be gone. 

And now were all things done that should be done ; 

The money rendered up, the King's seal shown, 

Unto the master all his will made known, 

And on the deck stood the Corinthian. 

As up the mast clattering the great rings ran, 

And back the hawser to the ship was cast, 

The helmsman took the tiller, and at last 

The head swung round, trimly the great sail drew, 

The broad bows pierced the land of fishes through, 

Unheard the red wine fell from out the cup 

Into the noisy sea ; and then rose up 

The cloud of incense-smoke a little way, 

But driven from the prow, with the white spray 

It mingled, and a little dimmed the crowd 

Of -white-head waves ; then rose the sea-song loud, 

While on the stern still stood Bellerophon, 

Bidding farewell to what of life was gone, 

Pensive, but smiling somewhat to behold 

The lengthening wake, and field, and hill, and wold, 

And white-walled Argos growing small astern, 

That he the pleasure of the gods might learn. 



SELLER OPHON AT ARGOS. 149 



T3UT when the King's man, with a doubtful smile, 

^-* Had watched the parting sails a little while, 

He turned about, revolving many things 

Within his mind, of the weak hearts of kings, 

Because the Prince's glory seemed grown dim, 

And nowise grand this parting seemed to him ; 

" For day-long leave-taking there should have been," 

He grumbled, " and fair tables well beseen 

Should have been spread the gilded ship anigh, 

And many a perfect beast been slain thereby 

Unto the gods. — Had this Bellerophon 

Too great fame for the King of Argos won ? 

I will be lowly, for no little bliss 

I have in Argos, a good place it is — 

Or else what thing has happed ? " 

Howe'er it was, 
Slowly again to Argos did he pass, 
And here and there he spake upon that day 
Of how Bellerophon had gone away, 
Perchance as one who would no more return ; 
And sore hearts were there, who thereat must yearn 
To see the face that let a weak hope live ; 
And folk still doomed with many things to strive, 
Who found him helpful — few indeed were there 
Who did not pray that well he still might fare 
Whereso he was, and few forgot him quite 
For many a day and many a changing night 



150 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But Sthenoboea, when she knew that morn 
That she was not alone of love forlorn, 
But of the thing too that fed love in her, 
Yet coldly at the first her lot did bear 
In outward seeming : in no other wise 
She sat among her maids then when his eyes 
Had first met hers. " No babble shall there be 
In this fool's land concerning him and me. 
Gone is he, — let him die and be forgot : 
Cold is my heart that yesterday was hot, 
Quenched is the fervent flame of yesterday ; 
Past is the time when I had cast away, 
If he had bidden me, name, and fame, and all : 
Now in this dull world e'en let things befall 
As they are fated ; I am stirred no more 
By any hap — hope, hate, and love are o'er." 

So spake she in the morn, when, still a Queen, 
She sat among her folk as she had been, 
Dreaded, unloved ; yet as the day wore on 
She felt as though it never would be done. 
And now she took to wandering restlessly, 
And set her face to go unto the sea, 
But soon turned back, and through the palace ranged, 
And thought she thought not of him, and yet changed 
Her face began to grow ; and if she spoke, 
As one untroubled, aught unto her folk, 
Her speech grew wild and broken ere its end ; 
And as about the place she still did wend, 
More than its wonted chill her presence threw 
On those who of her coming footsteps knew — 
Yea, as she passed by some, she even thought 
A look like pity to their eyes was brought, 



SELLER OPHON AT AEG OS. 151 

And then, amidst her craving agony, 

Must she grow red with wrath that such could be. 

Now came the night, and she must cast aside 
All semblance of her coldness and her pride, 
And find the weary night was longer yet 
Than was the day, and harder to forget 
The thoughts that came therewith. How can I tell 
In any words the torment of that hell, 
That she for her own soul had fashioned so, 
That from it never any path did go 
To lands of rest ? no window was therein, 
Through which there shone a hope of happier sin ; 
But close the fiery walls about her glared, 
And on one dreadful picture still she stared, 
Intent on that desire) that dreadful love, 
The dullness of her savage heart that clove 
With wasting fire, a bane to her, and all 
Who in the net of her vain life might fall. 

The next day wore, and thereto followed night, 
And changed through dark and dusk and dawn to light ; 
And when at last high-risen was the sun, 
The women came to do what should be done 
In the Queen's chamber : water for the bath 
They brought, and dainties such as Venus hath ; 
Gold combs, embroidered cloths, pearl-threaded strings, 
Such unguents as the hidden river brings 
Through strange-wrought caverns down into a sea 
Where seldom any keel of man may be ; 
Fine Indian webs, the work of many a year, 
And incense that the bleeding tree doth bear 



152 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Lone in the desert ; — yea, and fear withal 
Of what new thing upon that day might fall 
From her they served, for on the day now dead 
Wild words, strange threatenings had her writhed lips 

said. 
But when within the chamber door they were, 
A new hope grew within them, a new fear, 
For empty 'neath the golden canopy 
The bed lay, and when one maid drew anigh, 
She saw that all untouched the linen was 
As for that night ; so when it came to pass 
That in no chamber of that house of gold 
Might any one the Lycian's face behold, 
Nor any sign of her, then therewithal 
To others of the household did they call, 
And asked if they had tidings of the Queen ; 
And when they found that she had not been seen 
Since at the end of day to bed she passed, 
Within their troubled minds the thing they cast, 
And thus remembered that at whiles of late 
She had been wont the rising sun to wait 
Within the close below her bower ; so then 
They called together others, maids and men, 
And passed with troubled eyes adown the stair ; 
And coming to the postern-door that there 
Led out into the pleasance, that they found 
Still open, and thereby upon the ground, \ 

And on a jagged bough of creeping vine, 
Gold threads they saw, and silken broidery fine, 
That well they knew torn from the Lycian's gown ; 
Therewith with hasty feet were trodden down 
The beds of summer flowers that lay between 



4 



• BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 153 

The outer wicket of that garden green 

And the bower-door — feet that had heeded nought 

By what wild ways they to their end were brought ; 

Then by the gate where the faint sweetbriar-rose 

Grew thick about the edges of the close, 

Had one pushed through their boughs in such a way 

That fragments of a dainty thin array 

Yet fluttered on the thorns in the light breeze, 

Nor might they doubt who once had carried these. 

But when the pleasance-gate they had passed Jjirough, 
At first within the lingering strip of dew 
Beneath the wall, footprints they well could see ; 
But as the shadow failed them presently, 
And little could the close-cropped summer grass 
Tell them of feet that might have chanced to pass 
Thereby before the dawn, their steps they stayed, 
And this and that thing there betwixt them weighed 
With many words ; then splitting up their band, 
Some took the way unto the well-tilled land, 
Some seaward went, and some must turn their feet 
Unto the wood : yet did not any meet 
A further sign ; and though some turned again 
To tell the tale at once, yet all in vain 
Did horsemen scour the country far and wide, 
And vainly was the sleuth-hounds' mettle tried. — 
— Gone was the Lycian, and in such a guise 
That silence seemed the best word for the wise. 
But many a babbling tongue in Argos was, 
Who for no gold had let such matters pass ; 
And some there were who, mindful of her face 
As down the street she passed in queenly grace, 
Said that some god had seen her even as they, 

7* 



i 5 4 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And with no will that longer she should stay 
Midst dying men, had taken her to his home — 
" And we are left behind," they said ; but some, 
Who had been nigher to her, said that she, 
Smitten by some benign divinity 
Who loved the world and lovely Argos well, 
Had fled with changed heart far from man to dwell- 
Yea, and might be a goddess even yet. 
But other folk, well ready to forget 
Her bitter soul, and well content to bear 
The changed life that she erst had tilled with care, 
Smiled, and said yea to better and to worse, 
But inly thought that many a heart-felt curse 
Her careless ears had heard upon the earth 
Had not returned to where it had its birth. 

The gods are kind, and hope to men they give 
That they their little span on earth may live, 
Nor yet faint utterly ; the gods are kind, 
And will not suffer men all things to find 
They search for, nor the depth of all to know 
They fain would learn : and it was even so 
With Sthenobcea ; for a fisher old 
That day a tale unto his carline told, 
E'en such as this : 

"When 1 last night had laH 
The boat up 'neath the high cliff, and had made 
All things about it trim, and left thee here, 
Even as thou knowest, I set out to bear 
Those mullets unto Argos. Nought befell 
At first whereof is any need to tell ; 
But when the night had now grown very old, 



BELLEROPHON AT ARGOS. 155 

And, as my wont is, I was waxing bold, 

And thinking of the bright returning day 

That drives the sprites of wood and wave away, 

As the path leads, I entered the beech-wood 

Which, close to where the ancient palace stood, 

Clothes the cliff's edge ; I entered warily, 

Yet thought no. evil thing therein to see. 

Scarce lighter than dark night it was therein, 

Though swift without the day on night did win. 

So I went on, I say, and had no fear, 

So nigh to day ; but getting midmost, where 

Thinner it grows and lighter, toward the sea, 

I stayed my whistling, for it seemed to me 

The wind moaned louder than it should have done, 

Because of wind without was well-nigh none. 

When I stood still it ended, and again, 

E'en as I moved, I seemed to hear it plain. 

Trembling, I stopped once more, and heard indeed 

A sound as though one moaned in bitter need, 

Clearer than was the moaning of the surf, 

Now muffled by a rising bank of turf 

On the clifPs edge ; fear stricken, yet in doubt, 

Through the gray glimmer now I peered about, 

And turned unto the sea : then my heart sank, 

For by the tree the nighest to that bank 

A white thing stood, like, as I now could see, 

The daughters of us sons of misery, 

Though such I deemed her not — and yet had I 

No will or power to turn about and fly ; 

And now it moaned and moaned, and seemed to writhe 

Against the tree its body long and lithe. 

Long gazed I, while still colorless and gray, 



156 THE EARTHLT PARADISE, 

But swift enow, drew on the dawn of day ; 
But as I trembled there, at last I heard 
How in a low voice it gave forth this word : 

" ' What saf st thou f — " Live on still — / loved thee not 
The while I lived; my bane from thee I got : 
And canst thou think that I shall love thee, then. 
Where no will is, or power to sons of men f " 
/ know not, thou mayst hate me, yet I come 
That I may look on thee in that new home 
My hands built for thee : if the priests speak truth, 
What heart thou hast may yet be stirred by ruth. 
When thy changed eyes behold the traitorous Queen 
Tormented for the vile things she has been — 
If, as the books say, fen such ways they have 
As we on this explored side of the grave. 
Yea, thou mayst pity then mine agony. 
When no more evil I can do to thee. 
Here on the earth I could not weep enow, 
Or show thee all my misery here, and thou 
Must ever look upon me as a Queen, 
Thy mistress and thy fear. Couldst thou have seen 
My weary ways upon this long, long night — 
Couldst thou behold the coming da/s new sight, y 
When round this tree the folk come gathering 
To see the wife and daughter of a King 
Slain by her own hand, and in such a wise— . 
O thou I hoped for once, might not thine eyes 
Have softened had they seen me shivering here, 
Alone, unholpen, sick with my first fear, 
Beat down by coming shame, and mocked by these 
Gay fluttering rags of dainty braveries 



SELLER OPHON AT ARGOS. 157 

That decked my state; by gold, and pearl, and gem, 
Over my wretched breast, set in the hem 
This night has torn, and o'er my bleeding feet j 
Mocked by this glittering girdle, nowise meet 
To do the hangman's office /— Couldst thou see 
That even so I needs must think of thee — 
Whom I have slain, whose eyes I have made blind. 
Whose feet I stayed that me they might not find, 
That I might not be helped of any one f ' 

" The day was dawning when her words were done, 
And to her waist I saw her set her hand, 
And take the girdle thence, and therewith stand 
With arms that moved above her head a space 
Within the tree ; and still she had her face 
Turned from me, and I stirred not, minding me 
Of tales of treacherous women of the sea, 
The bane of men ; but now her arms down fell, 
And low she spake, yet could I hear her well : 

".< Thou bitter noose, that thus shalt end my days, 
Rather than blame, shalt thou have thanks and praise 
From all men : I have loved one man alone, 
And unto him the worst deed have I done 
Of all the ill deeds I have done on earth. 
— / curse men not, although midst mocks and mirth, 
They say, " Rejoice, for Sthenoboea is dead?" 

" I started forward as that word she said, 
And she beheld me — face to face we met 
In the gray light, nor shall I e'er forget 
Those dreadful eyes, for such indeed I deem 



158 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A goddess high up in the heavens might seem 
If she should learn that all was changed, to bring 
Death on her head as on an earthly thing. 
Alas ! I have beheld men die ere now, 
But eld or sickness sore their hearts did bow 
With feebleness to bear what might betide, 
Or else 'mid hope of name and fame they died, 
And the world left them unawares ; but she, 
Full of hot blood and life yet, I could see 
Was red-lipped as an image, and still had 
Such smooth, soft cheeks as made beholders glad 
In many a feast and solemn sacrifice ; 
But yet such dreadful hate was in her'eyes, 
Such loathing of the ways of gods, and men, 
Such gathered-up despair, that truly then 
I shook so that my hands might hold no more 
The staff and half-filled basket that I bore. 

" But in a moment slowly she turned round, 
And toward the rising swarded space of ground 
Betwixt the beech-trees and the sea she went ; 
And I, although I knew well her intent, 
Yet could not stir. There on the brink she stood ; 
A cool sea-wind now swept into the wood, 
And drave her raiment round her ; I could see, 
E'en in the dawn, that jewelled broidery 
Gleam in the torn folds of the glittering hem ; 
And now she raised her arms, I saw on them 
Jewels again — Then sightless did I stand, 
For such a cry I heard, as though a hand 
Of fire upon her wasted heart was laid, 
And to and fro, I deem, a space she swayed 



BELLEROPHON AT AEG OS. 159 

Her slender body ; then I moved at last, 

And hurried toward the sheer cliff's edge full fast, 

But ere I reached the green brink, was she gone ; 

And, hanging o'er the rugged edge alone, 

With trembling hands, far down did I behold 

A white thing meet the dark gray waves and cold ; 

For overhanging is that foreland high, 

And little sand beneath its feet doth lie 

At lowest of the tide, and on that morn 

Against the scarped rock was the white surf borne. 

"Ah, long I looked before I turned away. 
No friend, indeed, was lost to me that day — 
I knew her not but by the people's voice, 
And they 'twas like hereat would e'en rejoice ; 
Yet o'er my heart a yearning passion swept, 
And there where she had stood I lay and wept, 
Worn as I am by care and toil and eld. 

" But when I rose again, then I beheld 
The girdle to the rough bough hanging yet, 
And this I loosed and in my hand did get, 
And lingered for a while ; then went my way, 
Nor thought at first if it were night or day, 
So much I pondered on the tale so wrought, 
What God to nothing such a life had brought. 

" But when unto the city gate I came, 
I found the thronging people all aflame 
With many rumors ; and this one they knew 
Among all other guesses to be true, 
That of the Queen nought knew her wonted place. 
But unto me who still beheld that face 



160 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

There in the beech-wood, idle and base enow 

Seemed all that clamor carried to and fro — 

Curses and mocks, and foolish laughter loud, 

And gaping wonder of the empty crowd ; 

So in great haste I got my errand done, 

And sold my wares e'en unto such an one 

As first remembered he must eat to-day, 

What king or queen soe'er had passed away. 

Thus I returned, bringing the belt with me — 

Behold it ! — And what way seems best to thee 

To take herein ? — Poor are we : these bright stones 

Would make us happier than the highest ones ; 

Yet danger hangs thereby, nor have I yet 

My living from dead corpses had to get ; 

Nay, scarcely can I deem this Queen will be 

At rest for long beneath the unquiet sea. 

— How say'st thou, shall I go unto the King, 

And tell him every word about the thing 

E'en as I know it ? " 

" Nay, nay, nay, " she said, 
" Certes but little do I fear the dead, 
Yet think thou not to call the girdle thine ; 
With a man's death doth every gem here shine — 
Our deaths the first ; but do thou bide at home, 
And let the King hear what may even come 
To a King's ears ; meddle thou not, nor make 
With any such ; still shall the brass pot break 
The earthen pot — a lord is thanked for what 
A poor man often has in prison sat. 
But down the beach run thou thy shallop straight, 
And from the net take off the heaviest weight, 
And do this belt about it ; and then go 







BELLEROPHON AT AEG OS. 161 

And in the deepest of the green bay sow 
This seed and fruit of love and wrath and crime, 
And let this tale be dealt with by great time ; 
But 'twixt the sea and the green southering hill 
We will abide, peaceful if toilsome still." 

So was it done, and e'en as in her heart 
Was hidden from all eyes her trait'rous part, 
So the sea hid her heart from all but those 
Who, having passed through all eld's dreamy doze, 
Died with their tale untold. 

Time passed away, 
And dimmer grew her name day after day ; 
And the fair place, where erst her eyes had chilled 
Sweet laughter into silence, now was filled 
By folk who, midst of fair life slipping by, 
No longer had her deeds in memory ; 
There where she once had dwelt 'mid hate and praise, 
No smile, no shudder now her name could raise. 



i6a THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



HPHE night had fallen or ere the tale was done, 
A And on the hall-floor now the pale moon shone 
In fitful gleams, for the snow fell no more, 
But ragged clouds still streamed the pale sky o'er : 
Awhile they sat, and seemed to hear the sea 
Beat 'gainst the ice-glazed cliffs unceasingly, 
Though nought belike that noise was but the wind 
Caught in some corner, half blocked-up and blind 
With the white drift : — just so the mournfulness 
Of the tale told out did their hearts oppress 
With seeming sorrow, for a glorious life 
Twisted awry and crushed dead in the strife 
Long ages past ; while yet more like it was 
That with the old tale o'er their souls did pass 
Shades of their own dead hopes, and buried pain 
By measured words drawn from its grave again, 
Though no more deemed a strange unheard-of thing 
Made but for them ; as when their hearts did cling 
To those dead hopes of things impossible, 
While their tale's ending yet was left to tell. 



JANUARY. 163 



OTILL the hard frost griped all things bitterly, 
^ And who of folk might now say when or why 
The earth should change and spring come back again. 

— Spring clean forgotten, as amidst his pain 
Some hapless lover's chance unmeaning kiss 
Given unto lips that never shall be his 

In time long passed, ere bitter knowledge came, 
And cherished love was grown a wrong and shame. 

— Yet 'mid the dead swoon of the earth,- the days 
'Gan lengthen now, and on the hard-beat ways 
No more the snow drave down ; and, spite of all, 
The goodman's thoughts must needs begin to fall 
Upon the seed hid in the dying year, 

And he must busy him about his gear ; 

And in the city, at the high noon, when 

The faint sun glimmered, sat the ancient men, 

With young folk gathered round about once more, 

Who heeded not the east wind's smothered roar, 

Since unto most of them for mere delight 

Were most things made, the dull days and the bright ; 

And change was life to them, and death a tale 

Little believed, that chiefly did avail 

To quicken love and make a story sweet 

Now the old Swabian's glittering eyes did meet 
A maiden's glance, who reddened at his gaze, 
Whereon a pleasant smile came o'er his face, 



164 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

As from his pouch a yellow book he drew 
And spake : 

" Of many things the wise man knew, 
The man who wrote this ; many words he made 
Of haps that still perchance for great are weighed 
There in the East : how kings were born and died, 
And how men lied to them, and how they lied, 
And how they joyed in doing good and ill : 
Now 'mid the great things that his book do fill, 
Here is a tale, told, saith he, by a crone 
At some grand feast forgotten long agone, 
Which may perchance scarce be of much less worth 
Than tales of deeds that reddened the green earth — 
Fools' deeds of men, who well may be to you 
As good as nameless, since ye never knew 
The ways of those midst whom they lived erewhile, 
And what their hearts deemed good, or nought, and vile." 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 



ARGUMENT. 

There was a man in a certain great city who on his wedding-day unwittingly 
gave his spousal-ring to the Goddess Venus ; and for this cause trouble came 
upon him, till in the end he got his ring back again. 

HPHE story of this chronicle 
•*■ Doth of an ancient city tell, 
Well built upon a goodly shore ; 
The wide lands stretched behind it bore 
Great wealth of oil and wine and wheat ; 
The great sea carried to its feet 
The dainty things of many lands ; 
There the hid miners' toiling hands 
Dragged up to light the dull blue lead, 
And silver white, and copper red, 
And dreadful iron ; many a time 
The sieves swung to the women's rhyme 
O'er gravelly streams that carried down 
The golden sand from caves unknown ; 
Dark basalt o'er the sea's beat stood, 
And porphyry cliffs as red as blood ; 
From the white marble quarries' edge 
Down to the sweeping river's sedge 
Sheep bore the web that was to be ; 
The purple lay beneath the sea, 



166 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The madder waved in the light wind, 
The woad-stalks did the peasant bind 
That were to better his worn hood ; 
And ever, amid all things good, 
Least of all things this lucky land 
Lacked for the craftsman's cunning hand. 

So richer grew that city still 
Through many a year of good and ill, 
And when the white beasts drew the car 
That bore their banner to the war, 
From out the brazen gates enwrought 
With many a dreamer's steadfast thought, 
An hundred thousand men poured out 
To shake the scared earth with their shout. 

Now little will your wonder be 
That 'mid so great prosperity 
Enough there was of ill and sin ; 
That many folk who dwelt therein 
Lived evil lives from day to day, 
Nor put their worst desires away. 
But as in otherwise indeed 
Of God's good pardon had they need, . 
And were herein as other folk, 
So must they bear this added yoke, 
That rife was wicked sorcery there ; 
And why I know not ; if it were 
Wrought by a lingering memory 
Of how that land was wont to be 
A dwelling-place, a great stronghold 
Unto the cozening gods of old. 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 167 

It might be so ; but add thereto 

That of all men life's sweets they knew, 

That death to them was wholly bad, 

So that perchance a hope they had 

That yet another power there was 

Than His who brought that death to pass. 

Howe'er that may be, this I know, 
That in that land men's lives were so 
That they in trouble still must turn 
Unholy things and strange to learn : 
Had this man 'mid the infidel 
A lost son, folk might buy and sell ; 
Did that one fear to pass his life 
With unrewarded love at strife ; 
Or had he a long-missing keel ; 
Or was he with the commonweal 
In deadly strife ; or perchance laid 
Abed, by fever long downweighed ; 
Or were his riches well-nigh done ; — 
Love, strife, or sickness, all was one, 
This seemed the last resource to them, 
To catch out at the strange-wrought hem 
Of the dark gown that hid away 
The highest ill from light of day. 

Yea, though the word unspoken was, 
And though each day the holy mass 
At many an altar gold-arrayed 
From out the painted book was said, 
And though they doubted nought at all 
Of how the day of days must fall 
At last upon the earth, and range 



168 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

All things aright that once seemed strange : 

Yet Evil seemed so great a thing 

That 'neath its dusk o'ershadowing wing 

They needs must cower down ; now at least 

While half a god and half a beast 

Man seemed ; some parley must they hold 

With God's foe, nor be overbold 

Before the threatening of a hand 

Whose might they did not understand, 

Though oftentimes they felt it sore : 

And through this faithlessness, the more 

111 things had power there, as I deem, 

Till some men's lives were like a dream, 

Where nought in order can be set, 

And nought worth thence the soul may get, 

Or weigh one thing for what it is ; 

Yea, at the best 'mid woe and bliss, 

Some dreamlike day would come to most 



Now this great city still made boast 
That, 'mid her merchants, men there were 
Who e'en from kings the bell might bear 
For wealth and honor : and I think 
That no men richer wines might drink, 
Were better housed, or braver clad, 
Or more of all the world's joy had 
Than their rich men ; that no king's door 
Could show forth greater crowds of poor, 
Who lacked for bread and all things good, 
Than in that land a merchant's could — 
Yea, rich indeed 'mongst all were they. 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 169 

Now on a certain summer day 
One of their fairest palaces, 
A paradise midst whispering trees, 
Beyond its wont was bright and fair ; 
Great feast did men get ready there, 
Because its young lord, lately come 
Back from the Eastlands to his home, 
That day should wed a lovely maid. 
He, for that tide too long delayed, 
A lading of great rarities 
Had brought to dazzle those sweet eyes ; 
So had you wandered through the house 
From hall to chamber amorous, 
While in the minster church hard by, 
'Mid incense smoke and psalmody, 
The gold-clad priest made one of twain, — 
So wandering had you tried in vain 
To light on an uncomely thing. 
Such dyes as stain the parrot's wing, 
The May-flowers or the evening sky, 
Made bright the silken tapestry ; 
And threaded pearls therein were wrought, 
And emeralds from far Eastlands brought 
To deck the shapes of knight and king ; — 
His maybe who of old did sing 
God's praises 'twixt the shield and spear, 
Or his the Trojan folk did fear. 
Or from the silken mimicry 
Of fair Cassandra might you see 
O ileus the red ruby tear, 
As he her snowy breast made bare ; 
Since woe itself must there be sweet 
For such a place to be made meet. 

8 



1 



170 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

If such things hid the marble walls, 
What wonder that the swift footfalls 
Were dulled upon the marble floor 
By silken webs from some far shore, 
Whereon were pictured images 
Of other beasts and other trees 
And other birds than these men knew ; 
That from the vaulted ceilings' blue 
Stars shone like Danae's coming shower, 
Or that some deftly painted bower 
Thence mocked the roses of that day ? 

Full many a life had passed away, 
And many a once young hand grown old, 
Dealing with silk and gems and gold, 
Through weary days and anxious nights, 
That went to fashion those delights, 
Which added now small bliss indeed 
To those who pleasure had to meed 
Upon a day when all were glad : 
Yet when the Church all dues had had, 
And the street, filled with minstrelsy, 
Gave token of the twain anigh ; 
When through the hall-doors, open wide, 
Streamed in the damsels of the bride ; 
When the tall brown-cheeked bridegroom came 
Flushed with hot love and pride and shame. 
And by the hand his love led on, 
Who midst that glorious company shone 
Like some piece of the pale moonlight 
Cut off from quietness and night, — 
Then all these dainty things in sooth 
Seemed meet for such an hour of youth ; . 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 171 

And vain were words such joy to stay ; 
And deathless seemed that little day, 
And as a fitful hapless dream 
The past and future well might seem. 

What need to tell how sea and earth 
Had been run through to make more mirth 
For folk already overglad — 
What cunning pageants there they had ; 
What old tales acted o'er again, 
Where grief and death glad folk did feign, 
Who deemed their own joy still would bide ; 
What old songs sung wherein did hide 
Meet meanings for that lovesome day ; 
What singing of the bridal lay 
By a fair, soft-voiced trembling maid, 
Like to the goddess well arrayed, 
Who, dreaded once, was grown to be 
A pageant-maker's imagery ? 
Why make long words of that sweet band 
Who scattered flowers from slender hand, 
And brought the garlands forth ? How tell 
What music on the feasters fell, 
So sweet and solemn, that from mirth 
O'erstrained well-nigh must tears have birth? — 
Nay, let all pass, and deem indeed 
That every joyance was their meed 
Wherewith men cheat themselves to think 
That they of endless joy may drink ; 
That every sense in turn must bear 
Of o'er-sweet pleasure its full share, 
Till for awhile the very best 



172 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

They next might gain seemed utter rest, 
And of some freshness were they fain. 
So then the garden did they gain, 
And wandered there by twos and threes 
Amidst the flowers, or 'neath the trees 
Sat, keeping troublous thoughts at bay. 

So fared they through the earlier day ; 
But when the sun did now decline, 
And men grew graver for the wine 
That erst such noble tales had told ; 
And maids no more were free and bold, 
But reddened at the words half-said, 
While round about the rebecks played ; 
Then needs must the feastmasters strive 
Too pensive thoughts away to drive, 
And make the sun go down with mirth 
At least upon that spot of earth. 
So did the minstrel men come in, 
And tale-tellers the lay begin, 
And men by fabled woes were stirred, 
Or smiling their own follies heard 
Told of some other ; and withal 
Here did the dice on table fall, 
Here stout in arms the chess-king stood ; 
There young men stirred their sluggish blood 
With clattering sword and buckler play, 
There others on the daisies lay 
Above the moat, and watched their quill 
Make circles in the water still, 
Or laughed to see the damsel hold 
Her dainty skirt enwrought with gold 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 173 

Back from the flapping tench's tail, 
Or to his close-set dusky mail 
With gentle force brought laughingly 
The shrinking finger-tip anigh. 

Midst these abode a little knot 
Of youths and maidens, on a spot 
Fenced by a cloister of delight, 
Well wrought of marble green and white ; 
Wherein upon a wall of gold 
Of Tristram was the story told, 
Well done by cunning hands that knew 
What form to man and beast was due ; 
Midmost, upon a space of green, 
Half shaded from the summer sheen, 
Half with the afternoon sun thrown 
Upon its daisies glittering strewn, 
Was gathered that fair company 
Wherewith the bridegroom chanced to be, 
Who through the cloister door must gaze 
From time to time 'thwart the sun's blaze 
On to a shaded space of grass 
Whereon his new-wed maiden was, 
Hearkening in seeming to a song 
That told of some past love and wrong ; 
But as he strained his ear to catch 
Across the wind some louder snatch 
Of the sweet tune, new-coming folk 
The sweet sight hid, the music broke ; 
Of these one maiden trimly girt 
Bore in her gleaming upheld skirt 
Fair silken balls sewed round with gold, 



174 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Which when the others did behold 
Men cast their mantles unto earth, 
And maids within their raiments' girth 
Drew up their gown-skirts, loosening here 
Some button on their bosoms clear 
Or slender wrists, there making tight 
The laces round their ankles light ; 
For folk were wont within that land 
To cast the ball from hand to hand, 
Dancing meanwhile full orderly ; 
So now the bridegroom with a sigh, 
Struggling with love's quick-gathering yoke, 
Turned round unto that joyous folk, 
And gat him ready for the play. 

Lovely to look on was the sway 
Of the slim maidens 'neath the ball, 
As they swung back to note its fall 
With dainty balanced feet ; and fair 
The bright outflowing golden hair, 
As swiftly, yet in measured wise 
One maid ran forth to gain the prize ; 
Eyes glittered and young cheeks glowed bright, 
And gold-shod foot, round limb and light, 
Gleamed from beneath the girded gown 
That, unrebuked, untouched, was thrown 
Hither and thither by the breeze ; 
Shrill laughter smote the thick-leaved trees, 
Familiar names clear voices cried, 
Sweet sound rose up as sweet sound died. 
And still the circle spread and spread, 
As folk to all that goodlihead 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 175 

Kept thronging in, till they must stay 
A little while the eager play, 
And now, for very breathlessness, 
With rest the trodden daisies bless. 
So now against the wall some leaned, 
Some from amidst the daisies gleaned 
The yellow trefoil, and the blue 
Faint speedwell in the shade that grew ; 
Some panting sat and clasped their knees 
With faces turned unto the breeze, 
And midst them the new-comers stood, 
With hair smooth yet and unstirred blood. 

Laurence, the bridegroom, as the game 
Unto this tide of resting came, 
Turned idle eyes about, and met 
An image in the gray wall set, 
A thing he knew from early days : 
There in a gilded carven place 
Queen Venus' semblance stood, more fair 
Than women whom that day did bear, 
And yet a marvel for the life 
Wherewith its brazen limbs were rife. 
Not in that country was she wrought, 
Or in those days ; she had been brought 
From a fair city far away, 
Ruined e'en then for many a day ; 
Full many a tale had there been told 
Of him who once that Queen did mould, 
And all of these were strange to hear, 
And dreadful some, and full of fear. 
And now as Laurence gazed upon 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That beauty, in the old days won 

He knew not from what pain and toil, 

Vague fear new-risen-up seemed to spoil 

The summer joy ; her loveliness 

That hearts, long dead now, once did bless, 

Grown dangerous, 'gan to lead his mind 

On through a troublous maze and blind 

Of unnamed thoughts, and silently, 

With knitted brow, he drew anigh, 

And midst the babbling close did gaze 

Into the marvel of her face : 

Till, with a sudden start, at last 

His straying thoughts he seemed to cast 

Aside, and laughed aloud, and said : 

" O cold and brazen goodlihead, 
How lookest thou on those that live ? 
Thou who, tales say, wert wont to strive 
On earth, in heaven, and 'neath the earth, 
To wrap ail in thy net of mirth, 
And drag them down to misery 
Past telling — and didst thou know why? — 
And what has God done with thee then, 
That thou art perished from midst men 
E'en as the things thou didst destroy, 
Thy Paris and thy town of Troy, 
And many a man and maid and town ? 
How is thy glory fallen adown, 
That I, even I, must sigh for thee ! " 

So spake he, as the minstrelsy 
3truck up once more a joyous strain, 
And called them to the play again ; 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 177 

And therewithal he looked about, 
In answer to the merry shout 
That called on him by name to turn. 
But even therewith the sun did burn 
Upon his new-gained spousal-ring — 
A wondrous work, a priceless thing, 
Whereon, 'neath mulberries white and red, 
And green leaves, lay fair Thisbe dead 
By her dead love ; the low sun's blaze 
It caught now, and he fell to gaze 
Thereon, and said at last : 

"Perchance 
The ball might break it in the dance, 
And that an ugly omen were ; 
Nay, one to ward it well is here. 
Thou, Goddess, that heardst Thisbe's vow, 
From blind eyes gaze upon her now 
Till I return mine own to claim ; 
And as thou mayst, bear thou the shame 
Of being the handmaid to my love ; 
Full sure I am thou wilt not move." 

Know that this image there did stand 
With arm put forth and open hand, 
As erst on Ida triumphing ; 
And now did Laurence set the ring 
On the fourth finger fair and straight, 
And laughing, " Thou mayst bear the weight," 
Turned back again unto the play. 

To him slow passed the time away; 
But when at last in purple shade 

8* 




178 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

'Twixt wall and wall the grass was laid, 

And he grew gladder therewithal, 

Then weariness on folk 'gan fall ; 

The fifes left off their dancing tune, 

And sang of lovers fain of June, 

And thence that company 'gan go 

By twos and threes with footsteps slow, 

Pensive at end of mirthful day ; 

But from them Laurence turned away 

Unto the carven dame, to take 

The ring he wore for true-love's sake ; — 

Daylight it was, though broad and red 

The sun was grown, and shadows led 

Eastward with long lines o'er the grass — 

— Daylight, but what had come to pass ? 

Near by those voices still he heard 
In laugh and talk and careless word ; 
Upon his cheek the wind blew cold ; 
His own fair house he did behold 
Changed nowise ; from 'the little close 
The scent of trodden grass arose — 
How could it be a dream ? — Yet there 
She stood, the moveless image fair, 
The little-noticed, oft-seen thing, 
With hand fast closed upon his ring. 

At first, in agony and haste, 
A frantic minute did he waste 
In pulling at the brazen hand 
That was as firm as rocks that stand 
The day-long beating of the sea ; 



J 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 179 

Then did he reel back dizzily, 

And gaze at sky and earth and trees 

Once more, as asking words from these 

To ravel out his tale for him. 

But now as they were Waxing dim 

Before his eyes, he heard his name 

Called out, and therewith fear of shame 

Brought back his heart and made him man. 

Unto his fellows, pale and wan, 

He turned, who, when they saw him so, 

What thing might ail him fain would know, 

For wild and strange he looked indeed ; 

Then stammered he : " Nay, nought I need 

But wine, in sooth : John, mind'st thou not 

How on the steaming shore and hot 

Of Serendib a sting I gat 

From some unseen worm, as we sat 

Feasting one eve ? Well, the black folk 

E'en saved my life from that ill stroke, 

By leech-craft ; yet they told me then 

I oft should feel that wound again, 

Till I had fifty years or more : 

This is a memory of that shore ; 

A thing to be right soon forgot" 

And to himself: " If this is not 

An empty dream, a cutting file 

My ring therefrom shall soon beguile, 

When, at the ending of the day, 

These wearying guests have gone away." 

Now unto supper all folk turned, 
And 'neath the torches red gold burned, 



180 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And the best pageants of the day 
Swept through the hall and said their say, 
' Departing e'en as men's lives go : 
But though to Laurence slow and slow 
Those hours must needs seem, none the less 
He gave himself to mirthfulness, 
At least in seeming ; till at last 
All guests from out the palace passed. 
And now the short soft summer night 
Was left at peace for their delight ; 
But Laurence, muffled up and hid, 
Shrinking, betwixt his servants slid, 
For now he had a little space 
To come unto that mystic place, 
Where still his ring he thought to see. 
A file and chisel now had he, 
And weighty hammer ; yet withal 
As he drew toward the cloister-wall, 
Well-nigh he called himself a fool, 
To go with cloak and blacksmith's tool, 
And lay hard blows upon a dream, 
For now in sooth he nigh must deem 
His eyes had mocked him ; reaching soon 
That cloister by the broad high moon, 
He hurried through the door, and heard 
All round the sound of June's brown bird 
Above the voices of the night ; 
Trembling, he sprang into the light 
Through the black arches of the place, 
And stealing on stood face to face 
With the old smiling image there, , 

And lowered to her fingers fair I 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 181 

His troubled, wild, and shrinking eyes, 
And stretched his hand out to the prize : — 
His eyes, his hand, were there in vain. 

Once more, as sure of coming gain, 
As erst in Ida she did stand, 
So stood she now ; her open hand, 
That late he saw closed round the ring, 
Empty and bare of any thing. 
Gaping awhile he stood, for fear 
Now made him think a voice to hear, 
And see her change soon, and depart 
From out her midst ; but gathering heart, 
He muttered : " Yet, what have I seen ? 
Should it not even thus have been, 
If the closed hand was but a dream ? 
Of some guest worser must I deem ; 
Go, fool ; thine own love waiteth thee." 
Therewith he went, yet fearfully 
Looked o'er his shoulder on the way, 
And terror on his heart still lay. 

Yet to his chamber at the last 
He came, and to the floor he cast 
His wrapping mantle, and alone 
He strove to think of all things done ; 
And strove once more to bring again 
The longing sweet, the joy and pain 
That on that morn he called desire ; 
For wretched fear had dulled that fire : 
And, whereas ere while he had deemed 
That life was joy, and it had seemed 



182 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A never-ending game to be, 

A fair and rich eternity 

Before him, now was it indeed 

A troublous fight, where he should need 

Help on the left hand and the right, 

Nor yet so 'scape the certain night. 

But 'mid these thoughts he heard withal 
The chamberlain to pages call, 
To bear the bridal wine to him ; 
And as he might he strove to dim 
His anxious thought, and with a smile 
The coming curious eyes beguile. 
They entered now, and whiles that he 
Drank from the gold cup feverishly, 
The minstrels, ere his draught was done, 
Struck up The King of England'* s Son, 
And soon amid that ordered word 
The lessening sound of feet he heard, 
And then the song itself must die. 
But from the bridechamber nearby 
Now for a space rose clear and sweet 
The damsels' song, Fair Marguerite ; 
And when that ended all was still, 
And he with strained, divided will, 
Trembling with love, yet pale with fear, 
To the bridechamber door drew near, 
Muttering some well-remembered charm 
That erst had kept his soul from harm. 
Yet misty seemed the place ; the wall — 
Its woven waters seemed to fall, 
Its trees, its beasts, its loom-wrought folk, 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 183 

Now seemed indeed as though they woke, 

And moved unto him as he went. 

The room seemed full of some strange scent ; 

And strains of wicked songs he heard, 

And half-said God-denying word : 

He reeled, and cried aloud, and strove 

To gain the door that hid his love ; 

It seemed to him that, were he there, 

All would again be calm and fair. 

But in the way before his eyes 

A cloudy column seemed to rise, 

Cold, odorous, impalpable, 

And a voice cried : " / love thee well, 

And thou hast loved me ere to-night, 

And longed for this d'ergreat delight, 

And had no words therefor to pray. 

Come, have thy will, and cast away 

Thy foolish fear, thy foolish love, 

Since me at least thou canst not move, 

Now thou with ring hast wedded me : 

Come, cast the hope away from thee 

Wherewith unhappy brooding men 

Must mock their threescore years and ten; 

Come, thou that mockest me, I live / 

How with my beauty canst thou strive t 

Unhappy if thou couldst! for see 

What depth of joy there is in me / " 

Then round about him closed the mist ; 
It was as though his lips were kissed, 
His body by soft arms embraced, 
His fingers lovingly enlaced 



184 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

By other fingers ; until he 

Midst darkness his own ring did see. 

Nought else awhile ; then back there came 
New vision : as amidst white flame 
The flower-girt goddess wavered there, 
Nor knew he now where they twain were, 
Midst wild desire that nigh did rend 
His changed heart ; then there came an end 
Of all that light and ecstasy ; 
His soul grew blind, his eyes could see ; 
And, moaning from an empty heart, 
He saw the hangings blown apart 
By the night wind, the lights flare red 
In the white light the high moon shed 
O'er all the place he knew so well, 
And senseless on the floor he fell 



A H, what a night to what a morn ! 
■**• Ah, what a morrow black with scorn, 
And hapless end of happy love ! 
What shame his helpless shame to prove ! 
For who, indeed, alone could bear 
The dreadful shame, the shameful fear, 
Of such a bridal ? Think withal, 
More trusted such a tale would fall 
Upon those folks' ears than on most, 
Who, as I said erst, saw a host 
Of wild things lurking in the night ; 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 185 

To whom was magic much as right 
As prayers or holy psalmody. 

So nothing else it seemed might be, 
When Laurence for three nights had striven 
To gain the fair maid to him given, 
But that her sire should know the thing 
And help him with his counselling. 
So, weary, wasted with his shame, 
Unto his house the bridegroom came, 
And when the twain were left alone 
He told him how the thing had gone. 
The old man doubted not the sooth 
Of what he said, but, touched with ruth, 
Yet spent no time in mourning vain. 

" Son," said he, " idle were the pain 
To seek if thou some deed hast wrought 
Which on thine head this grief hath brought — 
Some curse for which this doth atone, 
Some laugh whereby is honor gone 
From the dread powers unnamable : 
Rather, who now can help thee well ? ' 

" Small heed, my father," Laurence said, 
" Gave I to such things, and small dread 
To any thing I could not see, 
But it were God who fashioned me : 
From witch-wives have I bought ere now, 
Wind-bags indeed, but yet did trow 
Nothing therein, but dealt with these 
My shipmen's clamor to appease." 



^ 



186 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

" Well," said he, " that perchance is worse 
For thee, yea, may have gained this curse. 
But come, I know a certain man 
Who in these things great marvels can, 
And something of an age are we, 
Yoke-fellows in astronomy — 
A many years agone, alas ! " 

So therewithal the twain did pass 
Toward the great church, and entered there, 
And, going 'twixt the pillars fair, 
Came to a chapel, where a priest 
Made ready now the Holy Feast : 
" Hist," said the old man, " there he is 5 
May he find healing for all this ! 
Kneel down, and note him not too much, 
No easy man he is to touch." 

So down upon the floor of stone 
„ They knelt, until the mass was done, 
Midst peasant folk, and sailors' wives, 
Sore careful for their husbands' lives ; 
But when the mass was fully o'er 
They made good haste unto the door 
That led unto the sacristy : 
And there a ring right fair to see 
The old man to a verger gave 
In token, praying much to have 
With Dan Palumbus speech awhile : 
The verger took it with a smile, 
As one who says, "Ye ask in vain ; " 
But presently he came again, 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 187 

And said, " Fair sir, come hither then, 
The priest will see you of all men ! " 

With eyes made grave by their intent 
From out the lordly church they went 
Into the precinct, and withal 
They passed along the minster wall, 
And heard amid the buttresses 
The gray hawks chatter to the breeze, 
The sanctus bell run down the wind ; 
Until the priest's house did they find, 
Built 'neath the belfry huge and high, 
Fluttered about perpetually 
By chattering daws, and shaken well 
From roof to pavement, when the bell 
Flung out its sound o'er night or day. 

* " Sirs, Dan Palumbus takes his way 
E'en now from out the sacristy," 
The verger said, "sirs, well be ye ! 
For time it is that I were gone." 
Therewith he left the twain alone 
'Beside the door, and, sooth to say, 
In haste he seemed to get away 
"As one afeard ; but they bode there, 
And round about the house did peer, 
But found nought dreadful : small it was, 
Set on a tiny plot of grass, 
And on each side the door a bay 
Brushed 'gainst the oak porch rent and gray ; 
A yard-wide garden ran along 
The wall, by ancient box fenced strong ; 



188 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And in the corner, where it met 
The belfry, was a great yew set, 
Where sat the blackbird-hen in spring, 
Hearkening her bright-billed husband sing. 
A peaceful place it should have been 
For one who of the world had seen 
O'er much, and quiet watch would keep 
Over his soul awaiting sleep. 

* 

But now they heard the priest draw nigh, 
And saw him and his shadow high 
Wind round the wind-worn buttresses ; 
So coming by the last of these 
He met them face to face : right tall 
He was ; his straight black hair did fall 
About his shoulders ; strong he seemed, 
His eyes looked far off, as he dreamed 
Of other things than what they saw ; 
Strange lines his thin pale face did draw 
Into a set wild look of pain 
And terror. As he met the twain 
He greeted well his ancient friend, 
And prayed them within doors to wend. 
Small was his chamber ; books were there 
Right many, and in seeming fair. 
But who knows what therein might be 
'Twixt board and board of oaken tree ? 

Palumbus bade them sit, and sat, 
And talked apace of this and that, 
Nor heeded that the youth spake wild, 
Nor that his old friend coughed and smiled, 






THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 189 

As ill at ease, while the priest spake, 
Then from his cloak a purse did take, 
And at the last pushed in his word 
Edgewise, as 'twere. Palumbus heard 
As one who fain had been born deaf, 
Then rose and cried : " Thou fill'st the sheaf, 
Thou fill'st the sheaf : this is my doom, 
Well may the sexton make my tomb ! " 
And up and down he walked, muttering, 
'Twixt closed teeth, many a nameless thing. 

At last he stopped and said : " O ye, 
I knew that ye would come to me, 
And offer me great store of gold : 
Full often good help have I sold, 
And thus this tide should I have done ; 
But on this mountain of gray stone 
I stood last night, and in my art 
I dealt ; and terror filled my heart, 
And hope, and great uncertainty ; 
Therefore I deem that I shall die ; 
For cool and bold erst have I been, 
Whatever I have heard and seen ; 
But the old Master of my fear 
Seems afar now, and God grown near; 
And soon I look to see his face. 
Therefore, if but for a short space, 
Would I be on his side, and do 
A good deed ; all the more for you ; 
Since thou art part of sweet days, friend, 
That once we deemed would never end ; 
And in thine eyes meseems, O youth, 



190 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Kindness I see and hope and truth ; 
And thou and he may speak a word 
For me unto my master's Lord :- — 
Well, I must reap that I did sow — 
But take your gold again and go : 
And thou for six days fast and pray, 
And come here on the seventh day 
About nightfall ; then shalt thou learn 
In what way doth the matter turn, 
And fully know of time and place, 
And be well armed thy foe to face." 

So homeward doubtful went the twain, 
And Laurence spent in fear and pain 
The six long days ; and so at last, 
When the seventh sun was well-nigh past, 
Came to that dark man's fair abode ; 
The gray tower with the sunset glowed, 
The daws wheeled black against the sky 
About the belfry windows high, 
Or here and there one sank adown 
The dizzy shaft of panelled stone ; 
And sound of children nigh the close 
Was mingled with the cries of those ; 
And e'en as Laurence laid his hand 
Upon the latch, and there did stand 
Lingering a space, most startling clear 
The sweet chime filled the evening air. 
He entered 'mid the great bell's drone, 
And found Palumbus all alone 
'Mid books laid open : 

" Rest, " said he 5 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 191 

" Time presses not for thee or me : 
Surely shall I die soon enow." 
Silent, with hands laid to his brow, 
He sat then, nor did Laurence speak, 
Fearing perchance some spell to break : 
At last the priest caught up a book, 
And from its leaves a letter took, 
And unknown words there were on it 
For superscription duly writ, 
And sealed it was in solemn wise. 
He said : 

" Thou knowest where there lies 
Five leagues hence, or a little less, 
North of the town, a sandy ness 
That shipmen call St. Clement's Head ; 
South of it dreary land and dead 
Lies stretched now, and the sea bears o'er 
Ruin of shingle evermore, 
And saps the headland year by year, 
And long have husbandmen had fear 
Of its short-lived and treacherous soil, 
And left it free from any toil. 
There, with thy face turned toward the land, 
At the hill's foot take thou thy stand, 
Just where the turf the shingle meets, 
Wherewith the sea the marshland eats ; 
But seaward if thy face thou turn, 
What I have learned then shalt thou learn 
With like reward — watch carefully 
And well, and a strange company 
Shall pass thee as thou standest there, 
And heed thee not — some foul some fair, 



192 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Some glad some sorry ; rule thy heart, 
And heed them nothing for thy part, 
Till at the end of all thou seest 
A great lord on a marvellous beast 
Unnamable ; on him cry out, 
And he thereon shall turn about 
And ask thy need ; have thou no fear, 
But give him what I give thee here, 
And let him read, and thou shalt win 
Thine happiness, and have no sin. 
But as for me, be witness thou 
That in the scroll I give thee now, 
My death lies, and I know it well, 
And cry to God against his hell" 

In languid voice he spake as one 
Who knows the task that must be done, 
And how each word from him should fall, 
And gives no heed to it at all ; 
But here he stopped a little space, 
And once more covered up his face ; 
But soon began his speech again 
In a soft voice, and freed from pain : 

" And for the folk that thou shalt see, 
Whence cometh all that company, — 
Marvel thou not thereat, for know 
That this is sure : long years ago, 
Leagues seaward oT that barren place, 
The temple of a glorious race, 
Built with far mightier walls than these, 
Stood fair midst groves of whispering trees. 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 193 

Thence come these folk remembering 
Their glory once so great a thing — 
I have said : Could they be once more 
As they have been, — but all is o'er, 
What matters what is, what has been, 
And what shall be, when I have seen 
The last few hours of my last day ? — 
Depart. — Ah me, to cast away 
Such power as I on earth have had ! 
I who could make the lover glad 
Above his love's dead face, — at least 
A little while — now has all ceased 
With that small scrap of black and white : 
Think of me, God, midst thy delight, 
And save me ! yea, or do thy will ! 
For thou too hast beheld my skill." 

The scroll did Laurence hold in hand, 
And silent he a space did stand, 
Gazing upon Palumbus, who 
Sat open-eyed, as though he knew 
Nought of what things were round about ; 
So, stealthily, and in great doubt 
Of strange things yet to come to pass, 
Did Laurence gain the darkening grass, 
And through the precinct and the town 
He passed, and reached the foreshores brown, 
And gathered heart, and as he might 
Went boldly forward through the night. 
At first on his left hand uprose 
Great cliffs and sheer, and, rent from those, 
Boulders strewn thick across the strand 

9 



1 



194 THE EARTH Lr PARADISE. 

Made weary work for foot and hand ; 

But well he knew the path indeed, 

And scarce of such light had he need 

As still the summer eve might shed 

From the high stars or sunset dead. 

Soft was the lovely time and fair, 

A little sea-wind raised his hair, 

That seemed as though from heaven it blew. 

All sordid thoughts the sweet time slew, 

And gave good hope such welcoming, 

That presently he 'gan to sing, 

Though still amid the quiet night 

He could not hear his song aright 

For the grave thunder of the sea 

That smote the beach so musically, 

And in the dim light seemed so soft 

As each great wave was raised aloft 

To fall in foam, you might have deemed 

That waste of ocean was but dreamed, 

And that the surf's strong music was 

By some unknown thing brought to pass ; 

And Laurence, singing as he went, 

As in some lower firmament, 

Beneath the line that marked where met 

The world's roof and the highway wet, 

Could see a ship's light gleam afar 

Scarce otherwise than as a star, 

While o'erhead fields of thin white cloud 

The more part of the stars did shroud. 

So on he went, and here and there 
A few rough fisher-carles there were 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS.. 195 

Launching their ordered keels to sea, 

Eager to gain, if it might be, 

The harbor-mouth with morning-light ; 

Or else some bird that flies by night 

Wheeled round about with his harsh cry ; 

Or as the cliffs sank he could spy 

Afar some homestead glittering 

With high feast or some other thing. 

Such gleams of fellowship had he 

At first along the unquiet sea ; 

But when a long way off the town, 

The cliffs were wholly sunken down, 

And on the marshland's edge he went, 

For all sounds then the night-jar sent 

Its melancholy laugh across 

The sea-wind moaning for the loss 

Of long-drowned lands, that in old time 

Were known for great in many a clime. • 

But the moon rose, and 'neath its light, 
Cloud-barred, the wide wastes came in sight, 
With gleaming, sand-choked, reed-clad pools, 
And marsh-lights for the mock of fools ; 
And o'er the waste beneath the moon 
The sea-wind piped a dreary tune, 
And louder grew, and the world then 
No more seemed made for sons of men, 
And summer seemed an empty name, 
And harvest-time a mock and shame : 
Such hopeless ruin seemed settled there, 
On acres sunny once and fair. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But Laurence now could well behold 
,e sandy headland bare and bold 
;ainst the sea, and stayed his feet 
irhile, to think how he should meet 
ese nameless things, his enemies, 
e lords of terror and disease ; 
en trembling, hastened on, for thought 
11 many an image to him brought, 
ice seen, with loathing cast aside, 
t ready e'en for such a tide, 
me back with longing's added sting, 
d whatso horrors time could bring. 
»ow thrusting all these thoughts apart 
: hastened on with hardy heart, 
1 on the doubtful place he stood 
lere the sea sucked the pasture's blood, 
d with back turned unto the sea 
'strove to think right strenuously 
this and that well-liking place : 
e merry clamor of the chase, 
jeant of soldier or of priest, 
market-place or crowded feast, 
splintered spears for ladies' sake, 
til he 'gan to dream awake j 
m, midst of all his striving, still 
; happiest thoughts must turn to ill, 
in a fevered, restless dream: 
thought about some flowery stream, 
nself in gilded boat thereon — 
ivid cloud came o'er the sun, 
>reat wave swept from bank to bank ; 
flower-crowned amid friends he drank, 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 197 

And as he raised the red wine up 

Fell poison shrieked from out the cup ; 

The garland when his heart was full 

He set upon a fleshless skull ; 

The lute turned to a funeral bell, 

The golden door led down to hell. 

Then back from dreams his soul he brought, 

And of his own ill matters thought, 

And found his fear the lesser grew 

When all his heart therein he threw. 

Yet awful was the time indeed, 
And of good heart sore had he need : 
The wind's moan louder than before, 
Some wave cast higher up the shore, 
The night-bird's brushing past his head, — 
All little things grew full of dread ; 
Yet did he waver nought at all, 
Or turn, for whatso thing might fall. 

The moon was growing higher now, 
The east wind had been strong to blow 
The night sky clear from vexing cloud, 
And in the west his flock did crowd ; 
Sharper things grew beneath the light, 
As with a false dawn ; thin and bright 
The horned poppies' blossoms shone 
Upon a shingle-bank, thrust on 
By the high tide to choke the grass ; 
And nigh it the sea-holly was, 
Whose cold gray leaves and stiff stark shade 
On earth a double moonlight made : 



'* 



THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

I Above him, specked with thorn and whin, 
And clad with short gray grass and thin, 
The hill ran up, and Laurence knew 
That down the other slope there grew 
I A dark pine-wood, whose added sound 
I Scarce noted, yet did more confound, 
With changing note, his wearied mind. 

But now with drowsiness grown blind, 
| Once more he tottered on his place, 
I And let fall down his weary face ; 
| But then remembering all his part. 
Once and again woke with a start, 
And dozed again ; and then at last, 
Shuddering, all slumber from him cast, 
| Yet scarce knew if he lived or no : 
For by his scared wild eyes did go 
A wondrous pageant, noiselessly, 
I Although so close it passed him by ; 
I The fluttering raiment by him brushed, 
I As through its folds the sea-wind rushed. 

By then his eyes were opened wide. 

Already up the gray hill-side 

The backs of two were turned to him : 
I One like a young man tall and slim, 

Whose heels with rosy wings were dight ; 

One like a woman clad in white, 
I With glittering wings of many a hue, 
' Still changing, and whose shape none knew. 

In aftertime would Laurence say, 
I Thai though the moonshine, cold and gray, 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 199 

Flooded the lonely earth that night, 
These creatures in the moon's despite 
Were colored clear, as though the sun 
Shone through the earth to light each one, 
And terrible was that to see. 

But while he stood, and shudderingly 
Still gazed on those departing twain, 
Yet 'gan to gather heart again, 
A noise like echoes of a shout 
Seemed in the cold air all about ; 
And therewithal came faint and thin 
What seemed a far-off battle's din, 
And on a sight most terrible 
His eyes in that same minute fell, — . 
The images of slaughtered men, 
With set eyes and wide wounds, as when 
Upon the field they first lay slain ; 
And those who there had been their bane 
With open mouths as if to shout, 
And frightful eyes of rage and doubt, 
And hate that never more should die. 
Then went the shivering fleers by, 
With death's fear ever in their eyes ; 
And then the heaped-up fatal prize, 
The blood-stained coin, the unset gem, 
The gold robe torn from hem to hem, 
The headless, shattered golden god, 
The dead priest's crushed divining-rod ; 
The captives, weak from blow and wound, 
Toiling along ; the maiden, bound 
And helpless, in her raiment torn ; 



200 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



The ancient man's last day forlorn : 
Onward they pressed, and though no sound 
Their footfalls made upon the ground, 
Most real indeed they seemed to be. 
The spilt blood savored horribly, 
Heart-breaking the dumb writhings were, 
Unuttered curses filled the air ; 
Yea, as the wretched band went past, 
A dreadful look one woman cast 
On Laurence, and upon his breast 
A wounded blood-stained hand she pressed. 

But on the heels of these there came 
A King, that through the night did flame, 
For something more than steel or brass 
The matter of his armor was ; 
Its fashion strange past words to say ; 
Who knows where first it saw the day ? 
On a red horse he rode ; his face 
Gave no more hope of any grace 
Than through the blackness of the night 
The swift-descending lightning might ; 
And yet therein great joy indeed 
The brightness of his eyes did feed ; — 
A joy as of the leaping fire 
Over the house-roof rising higher 
To greet the noon-sun, when the glaive 
Forbids all folk to help or save. 

Yet harmless this one passed him by, 
And through the air deliciously 
Faint pensive music breathed, and then 





THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 201 

There came a throng of maids and men — 
A young and fair and gentle band ; 
Whereof some passed him hand in hand, 
Some side by side not touching walked, 
As though of happy things they talked ; 
Noiseless they were like all the rest 
As past him up the hill they pressed ; 
Yet she who brushed by him most close 
Cast to his feet a fresh red rose. 

Then somewhat of a space there was 
Before the-next band 'gan to pass, 
So faint thejr moved for very woe ; 
And these were men and maids also, 
And young were most, and most were fair ; 
And hand in hand some few went there, 
And still were fain with love to see 
Each other's bitter misery ; 
But most, just sundered, went along, 
With faces drawn by hidden wrong, 
Clenched hands and muttering lips that cursed 
From brooding hearts their sin that nursed. 
And she that went the last of all, 
Black-robed, in passing by let fall 
At Laurence's feet a black-bound wreath 
Of bitter herbs long come to death. 

Alone, afoot, when these were gone, 
A bright one came, whose garments shone 
In wondrous wise ; a bow he bore, 
And deadly feathered shafts' good store ; 
Winged was he and most godlike fair ; 

Q* 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Slowly he went, and oft would stare 
With eyes distraught down on the grass, 
As waiting what might come to pass ; 
Then whiles would he look up again, 
And set his teeth as if with pain ; 
And whiles for very joy of heart 
His eyes would gleam, his lips would part 
With such a smile as though the earth 
Were newly made to give him mirth ; 
Back o'er his shoulder would he gaze 
Seaward, or through the marshland haze 
That lay before, strain long and hard, 
Till fast the tears fell on the sward : — 
So towards the hill's brow wandered he. 

Then through the moaning of the sea 
There came a faint and thrilling strain, 
Till Laurence strove with tears in vain, 
And his flesh trembled, part with fear, 
Part as with some great pleasure near, 
And then his dazzled eyes could see 
Once more a noiseless company ; 
And his heart failed him at the sight, 
And he forgot both wrong and right, « 
And nothing thought of his intent ; 
For close before him now there went 
Fair women clad in ancient guise 
That hid but little from his eyes 
More loveliness than earth doth hold 
Now, when her bones are growing old ; 
But all too swift they went by htm, 
And fluttering gown and ivory limb. 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 203 

Went twinkling up the bare hill-side, 
And lonely there must he abide. 

Then seaward had he nigh turned round, 
And thus the end of life had found, 
When even before his wildered sight 
There glided forth a figure white, 
And passed him by afoot, alone ; 
No raiment on her sweet limbs shone, 
Only the tresses of her hair 
The wind drove round her body fair ; 
No sandals were there on her feet, 
But still before them blossoms sweet 
Unnamed, unknown within that land, 
Sprang up ; she held aloft her hand 
As to the trembling man she turned 
Her glorious eyes, and on it burned 
The dreadful pledge, the looked-for thing, 
The well-wrought, lovely spousal ring. 

Then Laurence trembled more and more ; 
Huge longing his faint heart swept o'er, 
As one who would a boon beseech. 
His fevered hand forth did he reach, 
And then she stayed and gazed at him, 
Just moving lightly each fair limb 
As one who. loiters, but must go ; 
But even as the twain stood so, 
She saying nought, he saying nought, 
And who knows what wild wave of thought 
Beating betwixt them, from his girth 
The dread scroll loosened fell to earth, 



t 

Tyyk 



THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

And lo his ears where sounds waxed dim 
Louder its rustle seemed to him 
Than loudest thunder ; down he bent, 
Remembering now his good intent, 
And got the scroll within his hand ; 

<nd when 'mid prayers he came to stand 
pright again, then was she gone, 
And he once more was left alone. 






Foredone, bewildered, downcast now, 
Confused clamor heard he grow. 
And then swept onward through the night 
A babbling crowd in raiment bright, 
Wherein none listened aught at all 
To what from other lips might fall, 
And none might meet his fellow's gaze ; 
And still o'er every restless face 
' 'assed restless shades of rage and pain, 
.nd sickening fear and longing vain. 

wound that manifold agony 
nholpen, vile, till earth and sea 

iilent, till the moonlight died 
lefore a false light blaring wide, 
id from amidst that fearful folk 
he Lord of all the pageant broke. 



Most like a mighty king was he, 

And crowned and sceptered royally ; 

As a white flame his visage shone, 

iharp, clear-cut as a face of stone ; 

flickering flame, not flesh, it was ; 

over it such looks did pass 



THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 205 

Of wild desire, and pain, and fear, 
As in his people's faces were 
But tenfold fiercer : furthermore 
A wondrous steed the Master bore, 
Unnamable of kind or make, 
Not horse, nor hippogriff, nor drake. 
Like and unlike to all of these, 
And flickering like the semblances 
Of an ill dream, wrought as in scorn 
Of sunny noon, fresh eve, and morn, 
That feed the fair things of the earth. 
And now brake out a mock of mirth 
From all that host, and all their eyes 
Were turned on Laurence in strange wise, 
Who met the maddening fear that burned 
Round his unholpen heart, and turned 
Unto the dreadful king and cried : 
" What errand go ye on ? Abide, 
Abide ! for I have tarried long ; 
Turn thou to me, and right my wrong ! 
One of thy servants keeps from me 
That which I gave her not ; nay, see 
What thing thy Master bids thee do ! " 

Then wearily, as though he knew 
How all should be, the Master turned, 
And his red eyes on Laurence burned, 
As without word the scroll he took ; 
But as he touched the skin he shook 
As though for fear, and presently 
In a great voice he 'gan to cry : 
" Shall this endure for ever, Lord ? 



206 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Hast thou no care to keep thy word ? 
And must such double men abide ? 
Not mine, not mine, nor on thy side ? 
For as thou cursest them I curse : — 
Make thy souls better, Lord, or worse ! " 

Then spake he to the trembling man : 
" What I am bidden, that I can ; 
Bide here, and- thou shalt see thine own 
Unto thy very feet cast down ; 
Then go and dwell in peace awhile." 
Then round he turned with sneering smile, 
And once more lonely was the night, 
And colorless with gray moonlight. 

• 

But soon indeed the dawn drew near, 
As Laurence stood 'twixt hope and fear, 
Still doubting, now that all was gone, 
If his own heart the thing had done, 
Though on his coat the blood-mark was, 
Though rose and wreath lay on the grass ; 
So long he waited wearily, 
Until, when dawn 'gan stripe the sky, 
If he were waking scarce he knew, 
When, as he deemed, a white cloud drew 
Anigh him from the marshland gray, 
Over the empty ghost-trod way, 
And from its midst a voice there came : 
"Thou who hast wrought me added shame, 
Take back thine own and go thy ways; 
And think, perchance, in coming days, 
When all grows old about thee, how 




THE RING GIVEN TO VENUS. 207 

From foolish hands thou needs must throw 

A gift of unhoped great delight^ 

It vanished as the east grew bright, 

And in the shadowless still morn 

A sense of rest to him was born ; 

And looking down unto his feet, 

His eyes the spousal-ring did meet 

He caught it up with a glad cry, 

And kissed it over longingly, 

And set it on his hand again ; 

And dreamlike now, and vague and vain, 

Seemed all those images of fear, 

The wicked sights that held him there ; 

And rather now his eyes could see 

Her that was his now verily. 

Then from that drear unhallowed place 
With merry heart he set his face. 
A light wind o'er the ocean blew, 
And fresh and fair the young day grew ; 
The sun rose o'er the green sea's rim, 
And gave new life and joy to him ; 
The white birds crying o'er his head 
Seemed praising all his hardihead, 
And laughing at the worsted foe ; 
So, joyous, onward did he go, 
And in a little sheltered bay 
His weariness he washed away, 
And made afresh on toward the town ; 
He met the fish-wife coming down 
From her red cottage to the strand, 
The fisher-children hand in hand 



THE EAR THLr PARADISE. 

Over some wonder washed ashore ; 

The old man muttering words of lore 

About the wind that was to be ; 

And soon the white sails specked the sea, 

And fisher-keel on fisher-keel 

The furrowed sand again did feel, 

And round them many a barefoot maid 

The burden on her shoulders laid, 

While unto rest the fishers went, 

And grumbling songs from rough throats sent 

Now all is done, and he at last, 
Weary, but. full of joy, has passed 
Over his threshold once again, 
And scarce believed is all the pain 
And all the fear that he has had ; 
Now night and day shall make him glad. 

As for Palumbus, tossed about 
His soul might be in dread and doubt, 
In rest at least his body lay 
Ere the great bell struck noon that day. 
And soon a carver did his best 
To make an image of that rest, 
Nor aught of gold did Laurence spare 
To make his tomb both rich and fair ; 
And o'er his clasped hands and his head 
Thereafter many a mass was said. 



JANUARY. 209 



00 when the tale was clean done, with a smile 

^ The old priest looked around a little while, 

That grew, as young and old 'gan say their say 

On that strange dream of time long past away ; 

So listening, with his pleased and thoughtful look 

He 'gan turn o'er the worn leaves of his book, 

Half noting at the first the flowers therein, 

Drawn on the margin of the yellowing skin 

Where chapters ended ; or fair images 

Of kings and lords amidst of war and peace 

At books' beginnings ; till within a space 

His eyes grew fixed upon a certain place, 

And he seemed reading. Was it then the name 

Of some old town before his eyes that came, 

And drew his thoughts there ? Did he see it now ? 

The bridge across the river choked with snow ; 

The pillared market-place, not thronged this eve ; 

The muffled goodwives making haste to leave 

The gusty minster porch, whose windows shone 

With the first-litten candles ; while the drone 

Of the great organ shook the leaded panes, 

And the wind moaned about the turret vanes ? 

— Nought changed there, and himself so changed 

'mid change, 
That the next land — Death's land — would seem 

nought strange 

To his awakening eyes ! 

Ah ! good and ill, 

When will your strife the fated measure fill ? 

When will the tangled veil be drawn away, 

And show us all that unimagined day ? 



^ 



2 io THE EAR THL T PARADISE. 



FEBRUARY. 

"VTOON — and the north-west sweeps the empty road, 
-^ The rain- washed fields from hedge to hedge are 

bare; 
Beneath the leafless elms some hind's abode 
Looks small and void, and no smoke meets the air 
From its poor hearth : one lonely rook doth dare 
The gale, and beats above the unseen corn, 
Then turns,' and whirling down the wind is borne. 

Shall it not hap that on some dawn of May 
Thou shalt awake, and, thinking of days dead, 
See nothing clear but this same dreary day, 
Of all the days that have passed o'er thine head ? 
Shalt thou not wonder, looking from thy bed, 
Through green leaves on the windless east a-fire, 
That this day too thine heart doth still desire ? 

Shalt thou not wonder that it liveth yet, 
The useless hope, the useless craving pain, 
That made thy face, that lonely noontide, wet 
With more than beating of the chilly rain ? 
Shalt thou not hope for joy new born again, 
Since no grief ever born can ever die 
Through changeless change of seasons passing by? 



FEBRUARY. 211 



*T*HE change has come at last, and from the west 
■*■ Drives on the wind, and gives the clouds no rest, 
And ruffles up the water thin that lies 
Over the surface of the thawing ice ; 
Sunrise and sunset with no glorious show 
Are seen, as late they were across the snow ; 
The wet-lipped west wind chilleth to the bone 
More than the light and flickering east hath done. 
Full soberly the earth's fresh hope begins, 
Nor stays to think of what each new day wins : 
And still it seems to bid us turn away 
From this chill thaw to dream of blossomed May : 
E'en as some hapless lover's dull shame sinks 
Away sometimes in day-dreams, and he thinks 
No more of yesterday's disgrace and foil, 
No more he thinks of all the sickening toil 
Of piling straw on straw to reach the sky ; 
But rather now a pitying face draws nigh, 
'Mid tears and prayers for pardon ; and a tale 
To make love tenderer now is all the bale 
Love brought him erst. 

But on this chill dank tide 
Still are the old men by the fireside, 
And all things cheerful round the day just done 
Shut out the memory of the cloud-drowned sun, 
And dripping bough and blotched and snow-soaked 

earth ; 
And little as the tide seemed made for mirth, 



1 



212 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Scarcely they lacked it less than months agone, 
When on their wrinkles bright the great sun shone ; 
Rather, perchance, less pensive now they were, 
And meeter for that cause old tales to hear 
Of stirring deeds long dead : 

So, as it fell, 
Preluding nought, an elder 'gan to tell 
The story promised in mid-winter days 
Of all that latter end of bliss and praise 
That erst befell Bellerophon the bright, 
Ere all except his name sank into night 




BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 

ARGUMENT. 

Bellerophon bore unawares to Jobates King of Lycia the deadly mes- 
sage of King Prcetus : wherefore the Lycian King threw him often in the 
way of death ; but the Fates willed him not to perish so, but gave him rather 
great honor and a happy life. 

T O ye have erst heard how Bellerophon 
•^— ' Left Argos with his fortune all undone, 
Well deeming why, and with a certain scorn, 
Rather than anger, in his heart new-born, 
To mingle with old courage, and the hope 
That yet with life's wild tangle he might cope, 
Nor be so wholly beaten in the end : 
Whatever pain he gat from failing friend, 
And earth made lonely for his feet again, 
The brightness of his youth might nowise wane 
Before it, or his hardihood grow dim. 

So now the evening sun shines fair on him 
In Lycia, as he goes up from the quays, 
Well pleased beneath the new folk's curious gaze 
With all the fair things that his eyes behold : 
As goodly as the tale was that men told 
Of King Jobates' city, goodlier 
Than all they told it seemeth to him here ; 



214 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And 'mid things new and strange and fairly wrought 

Small care he hath for any anxious thought. 

And so amid the shipment company 

He came unto the King's hall, builded high 

Above the market-place, and no delay 

In getting speech of the great King had they, 

For ever King Jobates' wont it was 

To learn of new-comers things brought to pass 

In outlands, and he served in noble wise 

Such guests as might seem trusty to his eyes. 

So in the midmost of his company 

He passed in through the hall, and seemed to be 

A very god chance-come among them there, 

Though little splendid soothly was his gear : 

A bright steel helm upon his brows he had, 

And in a dark blue kirtle was he clad, 

And a gray cloak thereover ; bright enow 

With gold and gems his great sword's hilt did glow, 

But no such thing was in aught else he wore ; 

A spear great-shafted his strong right hand bore, 

And in his left King Proetus' casket shone ; 

Grave was his face now, though there played thereon 

A flickering smile, that erst you might have seen 

In such wise play, when small space was between 

The spears he led and fierce eyes of the foe. 

Thus through the Lycian court-folk did they go 
Till to the King they came : e'en such a man 
As sixty summers made not pinched or wan, 
Though beard and hair alike were white as snow. 
Down on the sea-farers did he gaze now 
With curious peering eyes, and now and then 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 215 

He smiled and nodded, as he saw such men 
Amidst them as he knew in other days ; 
But when he met Bellerophon's frank gaze, 
There his eyes rested, and he said : " O guest, 
Though among these thy gear is not the best, 
Yet know I no man more if thou art not 
E'en that Bellerophon, who late hast got 
Such praise 'mid men of Argos, that thy name 
Two months agone to this our country came, 
Adorned with many tales of deeds of thine ; 
And certainly as of a man divine 
Thy mien is and thy face : how sayest thou ? " 

" So am I called, " he said, " 'mid all men now, 
Since that unhappy day that drave me forth, 
Lacking that half that was of greatest worth, 
And made me worthy ; — for my deeds, O King, 
What I have done is but a little thing : 
I wrought that I might live from day to day, 
That something I might give for hire and pay 
Unto my lord ; from whom I bring to thee 
A message written by him privily, 
Hid in this casket ; take it from my hand, 
And do thou worthily to this my band, 
And let us soon depart, for I am fain 
The good report of other men to gain, 
Wide through the world ; — nor do thou keep mc here 
As one unto King Proetus* heart right dear, 
Because I deem that I have done amiss 
Unto him, though I wot not how it is 
That I have sinned : certes he bade me flee, 
And ere he went my face he would not see ; 



2t6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Therefore I bid thee, King, to have a care 
Lest on a troublous voyage thou shouldst fare." 

" Sweet is thy voice," the King said : "many a maid 
Among our fairest would be well a-paid 
In listening to thy words a summer day. 
Nor will our honor let thee go away 
Whatso thy deed is, though I deem full well 
But little ill there is of thee to tell. 
Give forth the casket ; in good time will we 
This message of the King of Argos see, 
And do withal what seemeth good therein. 
Sit ye, O guests, for supper doth begin ! — 
Ho ! marshals, give them room ; but thou sit here, 
And gather heart the deeds of Kings to bear 
While yet thou mayst, and here with me rejoice, 
Forgetting much ; for certes in thy voice 
Was wrath e'en now, and unmeet anger is 
To mingle with our short-lived spell of bliss." 

Then sat Bellerophon adown and thought 
How fate his wandering footsteps erst had brought 
To such another place, and of the end, 
Whate'er it was, that fate to him did send. 
Yet since the time was fair, and day by day 
Ever some rag of fear he cast away, 
And ever less doubt of himself he had, 
In that bright concourse was he blithe and glad, 
And the King blessed the fair and merry tide 
That set so blithe a fellow by his side. 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 217 



T> UT the next day, in honor of the guest, 

■*-* The King bade deck all chambers with his best, 

And bid all folk to joyous festival, 

And let the heralds all the fair youth call 

To play within the lists at many a game ; 

" Since here last eve the great Corinthian came 

That ye have heard of : and though ye indeed 

Of more than manly strength may well have need 

To match him, do your best, lest word he bear 

Too soft that now the Lycian folk live here, 

Forgetting whence their fathers came of yore 

And whom their granddames to their grandsires bore." 

So came the young men thronging, and withal 
Before the altars did the oxen fall 
To many a god, the well-washed fleeces fair 
In their own bearers , blood were dyed, and there 
The Persian merchants stood and snuffed the scent 
Of frankincense, for which of old they went 
Through plain and desert waterless, and faced 
The lion-haunted woods that edged the waste. 
Then in the lists were couched the pointless spears, 
The oiled sleek wrestler struggled with his peers, 
The panting runner scarce could see the crown 
Held by white hands before his visage brown ; 
The horses, with no hope of gold or gain, 
With fluttering hearts remembered not the rein 
Nor thought of earth. And still all things fared so, 

That all who with the hero had to do 

10 



1 



2i8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Deemed him too strong for mankind ; or if one 
Gained seeming victory on Bellerophon, 
He knew it for a courteous mockery 
Granted to him. So did the day go by, 
And others like it, and the talk still was 
How even now such things could come to pass 
That such a man upon the earth was left 

But when the ninth sun from the earth had reft 
Silence, and rest from care, then the King sent 
To see Bellerophon, who straightly went, 
And found Jobates with a troubled face, 
Pacing a chamber of the royal place 
From end to end, who turned as he drew near, 
And said in a low voice : " What dost thou here ? 
This is a land with many dangers rife ; 
Hast thou no heed to save thy joyous life ? 
The wide sea is before thee, get thee gone, 
All lands are good for thee but this alone ! " 

And as the hero strove to catch his eye 
And 'gan to speak, he passed him hurriedly, 
And gat him from the chamber : with a smile 
Bellerophon turned too within a while, 
When he could gather breath from such a speech, 
And said : " Far then King Proetus' arm can reach : 
So was it as I doubted ; yet withal 
Not every thing to every king will fall 
As he desires it, and the gods are good ; 
Nor shall the Lycian herbage drink my blood : — 
The gods are good, though far they drive me forth ; 
But the four quarters, south, west, east, and north, 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 219 

All are alike to me, who therein have 
None left me now to weep above my grave 
Whereso I fall : and fair things shall I see, 
Nor may great deeds be lacking unto me : — 
Would I were gone then ! " 

But with that last word 
Light footsteps drawing swiftly nigh he heard, 
And made a shift therewith his eyes to raise, 
Then staggering back, bewildered with amaze, 
Caught at the wall and wondered if he dreamed, 
For there before his very eyes he seemed 
To see the Lycian Sthenobcea draw nigh ; 
But as he strove with his perplexity 
A soft voice reached his ears, and then he knew 
That in one mould the gods had fashioned two, 
But given them hearts unlike ; yea, and her eyes 
Looked on his troubled face in no such wise 
As had the other's ; wistful these and shy, 
And seemed to pray, Use me not cruelly, 
I have not harmed thee. — Thus her soft speech ran : 

" Far have I sought thee, O Corinthian man, 
And now that I have found thee my words fail, 
Though erst my heart had taught me well my tale." 

She paused, her half-closed lips were e'en as sweet 
As the sweet sounds that thence the air did meet, 
And such a sense swept o'er Bellerophon 
As whiles in spring had come, and lightly gone 
Ere he could name it ; like a wish it was, 
A wish for something that full swift did pass, 
To be forgotten. . 



2io THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Some three paces were 
Hetwrixt them when she first had spoken there, 
now, as though it were unwittingly, 
ilowly moved a little more anigh ; 
she flushed red now ere she spake once more, 
faltered and looked down upon the floor. 

Prince Bellerophon," at last she said, 
Ireamed last night that I beheld thee dead ; 
ew thee thus, for twice had I seen thee, 
een myself, in this festivity ; 
since I know how loved a man thou art, 
e have 1 come, to bid thee to depart, 
:e that thou mayst do yet." 

Nigher he came 
I said : " O fair one, I am but a name 
:hee, as men are to the gods above ; 

I what thing, then, thy heart to this did move ? " 

a spake he, knowing scarce what words he said, 
nge his own voice seemed to him ; and the maid 
ke not at first, but grew pale, and there passed 
uivering o'er her lips ; but at the last, 
h eyes fixed full upon him, thus she spake : 

Why should I lie ? this did I for thy sake, 
ause thou art the worthiest of all men, 
; loveliest to look on. Hear me, then ; 
ere my tale is finished, speak thou not, 
ause this moment has my heart waxed hot, 

I I can speak before I go my way — 
Dre thou leav'st me. — On my bed I lay, 



BBLLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 221 

And dreamed I fared within the Lycian land, 

And still about me there on either hand 

Were nought but poisonous serpents, yet no dread 

I had of them, for soothly in my head 

The thought was, that my kith and kin they were ; 

But as I went methought I saw thee there 

Coming on toward me, and thou mad'st as though 

No whit about those fell worms thou didst know ; 

And then. in vain I strove to speak to thee, 

And bid thee get thee down unto the sea, 

Where bode thy men ready at bench and mast ; 

But in my dream thou cam'st unto me fast, 

And unto speech we fell of e'en such things 

As please the sons and daughters of great kings ; 

And I must smile and talk, and talk and smile, 

Though I beheld a serpent all the while 

Draw nigh to strike thee : then — then thy lips came 

Close unto mine ; and while with joy and shame 

I trembled, in my ears a dreadful cry 

Rang, and thou fellest from me suddenly 

And layst dead at my feet : and then I spake 

Unto myself, '. Would God that I could wake,' 

But woke not, though my dream changed utterly, 

Except that thou wert laid stark dead anigh. 

Then in this palace were we, and the noise 

Of many folk I heard, and a great voice 

Rang o'er it ever and again, and said, 

Bellerophon who would not love is dead. 

But I — I moved not from thee, but I saw 

Through the fair windows many people draw 

Unto the lists, until withal it seemed 

As though I never yet had slept or dreamed, 



222 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That all the games went on, where yesterday 

Thou like a god amidst of men didst play : 

But yet through all, the great voice cried and said, 

Bellerophon who would not love is dead. 

This is the dream — ah, hast thou heard me, then ? 

Abide no more, I say, among these men : 

Think'st thou the world without thy life can thrive, 

More than my heart without thy heart can live ? " 

Almost before her lips the words could say, 
She turned her eager glittering eyes away, 
And hurried past, and as her feet did bear 
Her loveliness away, he seemed to hear 
A sob come from her ; but for him, he felt 
As in some fair heaven all his own he dwelt, 
As though he ne'er of any woe had known, 
So happy and triumphant had he grown. 

But when he thus a little while had stood 
With this new pleasure stirring all his blood, 
He 'gan to think how that she was not there, 
And 'thwart the glory of delight came care, 
As uttermost desire so wrought in him, 
That now in strange new tears his eyes did swim, 
He scarce knew if for pleasure. or for pain. 
Of other things he strove to think in vain — 
Nought seemed they; — the strange threatening of 

the King, 
Nay, the maid's dream — it seemed a little thing 
That he should read their meaning more than this : 
' Here in the land of Lycia dwells thy bliss ; 
So much she loved thee that she wished thee gone, 
That thou mightst live, though she were left alone ; 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 223 

Or else she had not left thee ; failing not 
To see how all the heart in thee waxed hot 
To cast thine arms about her and to press 
Her heart to thine and heal its loneliness.' 
Pity grew in him as he thought thereof, 
And with its sweet content fed burning love, 
Till all his life was swallowed by- its flame, 
And dead and past away were fear and shame, 
Nor might he think that he could ever die. 

But now at last he with a passionate sigh 
Turned from the place where he had seen her feet, 
And murmured as he went, " O sweet, O sweet, 
O sweet the fair morn that thou breathest in, 
When thou, awakening lone, dost first begin 
For one more day the dull blind world to bless 
With sight of thine unmeasured loveliness." 

So speaking, through a low door did he gain 
A little garden ; the fair morn did wane, 
The day grew to its hottest, the warm air 
Was little stirred, the o'er-sweet lily there 
With unbowed stem let fall upon the ground 
Its fainting leaves ; full was the air of sound 
Of restless bees ; from high elms far away ' 

Came the doves' moan about the lost spring day, 
And Venus' sparrows twittered in the eaves 
Above his head. There 'twixt the languid leaves 
And o'er-blown blossoms he awhile did go, 
Nursing his love, till faint he 'gan to grow 
For very longing, and love, bloomed an hour,. 
Began to show the thorn about the flower ; 



224 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet sweet and sweet it was, until the thought 

Of that departing to his mind was brought, 

And though he laughed aloud with scorn of it, i 

Yet images of pain and death would flit ' 

Across his love, until at last anew 

He 'gan to think that deeds there were to do 

In his old way, if there he still would bide. 

Deeds must have birth from hope ; grief must he hide, 

And into hard resolve his longing chill, 

If he would be god-loved and conquering still : 

So back he turned into the house, in mind, 

Whatso might hap, the King once more to find, 

And crave for leave to serve him ; for he deemed, 

Whate'er the King had warned or his love dreamed, 

That he and youth 'gainst death were fellows twain 

For years yet, whoso in the end should gain. 

Deep buried in his thoughts he went, but when 
He drew anigh the hall a crowd of men 
Were round about it ; armed they were, indeed, 
But rent and battered was their warlike weed, 
And some lacked wounding weapons ; some men leant 
Weakly 'gainst pillars ; some were so much spent 
They wept for weariness and pain ; no few 
Bore bandages the red blood struggled through ; 
E'en such they seemed, the hero thought, as folk 
That erst before his Argive spears had broke, 
And at his feet their vain arms down had cast : 
So, wondering thereat, through these folk he passed 
Into the hall, where on the ivory throne 
Jobates sat, with flushed face, gazing down 
Upon the shrinking captains ; therewithal 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 225 

E'en as he entered did the King's eyes fall 
Upon him, and the King somewhat did start 
At first, but then, as minding not the part 
That he had played that morn, a gracious smile 
Came o'er his face ; then spake he in a while : 

" Look upon these, O wise Bellerophon, 
And ask of them what glory they have won — 
Or ask them not, but listen unto me : 
Over the mountain-passes that men see 
Herefrom, a town there is, and therein dwell 
Folk baser and more vile than men can tell ; 
A godless folk, without a law or priest ; 
A thankless folk, who at high-tide and feast 
Remember not the gods ; no image there 
Makes glad men's eyes, no painted story fair 
Tells of past days ; alone, unhelped they live, 
And nought but curses unto any give : 
A rude folk, nothing worth, without a head 
To lead them forth, — and this morn had I said 
A feeble folk and bondsmen of mine own. 
But now behold from this same borel town 
Are these men empty-handed now come back, 
And midst these Solymi is little lack 
This morn of well-wrought swords and silk attire 
And gold that seven times o'er has felt the fire. , 

" Lo now, thou spak'st of wandering forth again — 

Rather be thou my man, and 'gainst these men 

Lead thou mine army ; nay, nor think to win 

But little praise if thou dost well herein, 

For these by yesterday are grown so great 

That if thou winnest them, midst this red heat 

Of victory, a great deed shalt thou do, 

10* 



226 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And great will thy reward be ; wilt thou go ? 
Methought thou hadst a mind to serve me here." 

So, as Bellerophon drew more anear, 
He thought within his heart, " Ah, then, I know 
From all these things why he would have me go ; 
Yet since indeed I may not quite depart 
From Lycia now, because my new-smitten heart 
Is bound with bonds of love unto the land, 
Safer am I in armor, sword in hand, 
Than midst these silken hangings and fair things, 
That well I wot hide many poison-stings : 
The gods are great, nor midst of men am I 
Of such as, once being threatened, quickly die." 

Then he spake out : " O King, wilt thou then pray 
To all the gods to give me a good day ? 
For when I was a youth and dwelt at home 
Men deemed I knew somewhat of things to come, 
And now methinks more dangers I foresee 
Than any that have yet been forged for me." 

The King frowned at that word, and flushed blood-red. 
As if against his will ; but quickly said, 
In a mild voice : " Be of good cheer, O son ; 
For if the gods help not Bellerophon 
They will not have to say, that in this land 
I prayed their good-will for thee with close hand. 
No god there is that hath an altar here 
That shall not smoke with something he holds dear 
While thou art absent from us ; — but these men, 
Worn as they are, are fain to try again, 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA, 227 

As swiftly as may be, what from the Fates 
In bloody fields the Lycian name awaits : 
Mine armory is not empty, yet there are 
Un wounded men to furnish forth the war — 
Yea, and mine household-folk shall go with thee, 
And none but women in mine house shall be, 
Until the Lycian shield once more is clean 
Through thee, as though no stain had ever been. 
Canst thou be ready by the second day 
Unto the Solymi to take thy way ? " 

" So be it," said the wise Corinthian ; 
" And here, O King, I make myself thy man — 
May the gods make us faithful ; but if worse 
Must happen, on his head fall all the curse 
Who does the wrong ! — Now for thy part see thou 
That we who go have every thing enow ; 
Nor think to hear too soon of victory, 
For though a spliced staff e'en as strong may be 
As one ne'er broken, lean thou not thereon 
Till o'er the narrow way thy feet have won 
And thou may's t try it on the level grass. 
Now give me leave, for I am fain to pass 
Thy men in order by me, and to find 
How best thy wounded honor I may bind." 

When first the hero's hand the King's hand took, 
But ill belike Jobates that did brook, 
And well-nigh drew it back ; yet still it lay 
And moved not, and the King made haste to say : 

" May the gods bless us both, as I bless thee, 
Who at this tide givest good help to me ! 



228 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Depart, brave man ; and, doing but thy best, 
Howe'er fate goes, by me shalt thou be blest" 

Then went Bellerophon, and labored sore 
To give the Lycian folk good heart once more, 
Till day passed into night, and in fair dream 
And hopeful waking, happy love did gleam, 
E'en like the young sun, on the hero's head. 
But when the next bright day was well-nigh dead, 
Within the brazen porch Bellerophon 
Stood thinking o'er all things that had been done. 
Alone he was, and yearning for his love, 
And longing for some deed the truth to prove 
Of what seemed dreamlike now, midst all the stir 
Of men and clash of arms ; and wearier 
He felt than need was, as the evening breeze 
Raised up his hair. But while sweet images 
His heart made now of what he once had seen, 
There in the dusk, across the garden green, 
A white thing fluttered ; nor was steadier 
His heart within him, as he thought of her, 
And that perchance she came ; and soon anigh 
A woman drew, but stopping presently 
Over against him, he could see her now 
To be a handmaid ; and, with knitted brow, 
Was going thence, but through the dusk she cried ? 
" O fair my lord Bellerophon, abide 
And hearken — here my lady sendeth me, 
And saith these words withal : 

Philonoe, 
Born of the Lycian King, doth give thee this 
Fair blade, and prayeth for thee health and bliss; 



SELLER OPHON IN LTCIA. 229 

Saying, moreover : as for this same sword, 
Draw it not forth before base man or lord, 
But be alone when first it leaves the sheath; 
Yet since upon it lieth life and death, 
Surely thou wilt not long delay to see 
The face of that bright friend I give to thee" 

He felt the cold hilt meet his outstretched hand, 
And she was gone, nor longer did he stand 
Than but to look if any stood thereby, 
Then gat him gone therefrom, and presently 
Was lone within his chamber ; there awhile 
He stood regarding with a lovesome smile 
The well-wrought sword, and fairly was it dight 
With gold and gems ; then by the taper's light 
He drew it from the sheath, and, sooth to tell, . 
E'en that he hoped for therewithal befell, 
Because a letter lay 'twixt blade and sheath, 
Which straight he opened, and nigh held his breath 
For very eagerness, the while he read : 

" Short is the time, and yet enow" it said, 
" Night-fall it will be when thou readest this. 
If thou wouldst live yet, for the weal and bliss 
Of many, gird this sword to thee, and go 
Down to the quay, and there walk to and fro, 
Until a sea-farer thou meetest there, 
With two behind him who shall torches bear; 
He shall behold the sword, and say to thee, 
6 Is it drawn forth f ' and say, i Yea, verily, 
A nd the wound healed? Then shall he bring thee straight 
Unto his keel which with loose sails doth wait 



23° THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Thy coming, and shall give thee gold good store, 

Nor bide the morn to leave the Lycian shore. — 

Farewell; I would have seen thee, but I feared — 

— I feared two things; first, that we might be heard 

By green trees and by walls, and thus should/ 

Have brought the death on thee I bid thee fly ; 

The first — but for the second, since I speak 

Now for the last time — Love has made me weak; 

I feared my heart made base by sudden bliss — 

I feared — wilt thou be wroth who readest this t — 

Mine eyes I saw in thine that other tide ; 

I thought perchance that here thou mightst abide, 

.Constrained by Love, 

Now if I have said ill. 
Shall not my soul of sorrow have its fill f 
I sin, but bitter death shall pay therefor." 

He read the piteous letter o'er and o'er, 
Till fell the tears thereon like sudden rain, 
For he was young, and might not love again 
With so much pleasure, such sweet bitterness, 
Such hope amid that new-born sharp distress 
Of longing ; half-content to love and yearn, 
Until perchance the fickle wheel might turn. 

The well-kissed sword within bis belt he set, 
But ye may well deem was more minded yet 
To bide his fortune in the Lycian land, 
What fear soe'er before his path might stand. 
And great his soul grew, thinking of the tide 
When every hindrance should be thrust aside, 
And love should greet him ; calm, as though the death, 



BBLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 231 

He knew so nigh him, on some distant heath 
Were sitting, flame-bound, waiting for the word 
Himself should give ; with hand upon his sword, 
Unto the hall he took his way : therein 
Was growing great and greater joyful din, 
For there they drank unto the coming day ; 
And as through all that crowd he made his way, 
The shouts rose higher round him, and his name 
Beat hard about the stony ears of Fame. 

So then beside the Uycian King he sat 
A little while, and spake of this and that, 
E'en as a man grown mighty ; and at last 
Some few words o'er that feasting folk he cast, 
Proud, mingling sharp rebuke with confidence, 
And bade them feast no more, but going thence 
Make ready straight to live or die like men. 
And therewithal did he depart again 
Amidst them, and for half the night he went 
Hither and thither, on such things intent 
As fit the snatcher-forth of victory ; 
And then, much wondering how such things could be, 
That aught but love could move a man at all, 
Into a dreamless slumber did he fall, 
Wherefrom the trumpet roused him in the morn, 
Almost before the summer sun was born ; 
And midst the new-born longings of his heart, 
From that fair place now must he needs depart 
Unguarded and unholpen to his fate. 

Nought happed to him 'twixt palace-court and gate 
Of the fair city ; thronged it was e'en then 



232 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

With anxious, weeping women and pale men, 

But unto him all faces empty were \ 

But one, that nowise might he now see there : 

Or ere he passed the great gate back he gazed 

To where the palace its huge pile upraised 

Unto the fresh and windy morning sky, 

As seeking if he might e'en now espy 

That which he durst not raise his eyes unto 

When 'neath its walls he went awhile ago. 

So through the gate the last man strode, and they 
Who in the city seemed so great a stay 
Unto that people, as the country-side 
About their moving ranks spread bleak and wide, 
Showed like a handful, and the town no less 
Seemed given up to utter helplessness. 



O EVEN days of fear wore by ; Philonoe 

^ Must vex her heart with all that yet might be, 

And oft would curse herself that she it was 

Through whom such death as his should come to pass, 

And weep to think of all her life made lone. 

But on the eighth day, at the stroke of noon, 

A little band of stained and battered men 

Passed through the gate into the town again, 

And left glad hearts as well as anxious ones 

Behind them, as they clattered o'er the stones 

Unto the palace : there the King they found 

Set on his throne, with ancient lords around, 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 233 

And cried to him : " O King, rejoice ! at last 
Raised is thy banner, that ill men had cast 
Unto the ground ; as safely mayst thou lie 
Within the city of the Solymi 
As in this house thou buildedst for thy bliss, 
For all things there are thine now, e'en as this." 

Then the King rose, and filled a cup with wine, 
And said : " All praise be unto things divine ! 
Yet ere I pour, how goes it with our folk ? 
Did many die before they laid the yoke 
On these proud necks ? when will they come again ? " 

" O King, " they said, " though they fell not in vain, 
Yet many fell ; but now upon the way 
Our fellows are : I think on the third day 
They will be here, and needs must they be slow, 
Because they have with them a goodly show ; 
Wains full of spoil, arms, and most fair attire, 
Wrought gold that seven times o'er has felt the fire ; 
And men and women of thy stubborn foes 
E'en as thou wilt their lives to keep or lose." 

"What sayst thou next about Bellerophon," 
The King said, " that this day for me hath won ? 
Is he alive yet ? " 

Then the man waxed pale, 
And said : u He liveth, and of small avail 
Man's weapons are against him ; on the wall 
He stood alone, for backward did we fall 
Before the fury of the Solymi, 
Because we deemed ourselves brought there to die, 



234 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And might not bear it : then it was as though 

A clear bright light about his head did glow 

Amidst the darts and clamor, and he turned 

A face to us that with such glory burned 

That those behind us drave us back again, 

And cried aloud to die there in the pain 

Rather than leave him, and with such a wave 

Of desperate war swept up, they scarce could save 

Their inmost citadel from us that tide, 

Who at the first with mocks had bidden us bide 

A little longer in a freeman's land, 

Until their slaves had got their whips in hand 

To drive us thence." 

Now as he spake, at first 
The King like one, who heareth of the worst, 
And must not heed it, hearkened, but when he 
Had heard his servant's tale out, suddenly 
The wine he poured, and cried : "Jove, take thou this 
In token of the greatness of our bliss, 
In earnest of the gifts that thou shalt have, 
Who thus our name, our noble friends didst save." 

So spake he, looking downward, and his heart 
In what his lips said, had perchance some part, 
However, driven on by long-sworn oath, 
He dealt in things that sore he needs must loathe : 
And he who erst had told him of the thing 
Seemed fain to linger, as if yet the King 
Had something more to say ; but no fresh word 
He had for him, but with great man and lord 
Made merry, praising wind and wave 
That brought Bellerophon their feme to save. 



SELLER OPH ON IN LTCIA. . 235 

But joyous was the town to hear of this, 
For in that place, midst all that men call bliss, 
Cold fear was mingled ; such a little band 
They seemed, but clinging to a barbarous land, 
With strange things round about them ; if the earth 
Should open not to swallow up their mirth 
And them together, they must deem it good ;. 
Or if the kennels ran not with their blood, 
While a poor remnant, driven forth with whips, 
Must sit beneath the hatchways of strange ships, 
Of such account as beasts. So there dwelt they, 
Trembling amidst their wealth from day to day, 
Afraid of god and man, and earth and sky. 
Judge, therefore, if they thought not joyously 
Of this one fallen amongst them, who could make 
The rich man risk his life for honor's sake, 
The trembling slave remember what he was, 
The poor man hope for what might come to pass. 

So when the day came when the gates were flung 
Back on their hinges, and the people hung 
About the pageant of their folk returned, 
And many an eager face about him burned 
With new and high desires they scarce could name, 
He wondered how such glory on him came, 
And why folk gazed upon him as a god, 
And would have kissed the ground whereon he trod. 
A little thing it seemed to him to fight 
Against hard things, that he might see the light 
A little longer and rejoice therein, 
A little thing that he should strive, to win 
More time for love ; and even therewithal 



236 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Into a dreamy musing did he fall 
Amidst the shouts and glitter, and scarce knew 
What things they were that he that day did do, 
Only the time seemed long and long and long, 
The noise and many men still seemed to wrong 
The daintiness of his heart-piercing love, — 
As through a world of shadows did he move. 

Think then how fared his love Philonoe* 
Amid the din of that festivity ! 
For if while joy hung betwixt hope and fear 
Life seemed a hateful thing to her and drear, 
And all men hateful ; if herself she cursed, 
The hatefullest of all things and the worst ; 
If rest had grown a name for something gone 
And not remembered ; if herself alone 
Seemed no more one, but made of many things 
All wretched and at strife ; if sudden stings 
Of fresh pain made her start up from her place, 
And set to some strange unknown goal her face, 
And she must stifle wails with bitterest pain — 
If all this was, ought she not now to gain 
A little rest ? now, when she heard the voice 
Of triumph and the people's maddening noise 
Round her returning love ? still did she bear 
Her grinding dread if with a wearier, 
Yet with a calmer face, than now she bore 
Desire so quickened by that fear past o'er. 
She in her garden wandered through the day, 
And heavy seemed the hours to pass away. 
Her color came and went, she trembled when 
She heard some louder shout of joyous men ; 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 237 

She could not hear the things her maidens spake, 

Nor aught could she seem gracious for their sake ; 

The sweetest snatch of some familiar song 

She might not hearken ; she abode not long 

Within the shadow ; weary of the sun 

She grew full soon ; the glassy brook did run 

In vain across her feet ; the ice-cold well 

Quenched not her thirst ; the half-blown roses' smell , 

Was not yet sweet enough : the sun sank low, 

And then she murmured that the day must go 

That should have been so happy : wearily 

She laid her down that night, but nought slept she. 

Yet in the morn the new sun seemed to bring 

A joy to her, and some unnamed dear thing 

Better than rest or peace ; for in her heart 

She knew that he in all her thoughts had part ; 

Yea, and she thought how dreamlike he would ride 

Amidst his glory, and how ill abide 

The clamor of the feast ; yea, and would not 

That night to him belike be dull and hot, 

And that dawn hopeful ? 

'Neath the wall there was 
A place where dewy was the daisied grass 
E'en nigh the noon ; a high tower great and round 
Cast a long shadow o'er that spot of ground, 
And blind it was of window or of door, 
For, wrought by long-dead men of ancient lore, 
No part it was of that stone panoply 
That girt the town ; so lilies grew thereby, 
And woodbine, and the odorous virgin's-bower 
Hung in great heaps about that undyked tower, 
And lone and silent was the pleasance there. 



238 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Thither Love led Philonoe the fair, 

And well she knew of him, and still her heart 

At every little sound and sight would start, 

And still her palms were tingling for the touch 

Of other hands, and ever over-much 

Her feet seemed light. 

But when the bushes gleamed 
With something more than the low sun that streamed 
Athwart their blossoms, and a clear voice rung 
Above the ousel's, then with terror stung, 
She leaned her slim and perfect daintiness 
'Gainst the gray tower, and even like distress 
Her great joy seemed. Green clad he was that morn, 
And to his side there hung a glittering horn, 
A mighty unbent bow was in his hand, 
And o'er his shoulders did the feathers stand 
Of his long arrows ; in his gleaming eyes 
Such joy there was as he beheld the prize, 
That in -that shadow now he seemed to be 
A piece of sunlight fallen down suddenly. 

So face to yearning face they stood awhile, 
And every word at first seemed poor and vile, 
None better than another ; nor durst they 
Lips upon lips or palm to fingers lay, 
More than if many people stood around, 
With such strange fear and shame doth love abound 

At last she spake : " Thou comest, then, to say 
How thou wilt now be wise and go away, 
E'en as I bade ; the prey has 'scaped the net ; 
Be wise, the fowler other wiles hath yet ! " 



SELLER OPH ON IN LYCIA. 239 

" Yea," said he, " then thy word it was indeed 
That needs must think about me in my need : 
Strange, then, that now thou biddest me begone ! 
Belike thou know'st not of folk left alone, 
And what life grows to them : yet art thou kind — 
Thou deemest other friends I yet may find. 
Alas, life goeth fast ; not every day 
Do we behold folk standing in the way 
With outstretched hands to meet us." 

" Ah," she said, 
" How sweet thou art ! and yet the dead are dead, 
The absent are but dead a little while. 
Then get thee gone from midst of wrong and guile, 
And we shall meet once more in happier days, 
When death lurks not amidst of rosy ways. — 
— Ah, wilt thou slay me, then ? — I knew not erst 
How poor a life I had, and how accurst, 
Before I felt thy lips — what thing is this 
That makes me faint amidst of new-born bliss ? " 

" Rest in mine arms, O well-beloved," said he ; 
" I faint not, neither shall death come on me 
While thus thou art : nay, nay, I think if I, 
Hacked with an hundred swords, should come to lie, 
Yet without thee I should not then depart" 

" O love, alas ! the sorer is my heart 
The more I love," she said : " we are alone ; 
Our loving life is not for any one 
But for our own selves — ah, deem all I said 
Before those lips of thine on mine were laid 
As said again and yet again ! Some hate 



240 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Is round thee here, some undeserved strange fate 

Awaits thee here in Lycia — yea, full sure 

The hungry swords here may we twain endure ; 

But what then ? — Of the dead what hast thou heard 

That maketh thee so rash and unafeared ? 

Can the dead love, or is there any space 

In their long sleep when they lay face to face 

Soft as we do now ? can their pale lips plead 

The pleas of love ? or can their fixed eyes lead 

Heart unto heart ? or hast thou heard that they 

Can wait from weary day to weary day, 

And hope, as I will, while thou gatherest fame ? 

Can they have pleasure there e'en in a name, 

A memory ? is their pain a pleasure there, 

Are tears sweet, and the longing sobs that wear 

The hours away, where life and hope are gone ? 

" How can I any longer be alone ? 
Can I forget thee now ? the while I live ? 

my beloved, must I strive and strive, 

And move thee not ? How sweet thou art to me ! 
How dull the coming day that knows not thee I " 

" Fear not," he said ; " not yet my days are done ! 
When on the deadly wall I stood alone, 
And back the traitors fell from me, I felt 
As though within me such a life there dwelt 
As scarce could end. — Lo now, if I depart 

1 lack the safeguard of thy faithful heart, 

And meet new dangers that thou know'st not of. 
Yea, listen, nor rebuke me — This our love : 
Hast thou not heard how love may grow a-cold 
Before the lips that called thereon wax old ? 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 241 

Ah, listen ! seas betwixt us, and great pain, 

And death of days that shall not be again ; 

And yearning life within us, and desire 

That changes hearts as fire will quench the fire. 

These are the engines of the gods, lest we, 

Through constant love, gods too should come to be. 

A little pain, a little fond regret, 

A little shame, and we are living yet, 

While love that should out-live us lieth dead. — 

" Ah, my beloved, lift that glorious head 
And look upon me ! put away the thought . 
Of time and death, and let all things be nought 
But this love of to-day ! and think of me 
As if for ever I should seem to thee 
As I am now — I will not go away, 
Nor sow my love, to reap some coming day 
I know not what : be merry, we shall live 
To see our love high o'er all danger thrive." 

For now she wept, but, starting midst her tears, 
She stopped and listened like a bird that hears 
A danger on the wind : the round tower's shade 
A lesser patch upon the daisies made, 
And all about the place 'gan folk to stir : 
She turned and girt her loosened gown to her, 
And with one sob, and a long faithful look, 
The gathering tears from out her eyes she shook, 
Nor bade farewell, but swiftly gat her gone. 

But he beneath the tower so left alone 
Stooped down and kissed her foot-prints in the grass, 
And then with swift steps through the place did pass, 

11 



1 2$3 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Thinking high things ; nor knew he till that hour 
"- - sweet life was, or love its fruit and flower. 

passed the days, nor often might it be 

such sweet hours as this the twain might see ; 

they must watch that folk might not surprise 

r hearts' love through the windows of their eyes 

a midst of folk they met : but glorious days 

: for Bellcrophon, and love and praise 

i all folk, though the great end lingered yet 

n he sweet life, or glorious death, should get 



>W on a day was held of most and least 

Unto Diana sacrifice and feast, 
on that tide the market empty was, 
through the haven might no dromund pass ; 
then the wont was they should bear about 
goddess wrought in gold, with song and shout 
winding of great horns, amidst a band 
ire-kneed maidens, bended bow in hand 
quiver at the back ; and these should take, 

by force, and for the city's sake, 
e damsels chosen by lot for that same end, 
bind their hands, and with them straightly wend 

the temple of Diana ; there 
priest should lead them to the altar fair, 
midst old songs should raise aloft the knife ■ 

to take from each her well-loved life ; 
ewith the King, with a great company, 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 243 

Through the great door would come and respite cry, 

And offer ransom : a great golden horn, 

A silver image of a flowering thorn, 

Three white harts with their antlers gilt with gold, 

A silk gown for a huntress, every fold 

Thick wrought with gold and gems ; then to and fro 

An ancient song was sung, to bid men know 

That of such things the goddess had no need ; 

Yet in the end the maidens all were freed, 

The harts slain in their place, the dainty things 

Hung o'er the altar from fair silver rings, 

And then, midst semblance of festivity 

And joyful songs, the solemn day went by. 

All this they told Bellerophon, and said 
Moreover, that the white-foot well-girt Maid 
These gifts must have, because a merry rout 
Of feasters, knowing neither fear nor doubt, 
With love and riot did her grove defile 
In the old days ; and therefore nought more vile 
Than three fair maids* lives would she have at first, 
And with that burden was the city cursed 
For many years ; " But in these latter days, 
She to whom we to-morrow give great praise 
Will take these signs of our humility, 
And let the folk in other wise go free." 

So on the morn joyful the city was, 
Nor did men look for aught to come to pass 
More than in other years ; but lo, a change ! 
For there betid great portents dire and strange. 
For first, when in the car of cedar-wood, 



1 



244 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Decked with green boughs, the golden goddess stood, 
And the white oxen strained at yoke and trace, 
In no wise might they move her from the place, 
Though they had drawn well twenty times that weight 
So when the priests had come in all their state 
To pray her, and no lighter she would grow, 
They said she did it for that folk might know 
She fain would have a shrine built o'er the way, 
And that all rights should there be wrought that day. 

So was it done, and now all things seemed well 
A little space, and nought there was to tell 
Until the King had brought the ransom due, 
And the loosed bonds men from the maidens drew ; 
Then fell the third maid down before the King, 
And cried from foaming mouth a shameful thing 
Unmeet for maids ; then from the frightened folk 
That filled the street a clamor there outbroke, 
And some cried out to slay the woman there, 
And some to burn her wanton body fair, 
And some to cast her forth into the sea 
And purge the town of that iniquity. 

But when the King had bidden lead her forth, 
And try if she indeed were one of worth, 
Or if her maidenhood were nought and vain, 
The tossing street grew somewhat stilled again, 
And o'er the sinking tumult called a priest : 

" Abide, let see if she will take the beast 
E'en as her wont is ! but if so it be 
That of our old crime she has memory 
And threatens us with something strange and new, 
Yet 'mid your fear do all in order due, 
Nor make two faults of one, that ye may bear 
A double punishment from year to year." 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 245 

Then were the harts brought forth ; the first one stood 
Fearless as he were lonely in the wood, 
While to his throat drew nigh the sharp-edged knife, 
Nor did the second strive to keep his life ; 
But when the third and biggest drew anigh, 
He tossed his gilded antlers angrily 
And smote his foot against the marble floor, 
While from his throat came forth a low hoarse roar ; 
And as the girl whose office was to smite 
His drawn-back throat came forth confused and white, 
And raised a wavering hand aloft, then he 
His branching horns from the priests* hands shook free, 
And as the affrighted girl fell back, turned round, 
And gathered up his limbs for one last bound ; 
But even therewith a soldier from the band 
That stood about the King raised up his hand, 
And in the beast's heart thrust his well-steeled spear, 
And as he smote, like one who knew no fear, 
He cried aloud : 

" O foolish Artemis, 
Men's ways thou knowest not, putting from thee this, 
The gift once offered ! think no more of us 
That we will pray with eyes all piteous 
Before thee, or give gifts from trembling hands ; 
But get thee gone straightway to other lands, 
Where folk will yet abide thee — for we know 
How long a way it is for thee to go 
From heaven to earth, how far thine arms will reach. 
And no more now thy good-will do beseech ! " 

He stooped, and from the beast his weapon drew, 
Then turned and passed his fear-struck fellows through, 



246 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Or ere the swords from out the scabbards came ; 
And so folk say, that no man knew his name 
Or whence he was. 

But from the concourse broke 
In pale and murmuring knots the frightened folk ; 
And if the priests had heart yet for a word 
Of comfort, neither so had they been heard ; 
But they slunk oiF too, more perchance afraid 
Because they were the nigher to the Maid. 

Now had the morn begun with cloud and sun ; 
But, little heeded there of any one 
'Mid that beginning of fear's agony, 
Slowly the clouds were swallowing up the sky ; 
So ere the sun had wholly sunk in them, 
Great drops fell slowly from a black cloud's hem 
Amid that troubled folk, who felt as though 
They from that place of terror needs must go, 
Yet, going, scarce could feel their unnerved feet ; 
Then gleamed a lightning-flash adown the street, 
The clattering thunder, made ten times more loud, 
Because of dread, hushed all the murmuring crowd, 
And brought a many trembling to their knees, 
And some set off a-running toward the quays, 
That they might go they knew not where or why ; 
But therewithal such rain fell from the sky, 
As though some river of the upper world 
Had burst his banks ; the furious south-wind hurled 
The folk's wet raiment upward as it tore 
Along the ground, and the white rain-spray bore 
Seaward along : yet so it came to pass 
That no more terror from the sky there was ; 



/ 






BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 247 

The wind grew steady, but from roof of gray 

Fast fell the rain upon the ruined day, 

Till trembling still, and shivering with the cold, 

Home went all folk, and soon the Maid of gold 

Stood lonely in the rain-beat way and drear, 

Amid drenched cloths and garlands, once made fair 

To make the day more joyous. — You had thought 

That now already had the Maiden brought 

Upon the city all the dreaded ill, 

So lifeless was it grown and lone and still, 

But now to tell of Prince Bellerophon : 
Upon that day so chanced it he had gone 
Unto the hills, in chase the hours to spend 
Until the tide of feasting should have end ; 
For since he was an alien in that place, 
Beside the King he might not show his face 
Unto the goddess ; so that morn he stood 
Upon a hilPs top that from out a wood 
Rose bare ; thence looking east, he saw the sky 
Grow black and blacker as the rain drew nigh, 
And deemed it good to go ; but, as he turned, 
Afar a jagged streak of lightning burned, 
Paling the sunshine that the dark woods lit, 
And rocks about him ; through his mind did flit 
Something like fear thereat ; and still he gazed 
Out to the east, but not again there blazed 
That fire from out the sky. Now was he come 
To such a place, that thence fair field, and home 
Of toiling men, and wood, and broad bright stream 
Lay down below, and many a thing did gleam 
Beneath the zenith's brightness, brighter yet 



1 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

- horror of the far clouds' stormful threat, 
clear the air was with the coming rain. — 
len as he would turn his head again, 
in the far horizon like a spark 
e flame broke out against the storm-clouds dark, 
seemed to grow beneath his eyes ; he stood, 
gazing, saw across the day's dark mood 
her and another, nigh the first ; 
i, as the distant thunder's threatening cursed 
country-side, and trembling beast and man, 
spark-like three flames into one thread ran, 
shot aloft amidst, yet further spread 
ther end ; and to himself he said : 
ih, is it so ? what tidings then draw near ? 
ariike lands soon should I look to hear 
rmies marching on through war and wrack ; 
I will it be in haste to get me back 
> the foolish folk that trust in me/ 

ien did he mount and ride off hastily 
va the slopes ; but not so fast withal 
hat upon him did the full storm fall 
i long time ; and so through pelting rain 
howling wind he reached the gate again ; 
so unto the palace went, to hear 
i pale lips tales of all that day of fear ; 
when about those bale-fires seen afar 
pake, and bade make ready for some war, 
listened coldly ; for they thought to see 
! strange, portentous sign of misery 
1 the heavens upon the morrow morn, 
the old tale of war seemed well outworn. 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 249 

Yet ere the night beyond its midst was worn, 
Another tale unto their ears was borne 
That cast into their hearts the ancient fear, 
And the gods' threatening easier seemed to bear 
Than this that fell on them. 

At dead of night 
The gray clouds drew apart, the moon shone bright 
Over a dripping world ; and some folk slept 
Wearied by fear, if some their tired limbs kept 
Ready for flight ; then clattering horse-hooves came 
To the east gate, and one called out the name 
Of him who had the guard ; so said the man 
That forth he went into the moonlight wan, 
And saw nought but the tall black-shadowed trees 
Waving their dripping boughs in the light breeze, 
So went back scared. But in a while again 
The galloping of horse did he hear plain, 
But he and his sat fast and spake no word, . 
And scarce for fear might they hold spear or sword. 
Nigher the sound came, till it reached the gate ; 
Then as the warders did abide their fate, 
Thinking to see the gates burst open wide, 
Aud death in some strange shape betwixt them ride, 
The gates were smitten on with hasty blows, 
And breathless cries of wild entreaty rose 
Up through the night : 

" Open, O open, ye 
Who sit in peace, and let in misery ! 
Do ye not see the red sky at our backs ? 
And how the earth all quiet places lacks, 
And shakes beneath the myriad hooves of steel ? 
Open, ah open, as ye hope for weal ! 

11* 



250 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

For ships lie at your quays with sails all bent 
And oars made ready — Open, we are spent ! 
Do ye not hear them ? Open, Lycian men ! *' 

With staring eyes still sat the warders when 
That cry they heard, and knew not what should be ; 
And the great gates of oak, clenched mightily 
With iron end-long and athwart, seemed fair 
Unto their eyes ; but as they cowered there 
A clash of steel again their dull ears heard 
That came from out the town, and more afeard 
They grew, if it might be ; then torches came 
Into the place of guard, and 'mid their flame 
A shining one in arms, with wrathful eyes 
'Neath his bright helm, who cried : 

" Why in this guise 
Sit ye, O Lycians ? Get each to his home ! 
For know that yesterday three keels did come 
Laden with spindles and all women's gear, 
And none need lack e'en such a garment here 
As well befits him — lutes the gods have sent, 
And combs and golden pins, to that intent 
That ye may all be merry ; — what say I ? 
Ye may be turned to women verily, 
Because the gods are wise, and thriftless deed 
Mislikes them, and forsooth is little n«ed 
That thews and muscles go with suchlike hearts 
As ye have, while all wise and manly parts 
Are played by girls, weak-handed, soft, and white. 

" Get to the tower-top, look ye through the night, 
And ye shall see the cleared sky made all red 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 251 

And murky 'neath the moon with signs of dread ; 
Come forth and meet them ! What ! the gods ye fear. 
And what they threaten ? Life to you is dear ? 
Ah, fools, that think not how to all on earth 
The very death is born along with birth ; 
That soirfe men are but dying twenty years, 
That some men on this sick-bed of all tears 
Must lie for forty years, for eighty some, 
Or ever they may reach their peaceful home ! 
Ah, give to birth the name of death, and wait 
With brave hearts rather for the stroke of fate, 
And hope, since ye gained death when ye were born, 
That ye from death by dying may be torn — 

— Unless ye deem that if this day ye live, 
The next a deathless life to you will give. 

" Come, then ! these few behind me may ye see 
Who think it worse to live on wretchedly 
Than cast the die amidst of noble strife 
For honored death or fearless glorious life. — 

— Yea, yea ! and is the foe upon us then ? " 

For even as he spake they heard again 
The smiting on the door, and as the sword 
Leapt from the exile's sheath with his last word, 
Again the cry, made dim by the thick door, 
Smote on their ears : 

" Lycians, are ye no more 
Within your guarded town ? A voice we heard 
As if of one who bade us not be feared — 
He was a god belike, and no more men 
Dwell in your town : ah, will ye open then ? 



252 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Do ye not hear that noise upon the wind, 

And do ye think that ye fair days shall find 

If our red blood shall stain your ancient gate ? " 

Then, as if these were maddened by some fete, 
Down rained the blows upon the unyielding oak, 
And the scared guards shrank back behind the folk 
Bellerophon brought with him ; therewith he 
Sheathed his bright blade, and shot back mightily 
The weight of iron bolt, and therewithal 
Stepped aside swiftly ; back the gates did fall 
Upon their hinges, and a wretched throng 
Stood, horse and foot, the glimmering spears among, 
Cowering and breathless, and with eyes that turned 
Over their shoulders, as though still they yearned 
To see no more the quiet moonlit way 
Beyond the open gates. But now, when they 
Were ordered somewhat, and the gates again 
Shut fast, Bellerophon cried out : 

" O men, 
Full fast ye fled, meseems ! and who were these 
That made you tremble at the wet-leaved trees 
And quivering acres of the bearded rye ? " 

Then spake an old man : " Fair sir, manfully 
Thou speakest, and thy words are full of hope ; 
And yet with these no power thou hast to cope, 
Who for each rye-head raise a spear aloft, 
Who know as much of fear, or pity soft, 
As do the elm-trees ; whom the gods drive on 
Until the world once happy they have won 
And made it desert, peopled by the ghosts 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 253 

Of those who happy died before their hosts ; 

Or else lived on in fear and misery 

A little while before God let them die — 

Devils are these ; but what scorn shall we get 

When thou hast heard that these are women ! — yet 

Keep thou thy scorn till thou art face to face 

With these a minute ere the fearful chase." 

Loud laughed Bellerophon, and said : " See ye, 
O tremblers, what foreknowledge was in me, 
When I said e'en now ye should change your parts 
With women ! Throw the gates wide, fearful hearts, 
And let us out, that with a word or two 
All that is needed herein we may do ! " 

The old man said : " Laugh, then, while yet your eyes 
Are still unblasted with the miseries 
These days have brought on us ! — Lo, if I tell 
Half of the dreadful things that there befell, 
Ye will not listen ; — if I tell the shape 
Of these fell monsters, for whom hell doth gape, 
Still will ye say that but my fear it is, 
That speaketh in me, — yea, but hearken this : 
For certainly such foes are on you now 
As, bound together by a dreadfnl vow, 
Will slay yourselves, and wives, and little ones, 
And build them temples with the blanched bones 
Unto the nameless One who gives them force." 

Then cried Bellerophon, in wrath : " To horse ! 
To horse, O Lycians ! Ere the moon is down 
The dawn shall come to light us ; in the town 



254 THE EARTH LT PARADISE, 

Bide thou, captain, and guard gate and wall, 

And leave us to what hap from Fate may fall ! 

We are enow — and for these cowards here, 

Let them have yet another death to fear 

Unless they rule their tongues. Tell thou the King 

That, when I come again, full many a thing 

These lips will have to tell him ; and meanwhije, 

Since often will the gods make strong the vile, 

And bring adown the great, let him have care 

That this his city is left nowise bare 

Of men, and food, and arms. More might I say, 

But now methinks the night's face looks towards day. 

The moon sinks fast ; so get we speedily 

Unto that redness in the eastern sky, 

That at the dawn with smoke shall dim the sun." 

A shout rose when his last clear word was done, 
And at his back went rolling down the way 
Mingled with clash of arms, for, sooth to say, 
Hard had he labored ere the dark night fell, 
And thus had gathered men who loved him well, 
Stout hearts to whom more fair it seemed to be 
The face of death in stricken field to see 
Than in that place to bide, till Artemis 
Had utterly consumed all hope of bliss 
With some unknown, unheard-of shape of fear. 

So now his well-shod steed they brought him there ; 
Once more from out its sheath he drew his sword, 
The gates swung backward at his shouted word, 
And forth with eager eyes into the waves 
Of darkness did he ride ; the spears and glaives 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 255 

Moved like a tossing winter grove behind 
As on he led them, fame or death to find ; 
And gray night made the world seem over wide, 
And over empty, in the darkling tide, 
Betwixt the moonset and the dawn of day. 

Then rose the sun ; the fear that last night lay 
Upon that people changed to certain fear 
Well understood, of death that drew anear ; 
And now no more the timorous kept their eyes 
Turned unto earth, lest in the sky should rise 
The dreadful tokens of a changing world ; 
No more they thought to see strange things down : hurled 
By gods as unlike their vain images 
As unto men are hell's flame-branched trees. 
Last night for any war or pestilence, 
Glad had they been to change that crushing sense 
Of helplessness and lies ; but now this morn, 
Tormented by the rumor newly born, 
The vague fear seemed the lightest ; the gods' hands 
Less cruel than the deeds of those fell bands. — 
Uprooted vines, fields trampled into mire, 
The ring of spears around the stead afire, 
Steel or the flame for choice ; the torture hour 
When time is gone, and the flesh hath no power 
But to give agony on agony 
Unto the soul that will not let it die, 
So strong it is — the lone despair ; the shame 
Of a lost country and dishonored name ; 
These last but little things to bear indeed, 
When e'en the greatest helps not in our need, 
And o'er the earth is risen furious hell. 



256 THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

Now, when this terror on the city fell, 
At first went thronging to the clamorous quays 
Rich men, with whatso things their palaces 
Could give, that strong-backed slaves of theirs might 

bear. 
And to and fro the great lords wandered there, 
Making hard bargains 'neath the shipment grin, 
Who had good will a life of ease to win 
With one last voyage ; here and there indeed, 
Among the heaps of silver and rich weed 
Piled on the deck, the hard-hand mariners 
Thrust rudely 'gainst the wondering infant heirs, 
And delicate white slaves, and proud-eyed wives, 
And grumbled as they wrought to save their lives. 
And here and there a ship was moving out 
With white sails spreading amid oath and shout, 
While her sweeps smote the water heavily, 
And on the prow stood, yearning for the sea 
And other lands beyond, some trembling lord. 
But presently thereof the King had word ; % 
And when he knew that thus the matter went, 
A trusty captain to the quays he sent, 
And stout men armed, who lined the water-side. 
So there perforce must every man abide, 
For shut and guarded now was every gate. 

But if, amid the fear of coming fate, 
You ask how fared the sweet Philonoe, 
With mind a shrinking tortured thing to see, 
How shall you wonder ! Tales of dread she heard 
With scornful eyes, and chid with eager word 
Her timorous women ; and with bright flushed face 




BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 257 

And glittering eyes, she went from place to place, 
As though foreknowledge of the joy to come 
^Pierced through all grief. Of those that saw her, some 
Would say, " Alas ! this ill day makes her mad." 
And some, " A message certes hath she had 
From the other world, and is foredoomed to die." 
But some would gaze upon her wrathfully, 
While sitting with bent head on woe intent, 
They watched her fluttering raiment as she went 
Her daily ways as in fair time of peace. 

So did the longest of all days decrease 
Through hours of straining fear ; full were the ways 
With homeless country folk, with 'wildered gaze 
Fixed on the eager townsmen questioning ; 
And carts with this or that poor homely thing, 
And cumbered women worn and desolate, 
Blocked up the road anigh the eastern gate. 
Thronged with pale faces were the walls that day 
Of folk so scared they could not go away, 
But still must watch until the horror came, 
Or watch at least that smoke above the flame 
Till sundown lit the sky with dreadful light 
And still the tales of horror and affright 
Grew greater, and the cumbered city still 
Weighed down with wealth could summon up no will 
To fight or flee, or with closed lips to wait 
Amidst her gold the evil day of fate. 

Night came at last, a night of all unrest : 
Upon the armed men now the people pressed 
At gate and quay, until they needs must yield, 
And many a bark o'erladen slowly reeled 



258 THE EARTH Lr PARADISE. 

Beneath the moonlight o'er the harbor green ; 
While as the breathing of the night wind keen 
Sang down the creek, great sounds of fear it bore, 
And redder was the sky than heretofore. 

A fearful night, when some at last must think 
That they of no more horror now might drink 
Than they had drank ; wherefore, with stress of fear 
Made brave, some men must catch up shield and spear, 
And leaderless go forth unto the flame 
All eyes were turned to ; but when daylight came, 
With its gray light came naked death again, 
And honorless did all things seem and vain 
That man might do ; the gates were left ajar, 
And through the streets helpless in weed of war 
The warders went : nought worth the King was made, 
When by each man the truth of all was weighed, 
And all seemed wanting : help there was in none. 

Yet when 'mid these things nigh the day was done, 
And the foe came not, once more hope was born 
Within men's hearts too wearied and outworn 
To gather fresh fear ; then the walls seemed good, 
The great gates more than iron and oaken wood, 
And with returning hope there came back shame, 
And they, bethinking them of their old name, 
'Gan deem that spear to spear was no ill play, 
What wrath of goddesses soever lay 
Upon the city ; and withal indeed, 
There came fresh rumors to their honor's need, 
And they bethought them of the godlike one 
Who in their midst so great a deed had done, 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 259 

And who erewhile rode forth so carelessly 
Their very terror with his eyes to see. 
So at the sunset into ordered bands 
Once more the men were gathered ; women's hands 
Bore stones up to the ramparts that no more 
That crowd of pale and anxious faces bore, 
But helms and spear-heads ; and the King came forth 
Amidst his lords, and now of greater worth 
Than common folk he seemed once more to be. 
And in some order, if still timorously 
The Lycians waited through the night ; the sky 
Showed lesser tokens of the foe anigh, 
So still hope grew. 

At dawn of day the King 
Bade folk unto Diana's image bring 
Things precious and burnt-offerings ; and the smoke 
Curled o'er the bowed heads of the praying folk 
There in the streets, and though nought came to pass 
To tell that well appeased the goddess was, 
And though they durst not strive to move her thence, 
Yet did there fall on men a growing sense 
That now the worst was over : and at noon, 
Just as the King amid the trumpets' tune 
Went to his house, a messenger pierced through 
The wondering crowd, and toward Jobates drew, 
Nor did him reverence, nor spake aught before 
He gave unto the King the scroll he bore. 
Then from his saddle heavily down-leapt, 
Stiffened, as one who not for long has slept, 
While the King read the scroll ; then those anigh 
Amid the expectant silence heard him cry : 
" Praise to the gods, who are not angry long ! 
Hearken, all ye, how they have quenched our wrong : 



1 



260 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

" Good health and good-hap to the Lycian King 
And all his /oik, and every wished-for thing 
Wisheth hereby Bellerophon, and saith : 
From out the valley of the shade of death 
Late ant I come again to make you glad 
Because no evil journey have we had. 
And now the land is cleansed of such a pest 
As has not been before; be glad and rest, 
And look to see us back in seven days* space, 
For yet awhile must we abide to chase 
The remnant of the women that ye feared" 

Silence a moment followed that last word, 
Then such a joyous shout, as good it is 
That those can know not who still dwell in bliss : 
Then turning here and there, with varied noise 
The people through all places did rejoice, 
Till pleasure failed for weariness ; but still 
Did old and young, and men and women fill 
The temples with their praises ; till, when earth 
Had fallen into twilight 'mid their mirth, 
With prayers and hymns they brought the great-eyed, 

white, 
Slow-going oxen through the gathering night, 
And yoked them to Diana's car again : 
Nor this time were they yoked thereto in vain ; 
Down went the horned heads, beam and axle-tree 
Creaked as they drew, and folk cried out to see 
The wheels go round ; heart opened unto heart 
With unhoped joy, and hate was set apart, 
Envy and malice waited for some day 
More common, as the goddess took her way 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 261 

Amid the torch-lit, flower-strewn, joyous street, 
Unto the house made ready for her feet. 

But 'mid the noise of great festivity 
That filled the night, slept on Philonoe, 
Amid that sea of love past hope and fear, 
And woke at sunrise no more sound to hear 
Than singing of the birds in thick-leaved trees 
Ere yet the sun might silence them ; like these 
Did she rejoice, nor strange to her it was 
That all these things her love should bring to pass. 
Rising, she said : " To-day thou workest this, 
And unto many givest life and bliss ; 
To-morrow comes : therewith perchance for me 
A time when thou my faithful heart mayst see." 

Then she alone her fair attire did on, 
And 'mid the sleepers went her way alone 
Into the garden, and from flower to flower 
Passed, making sweeter even that sweet hour ; 
And as by soft folds of her fluttering gown 
Her body's fairness was both hid and shown, 
E'en so in simpleness her soul indeed 
Lay, not drawn back, but veiled beneath the weed 
Of earthly beauty that the gods had lent 
Till they through years should work out their intent 

O'er the freed city passed the time away, 
Until it drew unto the promised day 
Of their return who all that peace had won. 
And now the loved name of Bellerophon 
Rang ever in the maiden's ears ; and she, 
As in the middle of a dream, did see 



262 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The city made all ready for that hour, 
When in a fair-hung townward-looking bower, 
Pale now, amid her maidens she was set, 
New pain of longing for her heart to get 

Some dream there was of hurrying messengers 
Bright with a glory that was nowise theirs, 
And strains of music bearing back again 
The heart to vague years long since lived in vain ; 
Then still a moving dream — of robes of gold, 
Armor unsullied by the bloody mold 
That bought this peace ; a dream of noble maid 
And longing youth in snowy robes arrayed ; 
Of tinkling harps and twinkling jewelled hands, 
And gold-shod feet to meet the war-worn bands, 
That few and weary, flower-crowned, made the dream 
Less real amid the dainty people seem : — 
A wild dream of strange weapons heaped on wains, 
And rude wrought raiment vile with rents and stains, 
And dream-like figures by the axle-trees — 
— Women or beasts ? and in the hands of these 
Trumpets of wood, and conch-shells, and withal 
Clamor of blast and horrid rallying call, 
And such a storm of strange discordant cries, 
As stilled the townsfolk 'mid their braveries, 
For therewith came the prisoners of the fight. 

A dreadful dream ! — with blood-stained hair and 
white, 
Clad in most strange habiliment of war, 
Sat an old woman on a brazen car ; 
White stared her eyes from a brown puckered face 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 263 

Upon the longed-for dainties of that place, 

But wrath and fear no more in them were left, 

For death seemed creeping on her ; an axe-heft 

Her chained hands held yet ; and a monstrous crown, 

Of heavy gold, 'twixt her thin feet and brown 

Was laid as she had cast it off in fight, 

When she was fain amidst her hurried flight 

To hide all signs of her fell royalty. 

An unreal dream — about her seemed to be, 

Figures of women, clad in warlike guise, 

In scales of brass, beasts* skins, and cloths of dyes, 

Uncouth and coarse, made vile with earth and blood. 

A dream of horror ! nought that men deem good 

Was seen in them, were they or young or old : 

Great-limbed were some and mighty to behold, 

With long black hair and beast-like brows, and low ; 

Bald-headed, old, and wizened did some go, 

Yet all .adorned with gold ; this, in rich gown 

Of some slain woman, went with eyes cast down ; 

That yelling walked, with armor scantly clad, 

And at her belt a Lycian's head yet had 

Hung by the flaxen hair ; this, old and bent, 

From bushy eyebrows gray, strange glances sent, 

Grinning as from their limbs the people shrank ; 

But most the cup of pain and terror drank 

That they had given to drink so oft ere now 

If any sign thereof their eyes might show, 

And whatso mercy they of men might have, 

No hope for them their gross hearts now did save. 

A dreadful dream ! Philonoe's slim hands 
Shut from her eyes the sight of those strange bands ; 



264 THB EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet dreamlike must her heart behold them still, 
Amid new thoughts of God, and good and ill, 
And her eyes filled with tears. But what was this 
That smote her yearning heart with sudden bliss, 
Yet left it yearning ? her fair head she raised, 
And with wide eyes down on the street she gazed, 
Yet cried not out ; though all cry had been drowned 
Amid those joyous shouts, as, laurel-crowned, 
And sword in hand, and in his battered gear 
On his black horse he came, and raised to her 
Eyes that her heart knew. Nay, she moved not aught 
Nor reached her arms abroad, as he was brought 
Beneath her place, too soon to go away ; 
And open still her hands before her lay 
As down the street passed on the joyous cries, 
Nor were there any tears in her soft eyes ; 
Only her lips moved softly, as she cast 
One look upon the people going past, 
Struggling and slow behind the last bright spears 
Whose steady points had so thrust back their fears. 

But amid silence 'neath the eyes of men, 
Another time that day they met again ; 
And that was at the feast in the great hall, 
For thither must the King's folk, one and all, 
Women as men, give welcome unto him 
Through whom they throve. Belike all things grew dim 
Before the hero's eyes but her alone, 
Belike a strange light in the maid's eyes shone, 
Made bright with pain ; but yet hand met not hand, 
Though each to each so close the twain must stand, 
And though the hall was hushed to hear her say 




BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 265 

Words that she heeded not of that fair day. 
But when her clear and tender speech had end, 
And mouths of men a mighty shout did send 
Betwixt the pillars, still her lips did move, 
As though they two were lone, with words of love 
Unheard, but felt by him. 

So passed the day, 
And other days and nights fell fast away ; 
But now when this great trouble had gone by, 
And things again seemed no more now to lie 
Within his mighty hands, she 'gan to fear 
Her father's wiles again ; the days grew drear, 
The nights too long, nor might she see his face, 
Nor might they speak in any lonely place ; 
And hope at whiles waxed dim, and whiles she saw 
The fate her heart so dreaded on them draw, 
While she must sit aside with folded hands, 
While for her sake he shunned the peaceful lands. 

And all the while there must at last be borne 
That darkest hour that brings about the morn. 



"VTO W as the days passed, to his treasury 
-^ Would the King go, King Proetus' gift to see, 
And stand with knitted brows to gaze on it, 
While many thoughts about his heart would flit. 

And on a day he said : " Time yet there is 
To slay the man who saved our life and bliss. 
Once did I cast him unto death, and he 

12 



1 



266 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

Must win nought thence but utter victory ; 
And when the gods helped me with ruin and fear 
Another time, yet that brought nowise near 
The end this binds me to ; yet once again 
Shall it be tried before I call it vain, 
And strive no more, but bear the punishment 
That on oath-breakers and weak fools is sent." 

Then gat he to the doom-hall of the town, 
And midst his lords and wise men sat him down 
And judged the people ; if at whiles to him 
The clamor of the jarring folk waxed dim 
Amid the thoughts of his own life that rose 
Within him and about his heart did close, 
Yet none the less a great King there he seemed ; 
As of a god's his heart the people deemed. 

Now in good peace and joy the summer wore, 
Nor did folk mind how it was told of yore 
That in the days to come great dangers three, 
Within the bounds of Lycia should there be ; 
For fear of ill was grown an empty name. 
Into fair autumn slipped the summer's flame 
More fruitful than its wont, and barn and garth 
Ran over with the good things of the earth. 
Crowded the quays were, but no merchandise, 
No bale of fair-wrought cloth or odorous spice, 
Bore pestilence within it at that tide ; 
In peace and health the folk dwelt far and wide. 

But when the way's dust easier now was seen 
Upon the bordering grape-bunches, whose green 




BELLBROPHON IN LTCIA. 267 

Was passing slow through red to heavy black, 
And the ploughed land all standing crop did lack, 
Though yet the share the fallow troubled not ; 
Now, when the nights were cool, and noons still hot, 
And in the windless woods the acorn fell, 
More tidings were there of that land to tell. 

For on a day as in the doom-hall sat 
Jobates, and gave word on this and that, 
A clamor by the outer door he heard 
Of new-come folk, mixed with the answering word 
Of those his guards, who at the door did stand ; 
So when his say. was said, he gave command 
To bring in one of those about the door ; 
Then was a country carle brought forth before 
The ivory seat, and scared he seemed to be, 
And sodden was his face for misery, 
As on the King he stared with open eyes. 

" What wilt thou ? " said Jobates. " What thing lies 
Upon thee that my power can take away? 
For in mine house the gods are good to-day." 

Twice did the man's lips open as to speak, 
But no sound came ; the third time did outbreak 
A husky, trembling sound from them, but nought* 
To tell the wondering folk what thing he sought. 
Then said the King, " The man is mazed with fear ; 
Go ye and bring him wine ; we needs must hear 
What new thing now has happed beneath the sun. 
Take heart! for thou art safe ! " 

So was it done : 



268 THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

The man raised up the bowl with trembling hand, 
And drank, and then awhile he yet did stand 
Silent amid the silence ; then began 
In a weak voice : 

" A poor and toiling man 
I am indeed ; therefore a little thing 
My woe may seem to thee ; yet note, O King, 
That the world changes ; unimagined ill 
Is born therein, and shall grow greater still. 

" In early summer I was well enow 
Among such men as still have need to sow 
Before they reap, to reap before they eat, 
Nor did I think too much of any threat 
Time had for me ; but therewith came the tide 
When those fell women harried far and wide ; 
I saved myself, my wife, and little ones, 
And with nought else lay on this city's stones 
Until peace came ; then went I to the west 
Where dwelt my brother in good peace and rest, 
And there the four of us must eat our bread 
From hands that grudged not mayhap, with small dread 
And plenteous toil. A vineyard hath he there, 
Whose blossoming in March was full and fair, 
And May's frost touched it not, and July's hail 
Against its bunches green might not prevail ; 
Up a fair hill it stretched ; exceeding good 
Its sunny south-turned slopes are ; a thin wood 
Of oak-trees crowns the hill indeed, wherein 
Do harbor beasts most fain a feast to win 
At hands of us and Bacchus ; but a wall 
Well built of stones guardeth the garth from all 
On three sides, and at bottom of the hill 




BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 269 

A full stream runs, that dealeth with a mill, 

My brother's too, whose floury duskiness 

Our hungry souls with many a hope did bless : 

Within the mill-head there the perch feed fat, 

And on the other side are meadows flat 

And fruitful ; shorn now, and the rooting swine 

Beneath the hedge-row oak-trees grunt and whine, 

And close within the long grass lies the quail, 

While circling overhead the kite doth sail, 

And long the partridge hath forgot the mowers. 

A close of pot-herbs and of garland flowers 

Goes up the hill-side from the green-banked stream, 

And a house built of clay and oaken beam 

Stands at its upper end, whose hillward side 

Is midst the vines, that half its beams do hide. — 

— Nay, King, I wander not, I mind me well 

The tale from end to end I have to tell, 

Have patience ! 

" Fair that house was yesterday, 
When lusty youth and slim light-handed may 
Were gathered from the hamlets thereabout ; 
From the stream-side came laughing scream and shout, 
As up the bank the nets our maidens drew, 
And o'er their bare feet washed with morning dew 
Floundered the cold fish ; for grape-gathering tide 
It was that morn, and folk from far and wide 
Came to our help, and we must feast them there, 
And give them all we had of good and fair. 

" King, do I babble ? thou for all thy crown 
And robes of gold hadst gladly sat thee down 
At the long table 'neath the apple-trees — 
And now — go find the bones of one of these, 



270 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

And be called wise henceforth 1 

" The last guest came, 
The last shout died away that hailed his name, 
The ring of men about the homestead door 
Began to move ; the damsels hung no more 
Over the fish-tubs, but their arms shook dry 
And shod their feet, and came up daintily 
To mingle with the girls new-come thereto, 
And take their baskets and the edge-tools due ; 
The good wife from the white well-scalded press 
Brushed off the last wasp ; while her mate did bless 
The gods, and Bacchus chiefly, as he poured 
Upon the threshold ancient wine long stored 
Under the earth ; and then broke forth the song 
As to the vineyard gate we moved along. 

" Hearken, O King ! call me not mad, or say 
Some evil god-sent dream upon me lay ; 
Else could I tell thee thus how all things fell ? — 
Nay, speak not, or the end I may not tell. 

" Yea, am I safe here ? will he hear of it 
And come to fetch me, even if I sit 
Deep underground, deep underneath the sea, 
In places thou hast built for misery 
Of those that hate thee ; yet for safeguard now 
Of me perchance ? O King, abide not thou 
Until my tale is done, but bid them go 
Strengthen thy strong gates — deem thy high walls low 
While yet the sun they hide not ! " 

At that word 
He turned and listened as a man who heard 
A doubtful noise afar, but still the King 
Sat quiet midst his fear of some great thing, 
And spake not, lest he yet should lose the tale. 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 271 

Then said the man : " How much may now avail 
Thy power and walls I know not, for I thought 
Upon the wind a certain noise was brought — 
But now I hear it not, and I will speak — 
What said I ? — From all mouths there did outbreak 
A plaintive song made in the olden time, 
Long sung by men of the wine-bearing clime ; 
Not long it was, and ere the end was o'er 
In midst the laden vine-rows did we pour, 
And fell to work as glad as if we played ; 
And merrier grew the laugh of man and maid 
As the thin baskets filled upon that morn ; 
And how should fear or thought of death be born 
In such a concourse ! Now 'mid all this, I 
Unto the upper end had drawn anigh, 
And somewhat lonely was I, when I heard 
A noise that seemed the cry of such a bird 
As is a corncrake ; well, I listened not, 
But worked away whereas was set my lot, 
Midst many thoughts ; yet louder 'gan to grow 
That noise, and not so like a bird seemed now 
As a great spring of steel loosed suddenly. 
I put my basket down, and turned to see 
The other folk, nor did they heed the noise, 
And still amid their labor did rejoice ; 
But louder still it seemed, as there I stood 
Trembling awhile, then turned, and saw the wood 
Like and unlike what I had known it erst ; 
And as I gazed the whole sky grew accurst 
As with a greenish vapor, and I turned 
Wild eyes adown the hill to see what burned ; 
There did my fellows 'twixt the vine-rows pass 



272 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Still singing ; smitten then I thought I was 

By sudden sickness or strange coming death ; 

But even therewith in drawing of a breath 

A dreadful shriek rose from them, and mine eyes 

Saw such a shape above the wall arise 

As drave all manhood from me, and I fell 

Grovelling adown ; nor have I words to tell 

What thing it was I saw ; only I know 

That from my feet the firm earth seemed to go, 

And like a dream showed that fair country-side, 

And, grown a mockery, needs must still abide, 

An unchanged picture 'gainst the life of fear 

So fallen upon me. The sweet autumn air 

With a faint sickening vapor now was filled, 

And all sounds else but that sound were clean stilled, 

Yea, even the voice of folk by death afeard, 

That in the void that horror might be heard, 

And nought be heeded else. 

" Hearken, O King, 
The while I try to tell thee of the thing 
What like it was — well, lionlike, say I ? 
Yea, as to one who sees the teeth draw nigh 
His own neck — like a horror of the wood, 
Goatlike, as unto him who in drear mood 
Sees monsters of the night bemock his love, 
And cannot hide his eyes or turn to move — 
Or serpent-like, e'en as to such an one 
A serpent is, who floating all alone 
In some untroubled sea all void and dim 
Beholds the hoary-headed sea-worm swim, 
Circling about him, ere he rise to strike — 
Nay, rather, say the world hath not its like — 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 273 

A changer of man's life, a swallowing dread, 
A curse made manifest in devil-head. 

" Long lay I there, meseems ; no thought I had 
Either of death, or yet of being made glad 
In time to come, for all had turned to pain, 
Nor might I think of aught to call a gain. — 
Right wondrous is the life of man, O King ! 
So strong to bear so many a fearful thing, 
So weak of will ! — See now, I live, who lay 
How long I know not, on that wretched day, 
As helpless as a dead man, but for this, 
That pain still grew with memory of what bliss 
Passed life had been to me ; until, God wot, • 
So was I helped, that memory now was not, 
And all was blank. 

" Well, once more did I wake, 
Empty at first, till stirred the sickening ache 
Of that great fear ; then softly did I rise, 
And gazed about the garth with half-dead eyes, 
A heart whence every thing but fear was gone." 

He stopped awhile and hung his head adown, 
As if remembering somewhat ; then he drew 
Nigher the King, and said : " This thing is true, 
Though thou believe it not — that I was glad 
Within the hour that yet my life I had, 
Though this I saw — the garth made waste and bare, 
Burnt as with fire, and for the homestead fair 
The last flames dying o'er an ash-heap gray — 
Gone was the mill, the freed stream took its way 
In unchecked shallows o'er a sandy bed. 

12* 



274 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

" I knew not if my kin were slain or fled, 
Yet was I glad awhile that nought was there 
But me alone, till sense and dread 'gan stir 
Within my heart ; then slowly I began 
To move about, and saw no child of man — 
Unless maybe those ash-heaps here and there 
I durst not go anigh, my fellows were. 
Could I but flee away now ! down I gat 
Unto the stream, yet on the bank I sat 
A long while yet, bewildered ; till at last 
I gathered heart, and through the stream ran fast, 
And on and on, and cried, 'Are all men gone t 
Is there none left on earth but I alone, 
And have I nought to tell my tale unto t ' 

" So did I run, until at last I knew 
That among men I was, who, full of fear, 
Were striving somewhat of the words to hear 
My heart spake, but my lips would utter not ; 
And food and drink from them perchance I got, 
Perchance at last I told the story there ; 
I know not, but I know I felt the air 
And seemed to move — they must have brought me then 
To thee, O King — but these are not the men, 
These round about — there is no more to say. 
Meseems I cannot sleep or go away, 
Yet am I weary." 

Slowly came from him 
The last words, and his eyes, all glazed and dim, 
Began to close ; he tottered, and at last 
Sank on the ground, and into deep sleep passed, 
Nor might men rouse him ; so they bore him thence, 
Till death should reach him or returning sense. 



j 



BBLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 275 

So next of those who brought him thereunto 
Was question made what of those things they knew ; 
Who answered e'en as for their fear they might ; 
For some had seen a fire the late-past night, 
And some the morn before a yellow smoke ; 
And one had heard the cries of burning folk ; 
And one had seen a man stark naked fly 
Adown the stream-side, and as he went by 
Saw that he bled, and thought that on his flesh 
Were dreadful marks, that were as done afresh 
By branding irons. One, too, said he saw 
A dreadful serpent by the moonlight draw 
His dry folds o'er the summer-parched way 
Unto a pool that 'neath the hill-side lay. 
And men there were who said that they had heard 
The sound of lions roaring, and, afeard, 
Had watched all-armed, with barred doors, through 

the night. 
Then as men's faces paled with sore affright, 
Unto the doom-hall came more folk, and more, 
And tales of such-like things they still told o'er, 
Of fresh deaths and of burnings, and still nought 
They had to tell of what this fear had wrought. 

Now ye shall know that Prince Bellerophon 
In a swift ship had sailed awhile agone 
'Gainst a Tyrrhenian water-thief, who then 
Wrought great scathe on the peaceful merchantmen 
That sought those waters ; so the King sent forth 
Another captain that he held of worth, 
And eighty men with him in company, 
Well armed, the truth of all these things to see. 



5 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

t sunset from the town did they depart, 
□one among them seemed to lack good heart, 
wise they were in war ; but ere the sun 
augh all the hours of the next day had run, 
ancient brave man only of the band 
,e back again, no weapon in his hand, 
shield upon his neck — but carrying now 
son's dead body on his saddle-bow, 
d of eighteen winters, fair and strong; 
when men asked what thing had wrought that 

wrong, 
ght might he answer, but with bowed-down head 
sat beside the armed body dead, 
me who had no memory ; but when folk 
ched the youth's body for the deadly stroke, 
ivound at all might they find anywhere ; 
till the old man sat with hopeless stare, 
though he seemed right hale and sound of limb, 
ate and drank what things were brought to him, 
speechless did he live for three more days, 
a to the silent land he went his ways. 

ow a great terror on the city fell, 

a as that whereof we had to tell 

le past summer ; day by day there came 

. fleeing to the gates, who thought no shame 

ell how dreams had scared them, or some sign 

arth, or sky, or milk, or bread, or wine, 

3 some beast late given unto a god ; 

on the beaten ways once more there trod 

feet of homeless folk ; the country-side 

v waste and bare of men-folk far and wide ; 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 277 

And whatso armed men the King did send, 
But little space upon their way did wend 
Ere they turned back in terror ; nigher drew 
The belt of desolation, yet none knew 
What thing of ill it was that wrought this woe, 
More than the man who first the tale did show. 

Meanwhile men's eyes unto the sea were turned 
Watching, until the Sea-hawk's image burned 
Upon the prow Bellerophon that bore, 
And his folk cast the hawser to the shore, 
And long it seemed to them did he delay. 
Yet since all things have end, upon a day 
The Sea-hawk's great sweeps beat the water green, 
And her long pennon down the wind was seen, 
As nigh the noontide toward the quays she passed, 
With sound of horns and singing ; on the mast 
Hung the sea-robbers' fair shields, lip to lip, 
And high above the clamor of the ship, 
Out from the topmast, a great pennoned spear 
The terror of the seas aloft did bear, 
The head of him who made the chapmen quake. 

New hope did that triumphant music wake 
Within men's hearts, as now with joyous shout 
The bay-crowned shipmen shot the gangway out 
Unto the shore, and once more as a god 
The wise Bellerophon among them trod, 
As to the Father's house he took his way, 
The tenth of all the spoil therein to lay. 

But when he came into the greatest square 
Where was the temple, a great throng was there, 



8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

I on the high steps of the doom-hall's door, 
!ear-voiced, gold-clad herald stood, before 
)w of spears ; and now he cried aloud, 

r the raised heads of the listening crowd : 

Hearken, O Lycians ! King Jobates saith ; 
n us lies the shadow of a death 
ay not deal with ; old now am I grown, 
i at the best am but one man alone; 
since such men thereare, as yet may hope 
'h this vague unseen death of man to cope, 
whereby such a hafifiy end is wrought 

II nowise labor utterly for nought 

it my hands j lest to the gods we seem 
hold too fast to wealth, lest all men deem 
are base-born and vile : so know hereby, 
•J to the man who ends this woe will I 
e my fair daughter named Philonoe, 
i this land's rule and wealth to share with me 
i if it be so that he may not take 
maiden, let him give her for my sake 
whom he will; or if that may not be, 
able ransom shall he have of me 
i be content. — May the gods save usyet, 
i in fair peace these fears may we forget ! n 

[e ended, and the folk about the place, 
ing the shipmen come, on these did gaze, 
1 in their eyes were mingled hope and doubt ; 
at the last the shadow of a shout 
>y raised for Prince Bellerophon ; and he 
3d at the door one moment silently. 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 279 

And wondered ; for he knew nought of the things 
That there had fallen while the robber-kings 
He chased o'er ridge and furrow of the sea ; 
Because folk deemed ill-omened it would be 
To tell thereof ere all things due were paid 
Unto the Father, and the fair tenth laid 
Before his altar. Yet he could not fail 
To see that in some wise the folk must ail ; 
Such haggard eyes, such feverish faces were 
About him ; yea, the clamor and the cheer 
That greeted him were eager with the pain 
Of men who needs must hope yet once again 
Before they fall into the jaws of death. 

So as the herald spake, he held his breath, 
His heart beat fast, and in his eyes there burned 
The light of coming triumph, as he turned 
Unto a street that led from out the place, 
And up the steep way saw the changeless grace 
Of the King's palace, and the sun thereon, 
That calmly o'er its walls of marble shone, 
For all the feverish fears of men who die : 
One moment thus he stood, and smiled, then high 
Lifted his sword, and led the spear- wood through 
The temple-door and toward the altar drew. 



DUT when all rites to Jove were duly done, 
■*-* Unto the King went up Bellerophon, 
To tell him of his fare upon the sea ; 
So in the chamber named of porphyry 



2 8o THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

He found Jobates pacing to and fro, 
As on the day when first he bade him go 
And win the Sblymi. 

" O King," he said, 
" All hail to thee ! the water-thief is dead, 
His keel makes sport for children of the sea." 

" And I, Bellerophon, have news for thee, 
And see thou to it ! The gods love so well 
The fair wide world, that fear and death and hell 
In this small land will they shut up for aye. 
And thou — when thou hadst luck to get away, 
Why must thou needs come back here, to abide 
In very hell ? I say the world is wide, 
And thou art young ; far better had it been, 
When o'er the sea-thief's bulwarks first were seen 
Men's wrathful eyes, the war-shout to have stayed ; 
Then might ye twain, strong in each other's aid, 
Have won some fair town and good peace therein : 
For here with us stout heart but death shall win." 

Now on a table nigh the King's right hand 
Bellerophon beheld a casket stand 
That well he knew ; thereby a letter lay, 
Whose face he had not seen before that day, 
And as he noted it a half-smile came 
Across his face, for a look like to shame 
Was in the King's eyes as they met his own. 

Cheerly he spake : " O King, I have been thrown 
Into thine hands, and with this city fair 
Both weal and woe have I good will to share. 



BBLLBROPHON IN LTCIA. 281 

Young am I certes, yet have ever heard 

That whether men live careless or afeard 

Death reaches them ; of endless heaven and hell 

Strange stories oft have I heard people tell ; 

Yet knew I no man yet that knows the road 

Which leadeth either to the blest abode 

Or to the land of pain. Not overmuch 

I fear or hope the gates of these to touch — 

Unless we twain be such men verily 

As on the earth make heaven and hell to be ; 

And if these countries are upon the earth, 

Then death shall end the land of heaven and mirth, 

And death shall end the land of hell and pain. 

Yea, and say all these tales be not in vain, 

Within mine hand do I hold hope — within 

This gold- wrought scabbard — such a life to win 

As will not let hope fall off utterly, 

Until such time is come that I must die 

And no more need it. But the time goes fast ; 

Into mine ears a tale the townsmen cast 

With eager words, almost before my feet 

The common earth without Jove's fane could meet ; 

I heard thy herald too say mighty things — 

How sayest thou about the oaths of kings ? " 

The King's eyes glistened: "O Corinthian," 

He said, " if there be such a twice-cursed man 

7 1 1 

As rules the foolish folk and punisheth, | 

And yet must breathe out lies with every breath, 

Let him be thrice cursed, let the gods make nought 

Of all his prayers when he in need is caught ! " | 



1 



282 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" What sayest thou," then said Bellerophon, 
" If a man sweareth first to such an one. 
And then to such another, and the twain 
Cannot be kept, but one still maketh vain 
The other ? " 

Then the King cast down his eyes : 
" What sayest thou, my son ? What mysteries . 
Lie in these words of thine ? Go forth and break 
This chain of ours, and then return to take 
Thy due reward — oft meseems so it is 
That these our woes are forged to make thy bliss." 

Then laughed Bellerophon aloud, and said : 
" The gods are kind to mortals, by my head ! 
But so much do they love me certainly 
That more than once I shall not have to die ; 
And I myself do love myself so well 
That each night still a pleasant tale shall tell 
Of the bright morn to come to me. But thou, 
Think of thy first vow and thy second vow ! 
For so it is that I may come again 
Despite of all : and what wilt thou do then ? 
Ponder meanwhile if from ill deeds can come 
Good hap to bless thee and thy kingly home ! " 

And even with that last word was he gone, 
And the King, left bewildered and alone, 
Sat down, and strove to think, and said at last: 
" Good were it if the next three months were passed ; 
I should be merrier, nigher though I were 
Unto that end of all that all men fear." 



BELLBROPHON IN LYCIA. 283 

Then sent he for his captain of the guard, 
And said to him : " Now must thou e'en keep ward 
Closer than heretofore upon the gates, 
Because we know not now what thing awaits 
The city, and Bellerophon will go 
The truth of all these wondrous things to know : 
So let none pass unquestioned ; nay, bring here 
Whatever man bears tales of woe or fear 
Into the city ; fain would I know all — 
Nay, speak, what thinkest thou is like to fell ? " 

" Belike," the man said, " he will come again, 
And with my ancient master o'er us reign ; 
E'en as I came in did he pass me by, 
And nowise seemed he one about to die." 

" Nay," said the King, " thou speak'st but of a man ; 
Shall he prevail o'er what made corpses wan 
Of many a stout war-hardened company ? " 

" Methinks, O King, that such might even be," 
The captain said ; " he is not of our blood ; 
He goes to meet the beast in other mood 
Than has been seen among us, nor know I 
Whether to name him mere man that shall die, 
Or half a god ; for death he feareth not, 
Yet in his heart desire of life is hot ; 
Life he scorns not, yet will his laughter rise 
At hearkening to our timorous miseries, 
And all the self-wrought woes of restless men." 

" Ah," said the King, " belike thou lov'st him then ? " 



284 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Nay, for I fear him, King," the captain said, 
" And easier should I live if he were dead ; 
Besides, it seems to me our woes began 
When down our streets first passed this godlike man, 
And all our fears are puppets unto him ; 
That he may brighter show by our being dim, 
The gods have wrought them as it seems to me." 

" What wouldst thou do then that the man might be 
A glorious memory to the Lycian folk, 
A god who from their shoulders raised a yoke 
Dreadful to bear ; then, as he came, so went, 
When he had fully wrought out his intent ? " 

" Nay, King, what say'st thou ? Hast thou then forgot 
Whereto he goes this eve ? Nay, hear'st thou not 
His horse-hooves , ring e'en now upon the street ? 
Look out ! look out ! thine eyes his eyes shall meet, 
And see the sun upon his armor bright ! 
Yet the gold sunset brings about the night, 
And the red dawn is quenched in dull gray rain." 

Then swiftly did the King a window gain, 

And down below beheld Bellerophon, 

And certes round about his head there shone 

A glory from the west. Then the King cried : 

" O great Corinthian, happy mayst thou ride, 

And bring us back our peace ! " 

The hero turned, 

And through his gold hair still the sunset burned, 

But half his shaded face was gray. He stayed 

His eager horse, and round his mouth there played 

A strange smile as he gazed up at the King, 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 285 

And his bright hauberk tinkled ring by ring. 
But as the King shrank back before his gaze, 
With his left hand his great sword did he raise 
A little way, then back into the sheath 
He dropped it clattering, and cried : 

" Life or death, 
But never death in life for me, O King ! " 
Therewith he turned once more ; with sooty wing 
The shrill swifts down the street before him swept, 
And from a doorway a tired wanderer leapt 
Up to his feet, with wondering look to gaze 
Upon that golden hope of better days. 

Then back the King turned ; silent for a while 
He sat beneath his captain's curious smile, 
Thinking o'er all the years gone by in vain. 
At last he said : 

" Yea, certes, I were fain 
If I my life and honor so might save 
That he not half alone, but all should have." 

" Yea," said the captain, " good the game were then, 
For thou shouldst be the least of outcast men ; 
So talk no more of honor ; what say I, — 
Thou shouldst be slain in short time Certainly, 
Who hast been nigh a god before to-day ! 
Be merry, for much lieth in the way 
'Twixt him and life : and, to unsay the word 
I said before, be not too much afeard 
That he will come again. The gods belike 
Have no great will such things as us to strike, 
But will grow weary of afflicting us ; 



?86 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Because with bowed heads, and eyes piteous, 

We take their strokes. When thou sitt'st down to hear 

A minstrel's tale, with nothing great or dear 

Wouldst thou reward him, if he thought it well 

Of wretched folk and mean a tale to tell ; 

But when the godlike man is midst the swords 

He cannot 'scape ; or when the bitter words, 

That chide the gods who made the world and life, 

Fall from the wise man worsted in the strife ; 

Or when some fairest one whose fervent love 

Seems strong the world from out its curse to move 

Sits with cold breast and empty hands before 

The hollow dreams that play about death's door — 

When these things pierce thine ears, how art thou moved ! 

Though in such wise thou lov'st not nor art loved, 

Though with weak heart thou lettest day wear day 

As bough rubs bough ; though on thy feeble way 

Thou hast no eye to see what things are great, 

What things are small, that by the hand of fate 

Are laid before thee. Shall we marvel then, 

If the gods, like in other things to men, 

(For so we deem them) think no scorn to sit 

To see the play, and weep and laugh at it, 

And will not have poor hearts and bodies vile 

With unmelodious sorrow to beguile 

The long long days of heaven — but these, in peace, 

Trouble or joy, or waxing, or decrease, 

Shall have no heed from them — ah, well am I 

To be amongst them 1 never will I cry 

Unto the gods to set me high aloft ; 

For earth beneath my feet is sweet and soft, 

And, falling, scarce I fall. 



BELLBROPHON IN LTCIA. 287 

" Behold, King, 
Beasts weep not ever, and a short-lived thing 
Their fear is, and their generations go 
Untold-of past ; and I who dwell alow, 
Somewhat with them I feel, and deem nought ill 
That my few days with more of joy may fill ; 
Therefore swift rede I take with all things here, 
And short, if sharp, is all my woe and fear, 

" Now happier were I if Bellerophon, 
This god on earth, from out our land were gone, 
And well I hope he will not soon return. — 
Who knows ? but if for some cause thou dost yearn 
For quiet life without him, such am I 
As, risking great things for great things, would try 
To deal with him, if back again he comes 
To make a new world of our peaceful homes. 
Yet, King, it might well be that I should ask 
Some earthly joy to pay me for the task ; 
And if Bellerophon returns again 
And lives, with thee he presently will reign, 
And soon alone in thy place will he sit ; 
Yea, even, and if he hath no will for it. 
His share I ask then, yet am not so bold 
As yet to hope within mine arms to fold 
Philonoe thy daughter, any more 
Than her, who on the green Sicilian shore 
Plucked flowers, and dreamed no whit of such a mate 
As holds the keys of life, and death, and fate — 
— Though that indeed I may ask, as in time, 
The royal bed's air seem no outland clime 
To me, whose sire, a rugged mountaineer, 
Knew what the winter meant, and pinching cheer," 



288 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Into the twinkling crafty eyes of him 
The King looked long, until his own waxed dim 
For thinking, and unto himself he said : 
" To such as fear is trouble ever dead, 
How oft soe'er the troublous man we slay ? " 

At last he spake aloud : " Quick fails the day ; 
These things are ill to speak of in the night ; 
Now let me rest, but with to-morrow's light 
Come thou to me, and take my word for all." 

The mask of reverence he had erst let fall 
The captain brought again across his face, 
And smiling left the lone King in his place. 
Who when all day had gone, sat hearkening how, 
Without, his gathering serving-men spake low, 
And through the door-chinks saw the tapers gleam. 

But now while thus they talked, and yet the stream 
Of golden sunsetting lit up the world, 
Ere yet the swift her long dusk wings had furled 
In the gray cranny, fair Philonoe" went 
Amid her maids with face to earth down-bent 
Across the palace-yard, oppressed with thought 
Of what those latter days to her had brought ; 
Daring, unlike a maid's sweet tranquil mind, 
And hushed surprise, so strange a world to find 
Within her and around her : life once dear, 
Despised yet clung to ; fear and scorn of fear ; 
A pain she might not strive to cast away, 
Lest in the heart of it all life's joy lay ; 
Joy now and ever. Toward the door she came 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 289 

Of the great hall ; the sunset burned like flame 
Behind her back, and going ponderingly 
She noted her gray shadow slim to see 
Rise up and darken the bright marble wall ; 
Then slower on the grass her feet did fall 
Till scarce she moved ; then from within she heard 
A voice well loved cry out some hurried word. 
She raised her face, and in the door she seemed 
To see a star new fallen, therefrom there gleamed 
Such splendor, but although her dazzled eyes 
Saw nought, her heart, fulfilled of glad surprise, 
Knew that his face was nigh ere she beheld 
The noble brow as wise as grief-taught eld, 
As fair as a god's early unstained youth. 

A little while they stood thus, with new ruth 
Gathering in either's heart for the other's pain, 
And fear of days yet to be passed in vain, 
And wonder at the death they knew so nigh 
And disbelief in parting, should they die, 
And joy that still they stood together thus. 
Then, in a voice that love made piteous 
Through common words and few, she spake and said : 

" What dost thou, Prince, with helmet on thine head 
And sword girt to thee, this fair autumn eve ? 
Is it not yet a day too soon to leave 
The place thou earnest to this very noon ? n 

He said : " No Lycian man can have too soon 
His armor on his back in this our need, 
Yea, steel perchance shall come to be meet weed 

13 



n 



290 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

For such as thou art, lady. Who knows whence 
We next may hear tales of this pestilence ? 
Fair is this house : yet maybe, or to-day 
The autumn evening wind has borne away 
From its smooth chambers sound of woe and tears, 
And shall do yet again. Death slayeth fears, 
Now I go seek if Death too slayeth love." 

A little toward him did one slim hand move, 
Then fell again 'mid folds of her fair gown ; 
She spake : 

" Farewell, a great man art thou grown ; 
Thou know'st not fear or lies ; so fare thou forth : 
If the gods keep not what is most of worth 
Here in the world, its memory bides behind ; 
And we perchance in other days may find 
The end of hollow dreams we once have dreamed, 
Waking from which such hopeless anguish seemed." 

Pale was her face when these words were begun, 
But she flushed red or ere the end was done 
With more than sunset. But he spake and said : 
" Farewell, farewell, God grant thee hardihead, 
And growing pleasure on from day to day ! " 

Then toward the open gate he took his way, 
Nor looked aback, nor yet long did she turn 
Her eyes on him, though sore her heart did yearn 
To have some little earthly bliss of love 
Before the end. 

But right and left did move 
Her damsels as he passed them, e'en as trees 




BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 291 

Move one by one when the light fickle breeze 
Touches their tops in going toward the sea ; 
And their eyes turned upon him wonderingly 
That such a man could live, such deeds be done. 
But now his steed's hooves smote upon the stone, 
He swung into his saddle, and once more 
Cast round a swift glance at the great hall door 
And saw her not ; alone she stood within, 
Striving to think what hope of things to win 
Had left her life ; her maidens' prattling speech 
Within the porch her wildered ears did reach, 
But not the hard hooves' clatter as he rode 
Along the white wall of that fair abode, 
Nor yet the shout that he cast back again 
Unto the King ; dark grew each window-pane, 
She seemed to think her maids were talking there, 
She doubted that some answer came from her ; 
She knew she moved thence, that a glare of light 
Smote on her eyes, that old things came in sight 
She knew full well ; that on her bed she lay, 
And through long hours was waiting for the day ; 
But knew not what she thought of; life seemed gone, 
And she had fought with gods, and they had won. 



"VTEXT morn, the captain, as it was to be, 
•^ Held speech with King Jobates privily. 
And when he came from out the royal place 
A smile of triumph was there on his face, 
As though the game were won ; but as he went 



2Q2 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Unto the great gate on his luck intent, 

A woful sound there smote upon his ear, 

And crossed his happy mood with sudden fear : 

For now five women went adown the street, 

That e'en the curious townsmen durst not meet, 

Though they turned round to look with wild scared 

eyes, 
And listened trembling to those doleful cries ; 
Because for Pallas' sacred maids they knew 
Those wild-eyed wailing ones that closer drew 
Scant rags about them, as with feet that bled 
And failing limbs they tottered blind with dread, 
Past house and hall. Now such-like had been these, 
And guarded as the precious images 
That hold a city's safety in their hands, 
And dainty things from many distant lands 
Were gathered round them in the house that stood, 
Fair above all, within the hallowed wood, 
Ten leagues from out the city ; wondrous lore, 
Folk deemed, within that house they pondered o'er, 
And had been goddesses, but that they too 
The hope of death if not its terror knew. 

White grew the captain's face these folk to see, 
Yet midst his fear he muttered : " Well be ye, 

gods, who have no care to guard your own ! 
Perchance ye too weary of good are grown ; 
Look then on me, I shall not weary you — 

1 who once longed great things and high to do 
If ye would have it so ; — come, bless me then, 
Since ye are grown aweary of good men ! " 

So to his folk he turned, and bade them take 



BBLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 293 

The holy women for the goddess' sake, 
And give them into some kind matron's care. 
So did they, and when bathed and clad they were, 
He strove in vain to know their tale ; for they 
Had clean forgot all things before that day, 
And only knew that they by some great curse 
Had late been smitten, and 'mid fear of worse 
Were leaving life behind. So when he knew 
That with these woful women he might do 
Nought else, because their hearts were dead before 
Their bodies, midst the fear and tumult sore 
He went unto the gate, and waited there 
If he perchance some other news might hear ; 
But nought befell that day to tell about, 
And tidingless night came, and dark died out 

But just before the rising of the sun 
The gate was smitten on, and there sat one 
On a gray horse, and in bright armor clad. 
Young was he, and strong built ; his face seemed glad 
Amidst of weariness, and though he seemed 
Even as one who of past marvels dreamed. 
Now turned the captain to him hastily, 
And said : " Fair fellow, needs thou must with me, 
Nor speak thou good or bad before the King 
Has heard thee ; " therewith, scarcely wondering, 
He rode beside the captain, and the twain 
In no long time the palace-gate did gain, 
Which opened at a word the captain spake, 
And past the warders standing half-awake 
They came unto the King : sleeping he lay, 
While o'er his gold bed crept the daylight gray ; 



294 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But softly thereunto the captain went, 
And to his sleeping head his own down bent 
And whispered ; then as one who has just heard 
Right in his ears the whisper of death's word, 
He started up with eyes that, open wide, 
Still saw not what the strange new light might hide ; 
Upright he sat, and panting for a while, 
Till heeding at the last the captain's smile, 
And low and humble words, he smiled and said : 
" Well be ye ! for I dreamed that I was dead 
Before ye came, and waking thought that I 
Was dead indeed, and that such things were nigh 
As willingly men name not. What wouldst thou ? 
What new thing must the Lycians suffer now ? " 

" King," said the captain, " here I have with me 
A man-at-arms who joyful seems to be ; 
Therefore I deem somewhat has come to pass, 
Since for these many days no face here has 
Made e'en a show of gladness, or of more 
Than thinking good it were if all were o'er, — 
The slow tormenting hope — the heavy fear. 
Speak thou, good friend ! the King is fain to hear 
The tale thou hast to tell." 

Then spake the man : 
" Good hap to me, indeed, that thus I can 
Make glad the Lycian folk, and thee, O King ! 
But nowise have I wrought the happy thing, 
But some immortal as meseems : 

" Now I 
With other two made up my mind to try 
The chance of death or glorious life herein, 




BRLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 295 

In good hope either rest from fear to win 
Or many days of pleasure ; so I armed 
In this my father's gear, that had been charmed 
Years long agone by spells, well worn I doubt 
To nothing now, if one might clean tell out 
The truth of all ; then in Diana's fane 
Anigh our house I met the other twain, 
And forth we went at dawn, two days ago. 
Not hard it was our rightful road to know, 
For hour by hour of dreadful deaths we heard, 
And still met fleeing folk, so sore afeard 
That they must scowl upon us questioning. 
And so at last we deemed the dreadful thing, 
What death soever he dealt otherwhere 
From time to time, must have his chiefest lair 
Within Minerva's consecrated lands, 
That stretch from where her mighty temple stands 
Midst its wild olive-groves, until they meet 
The rugged mountain's bare unwooded feet 
Thither we turned, and at the end of day 
We reached the temple, and with no delay 
Sought out the priests and told them of our rede. 
" They answered us that heavy was their need, 
That day by day they dreaded death would come 
And take them from the midst of that fair home, 
And shortly, that when midnight was passed o'er, 
Their lives in that house they would risk no more, 
But get them gone. ' All things are done,' said they, 
* The sacred maids, who have not seen the day, 
But in these precincts, count the minutes now 
Until the midnight moon the way shall show ; 
Ten horse-loads of the precious things we have, 



296 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That somewhat of our past lives we may save 
To bring us o'er the sea. So sorry cheer, 
Fair sons, of meat or lodging get ye here, 
For all is bare and blank as some hill-side ; 
Nor, if ye love your lives, will ye abide 
Another minute here : for us, indeed, 
One answer more from Pallas do we need ; 
And, that being got at, nothing stays us then.' 

" Worn were the faces of these holy men, 
And their eyes wandered even as they spake, 
And scarcely did they move as men awake 
About that place, whose mighty walls of stone 
Seemed waiting for the time when all was gone, 
Except the presence of the Dreadful Maid, 
Careless of who was glad and who afraid. 

" Shortly we answered : we would bide and see 
What thing within the precinct there might be 
Until the morn, and if we lived till then, 
Further afield would seek this death of men. 
They heard us wondering, or with scorn, but gave 
Such cheer to us as yet they chanced to have ; 
And we, being weary, fell asleep withal 
Within a chamber nigh the northern wall 
Of the great temple. Such a dream I had, 
As that I thought fair folk, in order glad, 
Sang songs throughout a place I knew to be 
A town whereof had tales been told to me 
When I was but a youngling : years agone 
Had I forgot it all, and now alone 
The nameless place had come to me. — O King, 



BBLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 297 

I dreamed, I say, I heard much people sing 
In happy wise ; but even therewithal 
Amidst my dream a great voice did there call, 
But in a tongue I knew not ; and each face 
Was changed to utter horror in that place ; 
And yet the song rose higher, until all tune 
Was strangled in it, and to shrill shrieks soon 
It changed, and I sat upright in my bed, 
Waked in an instant, open-mouthed with dread. 
I know not why — though all about I heard 
Shrill screams indeed, as though of folk afeard, 
Mixed with a roar like white flame that doth break 
From out a furnace-mouth : the earth did shake 
Beneath my bed, and when my eyes I turned 
Without the window, such a light there burned 
As would have made the noon-tide sunshine gray. 
There on the floor one of my fellows lay, 
Half-armed and groaning like a wounded man ; 
And circling round about the other ran 
With foaming lips as one driven mad with fear. 

"Then I, who knew not what thing drew anear, 
And/scarce could think amid my dread, sat still 
Trembling a little space of time, until 
To me from out the jaws of death was born, 
Without a hope it seemed, a sudden scorn 
Of death and fear ; for all the worst I knew, 
And many a thing seemed false that had been true, 
And many a thing now seemed of little worth 
That once had made the mean and sordid earth 
All glorious. 

" So with fixed and steady face 
I armed myself, and turned to leave the place, 

13* 



298 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And passed from out it into the great hall 

Of the very temple, where from wall to wall 

There rolled a cloud of white and sulphurous smoke ; 

And there the remnant of the temple folk, 

That had not heart enow to flee away, 

Like dying folk upon the pavement lay, 

And some seemed dead indeed. High o'er that gear 

Stood golden Pallas, with her burnished spear 

Glittering from out the smoke-cloud in that light, 

That made strange day and ghastly of the night ; 

And her unmoved calm face that knew no smile 

Cast no look down, as though she deemed too vile 

The writhing tortured limbs, the sickening sound 

Of dying groans of those that lay around, 

Or to the pillars clung in agonies 

Past telling of; but now I turned mine eyes, 

Grown used to death within a little space, 

Unto the other end of that fair place, 

Where black the wood of polished pillars showed 

Against the dreadful light, that throbbed and glowed, 

Changing, and changing back to what it was. 

So, through their rows did I begin to pass, 

And heavier grew the smoke-cloud as I went ; 

But I, upon the face of death intent, 

And what should come thereafter, made no stay 

Until two fathom of white pavement lay 

Betwixt me and the grass : the lit-up trees 

Sparkled like quick-fire in the light night breeze, 

And turned the sky black, and their stems between 

The black depths of the inner wood were seen ; 

Like liquid flame a brook leapt out from them, 

And, turning, ran along the forest hem : 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. ' 299 

'Twixt that and me How shall I tell thereof 

And hope to 'scape hard word and bitter scoff? 

" Let me say first that, changing horribly 
That noise went on and seemed a part of me, 
E'en as the light ; unless by death I won 
Quiet again ; earth's peace seemed long years gone, 
And all its hopes poor toys of little worth. 
Therefore I turned not, nor fell down to earth, 
And still within my hand I held my sword, 
And saw it all as I see thee, fair lord. 

" And this I saw : a mass, from whence there came 
That fearful light, as from a heart of flame ; 
But black amid its radiance was that mass, 
And black and claw-like things therefrom did pass, 
Lengthening and shortening, and gray flocks of hair 
Seemed moving on it with some inward air 
The light bore with it ; but in front of me 
An upreared changing dark bulk did I see, 
That my heart told me was the monster's head, 
The seat of all the will that wrought our dread ; 
And midst thereof two orbs of red flame shone 
When first I came, and then again were gone, 
Then came again, like lights on a dark sea 
As the thing turned. And now it seemed to me, 
Moreover, that, despite the dreadful sound 
That filled my very heart and shook the ground, 
Mute was the horror's head, as the great shade 
That sometimes, as in deep sleep we are laid, 
Seems ready to roll over us, and crush 
Our souls to nought amidst its shadowy hush : 
Nor might I know how that dread noise was wrought 



3°° 



'THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



" But, when unto the place I first was brought 
Where now I stayed and stared, I knew not well 
If the thing moved ; but deemed that I might tell 
athoms o'er betwixt us, and midway 
t me and it a temple-priest there lay, 
foremost, armed, and in his hand a spear; 
is with fixed eyes I stood moveless there, 
ng to think how I should meet the thing, 
st that noise 1 heard his armor ring 
litten by some stroke ; and then I saw 
that hideous bulk the body draw, 
'el saw not what drew it ; till at last 
he huge dark mass it slowly passed, 
lid the monster change ; unless, methought 
le nigher thereto I was brought — 
;till my eyes were fixed on it ; with hand 
my drawn-back sword I still did stand, 
thoughts of folk who meet dread things alone 
;adful lands, and slowly turn to stone, 
xid I : quicker grew my fevered breath, 
long, the time seemed betwixt life and death, 
[ began to waver therewithal, 
it the last I opened lips to call 
I, and made no sound ; then fell my brand 
;ing adown from out my feeble hand, 
est seemed sweet again ; one step I made 
i, to gain a huge pier's deep black shade, 
at my fallen sword in vain I stared, 

:ould not stoop to it 

" And then there blared 
v sound forth, I deemed a trumpet-blast, 
1'er mine eyes a dull thick veil seemed cast, 



r 



SELLER OPHON IN LTCIA. 301 

And my knees bent beneath me, and I fell 
A dead heap to the earth, with death and hell 
Once more a pain, and terrible once more, 
Teaching me dreadful things of hidden lore, 
Showing strange pictures to my soul forlorn 
That cursed the wretched day when I was born. 

" There lay I, as it seemed, a weary tide, 
Nor knew I if I lived yet, or had died, 
E'en as the other folk, of utter fear, 
When in mine ears a new voice did I hear, 
Nor knew at first what words it said to me ; 
Till my eyes opened, and I seemed to see, 
Grown gray and soft, the marble pillars there, 
And 'twixt their shafts afar the woodland fair, 
As if through clear green water ; then I heard 
Close by my very head a kindly word : 
i Be of good cheer ! the earth is earth again, 
And thou hadst heart enow to face the bane 
Of Lycia, though the Gods would not that thou 
Shouldst slay him utterly : but rise up now 
If so thou may st, and help me, for I bleed, 
And of some leech-craft have I speedy need, 
Though no life-blood it is that flows from me.' 

" Then clearer grew mine eyes, and I could see 
An armed man standing over me, and I 
Rose up therewith and stood unsteadily, 
And gazed around, and saw that the fell light 
Had vanished utterly ; fast waned the night 
And a cold wind blew, as the young dawn strove 
With the low moon and the faint stars above, 



302 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And all was quiet But that new-come man, 
Standing beside me in the twilight wan, 
Seemed like a god, come down to make again 
Another earth all free from death and pain. 
Tall was he, fair he seemed unto me then 
Beyond the beauty of the sons of men : 
But as our eyes met, and mine, shamed and weak, 
Dropped before his, once more he 'gan to speak : 

" ' Be not ashamed,' he said, ( but look around, 
And thou shalt see thy fear lie on the ground, 
No more divine or dreadful' 

" Then I saw 
A tangled mass of hair, and scale, and claw, 
Lie wallowing on the gray down-trodden grass ; 
Huge was it certes, but nought like the mass 
Of horror 'mid the light my fear still told 
My shuddering heart of, nor could I behold 
Clearly the monster's shape in that dim light ; 
Yet gladly did I turn me from the sight 
Unto my fellow, and I said : 

" ' Hast thou 
Some other shape unto mine eyes to show ? 
And is this part of the grim mockery 
Whereto the gods have driven me forth to die ? 
Or art thou such a dream as meets the dead 
When first they die ? * 

" * I am a man,' he said, 
1 E'en as thou art ; thou livest, if I live ; 
And some god unto me such strength did give, 
That this my father's father's sword hath wrought 
Deliverance for the Lycians, and made nought 



BELLBROPHON IN LYCIA. 303 

This divine dread ; — but let us come again 
When day is grown, and I have eased the pain 
Of burning thirst that chokes me, and thine hands 
Have swathed my hurts here with fair linen bands, 
For somewhat faint I grow.' 

" So then we passed 
Betwixt the pillars till we reached at last 
The chamber where I erst had slept, and there 
We drank, and then his hurts with water fair 
I bathed, and swathed them ; and by then the day 
Showed how my fellows on the pavement lay 
Dead, yet without a wound it seemed ; and when 
Into the pillared hall we came again, 
From one unto the other did we go 
That lay about the place, and even so 
It was with them ; then the new-comer sighed 
And said : ' Belike it was of fear they died, 
Yet wish them not alive again, for they 
Had found death fearful on another day ; 
But gladly had I never seen this sight, 
For I shall think thereof at whiles by night, 
And wonder if all life is worth such woe ; — 
But now unto the quarry let us go.' 

" So forth we went, but when we came whereas 
The beast lay, slantwise o'er the wind-swept grass - 
Shone the low sun on what was left of him, 
For all about the trodden earth did swim 
In horrible corruption of black blood, 
And in the midst thereof his carcass stood, 
E'en like a keel beat down and castaway 
At dead ebb high up in a sandy bay. 



304 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But when I gathered heart close up to go 
And touch that master of all horror, lo, 
How had he changed ! for nothing now was there 
But skin, beset with scale and dreadful hair 
Drawn tight about the bones : flesh, muscle strong, 
And all that helped the life of that great wrong, 
Had ebbed away with life ; his head, deep cleft 
By the fair hero's sword-edge, yet had left 
Three teeth like spears within it : on the ground 
The rest had fallen, and now lay around 
Half-hidden in the marsh his blood had made ; 
Hollow his sides did sound when, still afraid 
Of what he had been, with my clenched hand 
I smote him. So a minute did we stand 
Wondering, until my fellow said to me : 

" * In the past night didst thou do valiantly, 
So smite the head from off him, and then go 
This finished work unto the King to show, 
And tell him by that token that I come, 
Who heretofore have had no quiet home 
Either in Corinth or the Argive land. 
Here till to-morrow bide I, to withstand 
What new thing yet may come ; for strange to me 
Are all these things, nor know I if I be 
Waking or sleeping yet, although methinks 
My soul some foretaste of a great bliss drinks. 
So get thee to the work, and then go forth ; 
These coming days in sooth will show the worth 
Of what my hand hath wrought ! ' 

" Weary he seemed 
And spake, indeed, well-nigh as one who dreamed ; 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 305 

But yet his word I durst not disobey. 

With no great pain I smote the head away 

From off the trunk, and humbly bade farewell 

Unto my godlike savior from deep hell ; 

I gat my horse, and to the saddle bound 

The monster's head, whose long mane swept the ground, 

Whose weight e'en now was no light pack-horse load, 

And so with merry heart went on my road, 

And made on toward the city, where I thought 

A little after nightfall to be brought ; 

But so it was, that ere I had gone through 

The wasted country and now well-nigh drew 

Unto the lands where people yet did dwell, 

So dull a humor on my spirit fell, 

That at the last I might not go nor stand ; 

So, holding still the reins in my right hand, 

I laid me down upon the sunburnt grass 

Of the road-side, and just high noon it was. 

" But moonrise was it when I woke again ; 
My horse grazed close beside with dangling rein ; 
But when I called him, and he turned to me, 
No burden on his back I now might see, 
And wondered ; for right firmly had I bound 
The thing unto him ; then I searched around 
Lest he perchance had rolled, and in such wise 
Had rid him of that weight ; and as mine eyes 
Grew used to the gray moonlight, I could trace 
A line of grayish ashes, as from place 
To greener place, the wandering beast had fed ; 
But nothing more I saw of that grim head. 
Then much I wondered, and my fear waxed great, 
And I 'gan doubt if there I should not wait 






3 o6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The coming of that glorious mighty one, 

Who for the world so great a deed had done. 

But at the last I thought it good to go 

Unto the town e'en as he bade me do, 

Because his words constrained me. Nought befell 

Upon the road whereof is need to tell, 

And so my tale is done ; and though it be 

That I no token have to show to thee, 

Yet doubt not, King Jobates, that no more 

The gods will vex the land as heretofore 

With this fell torment Furthermore, if he 

Who wrought this deed is no divinity 

He will be here soon ; so must thou devise, 

O Lycian King, in whatso greatest wise 

Thou wilt reward him ; — but for me, I pray 

That thou wilt give me to him from to-day, 

That serving him, and in his company, 

Not wholly base I too become to be." 

The King and captain for a little while 
Gazed each at each ; an ugly covert smile 
Lurked round the captain's mouth, but the King stared 
Blankly upon him, e'en as though he heard 
A doom go forth against him ; and again 
The man who brought the news stared at the twain 
With knitted brows, as greatly marvelling 
Why they spake nought, until at last the King 
Turned eyes upon him, and the captain spake : 

"Certes, O King, brightly the day doth break 
If this man sayeth sooth ; nor know I one 
To do this deed except Bellerophon ; 



BBLLEROPHON IN ZTCIA. 307 

And so much certes hast thou honored him 
That nothing now thy glory can wax dim 
Because of his ; and though indeed the earth 
Hold nought within it of such wond'rous worth 
As that which thou wilt give him in reward, 
Not overmuch it is for such a sword, 
And such a heart, the people's very friend." 

So spake he, and before his speech had end 
His wonted face at last the King had got, 
And spake unto the man : 

" We doubt thee not ; 
Thy tale seems true, nor dost thou glorify 
Thyself herein — certes thou wouldst abye 
A heavy fate if thou shouldst lie herein. — 
So here shalt thou abide till sight we win 
Of him who wrought this deed ; then shalt thou have 
A good reward, as one both true and brave 
As for a son of man, for he, meseems, 
Who made an end of our so fearful dreams 
Is scarcely man, though friend to me a man. — 
But now this tale of thine, that well began 
And went on clearly, clearly has not told 
The very shape of what thou didst behold." 

" No," said the man, " when* I stood therebeside . 
Methought its likeness ever would abide 
Within my mind ! but now, what shall I say — 
Hast thou not heard, O King, before to-day, 
That it was three-formed ? So men said to me, 
Before its very .body I did see, 
That, lion-like, the beast's shape was before, 
And that its goat-like hairy middle bore 



308 THE EARTH Lr PARADISE. 

A dragon's scaly folds across the waste 
Itself had made. But I, who oft have faced 
The yellow beast, and driven goats afield, w 

And shaken the black viper from my shield, 
Can liken it to these things in no whit 
Nay, as I try e'en now to think of it, 
Meseems that when I woke in the past night, 
E'en like a dream dissolved by morning light, 
Its memory had gone from me ; though, indeed, 
Nought I forgot of all my dreadful need. 
Content thee, King, with what I erst have told ; 
For when I try his image to behold 

Faint grows my heart again, mine eyes wax dim, I 

Nor can I set forth what I deemed of him 3 

When he lay dead. — Hearken, — what thing draws 
nigh ? " 
For from outside there rang a joyous cry, 
That grew, still coming nearer, till they heard 
From out the midst thereof a well-known word, 
The name Bellerophon : then from his bed 
The King arose, and clad himself, and said : 

" Go, captain, set the King Bellerophon 
Without delay upon the royal throne, 
And tell him that I come to make my prayer, 
That, since for a long time I have sat there, 
And know no other trade than this of King, 
He of his bounty yet will add a thing 
To all that he hath given, and let me reign 
Along with him. Send here my chamberlain, 
That I may clothe me in right fitting guise 
To do him honor in all goodly wise." '1 



BBLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 309 

So spake his lips, but his eyes seemed to say : 
' Long is it to the ending of the day, 
And many a thing may hap ere eventide ; 
And well is he who longest may abide.' 

So from the presence did the captain pass, 
When now the autumn morn in glory was, 
And when he reached the palace court, he found 
The eager people flocking all around 
The door of the great hall, and variously 
Men showed their joyance at that victory. 
But in the hall there stood Bellerophon 
Anigh the dais, and the young sun shone 
On his bright arms, and round from man to man 
In eager notes the hurried question ran, 
And, smiling still, he answered each \ but yet 
Small share that circle of his tale did get, 
Because distraught he was, and seemed to be 
As he who looks the face of one to see 
Who long delays ; but when the captain's staff 
Cleft through the people's eager word and laugh, 
And, after that, his fellow of the night 
Bellerophon beheld, his face grew bright 
As one who sees the end. Withal he said 
As they drew nigh : 

" Has the King seen the head, 
Knows he what it betokens ? For, behold ! 
Before the sun of that day grew a-cold 
Whereon thou left'st me, all that heap was gone 
Thou sawest there, both hair and flesh and bone ; 
So when this dawn I mounted my good steed, 
I looked to thee to show forth that my deed, 
Lest all should seem a feigned tale or a dream." 



3 io THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Master," the other said, " thou well mayst deem, 
That what thy will loosed, my will might not hold ; 
E'en as thy tele, so must my tale be told, 
And nought is left to show of that dread thing." 

E'en as he spake did folk cry on the King, 

And now to right and left fell back the crowd, 

And down the lane of folk gold raiment glowed, 

And blare of silver trumpets smote the roof. 

Then said the captain : 

" Certes, no more proof 

The King will ask, to show that thou hast done 

The glorious deed that was for thee alone ; 

Be glad, thy day is come, and all is well ! " 

But on his sword the hero's left hand fell, 
And he looked down and muttered 'neath his breath, 
" Trust slayeth many a man, the wise man saith ; 
Yet must I trust perforce." He stood and heard 
The joyful people's many- voiced word 
Change into a glad shout : the feet of those 
Who drew anear came closer and more close, 
Till their sound ceased, and silence filled the hall ; 
And then a soft voice on his ears did fall, 
That seemed the echo to his yearning thought : 

" Look up, look up ! the change of days hath brought 
Sweet end to our desires, and made thee mine ! " 

He raised his eyes, and saw gold raiment shine 
Before him in the low sun ; but a face 
Above it made the murmuring crowded place 



BELLBROPHON IN LTCIA. 311 

Silent and lone ; for there she stood, indeed, 

His troublous scarce-kept life's last crown and meed ; 

Her sweet lips trembled, her dear eyes 'gan swim 

In tears that fell not, as she reached to him 

One hand in greeting, while a little raised 

And restless was the other, as she gazed 

Into his eyes, and lowly was her mien ; 

But yet a little forward did she lean, 

As though she looked for sudden close embrace, 

Yet feared it 'neath the strange eyes of that place. 

But though his heart was melted utterly 
Within him, he but drew a little nigh, 
And took her hand, and said : 

" What hour is this 
That brings so fair a thing to crown my bliss ? 
What land far off from that which first I knew ? 
How shall I know that such a thing is true, 
Unless some pain yet falls on thee and me ? 
Rather this hour is called eternity, 
This land the land of heaven, and we have died 
That thus at last we might go side by side 
For ever, in the flower-strewn happy place." 

Then closer to her drew his bright flushed face ; 
Well-nigh their lips met, when Jobates cried : 
" Good hap, Corinthian ! for thou hast not died ; 
The pale land holds no joy like thou wilt have 
If yet awhile the gods thy dear life save. 
Yet mayst thou fear, indeed, for such thou art, 
That yet the gods will have thee play thy part 
In heaven and not on earth. — But come on now, 



312 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And see if this my throne be all too low 
For thy great heart ; sit here with me to-day, 
And in the shrines of the Immortals pray, 
With many offerings, lest they envy thee, 
And on the morrow wed Philonoe, 
And live thy life thereafter." 

So he spake, 
Smiling, and yet a troubled look did break 
Across the would-be frankness of his smile. 
But still the hero stood a little while 
And watched Philonoe, as she turned and went 
Adown the hall, and then a sigh he sent 
From out his heart, and turned unto the King 
As one who had no thought that any thing 
Of guile clung round him, and said : 

" Deem thou not, 
O King, that ruin from me thou hast got, 
Although I take from thee my due reward ; 
For still for thee my hand shall hold the sword, 
Nor will I claim more than thou givest me, 
And great is that, though a king's son I be." 

So on the throne was set Bellerophon, 
And on his head was laid the royal crown 
Instead of helm ; and just as safe he felt. 
As though 'mid half-fed savage beasts he dwelt 
Yet when he went out through the crowded street, 
Shouting because of him, when blossoms sweet 
Faint with the autumn fell upon his head, 
When his feet touched the silken carpet spread 
Over the temple-steps ; when the priests' hymn 
Rang round him in the inner temple dim, 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 313 

He smiled for pleasure once or twice, and said : 

" So many dangers, yet I am not dead ; 
So many fears, yet sweet is longing grown, 
Because to-morrow morn I gain my own ! 
So much desire, and but a night there is 
Betwixt me and the perfecting of bliss ! " 



I 

CO fell the noisy day to feastful night, 
^ For sleep was slow to hush the new delight 
Of the freed folk ; and in the royal house 
Loud did the revellers grow, and clamorous ; 
And yet that too must have an end at last, 
And to their sleeping-places all folk passed 
Not long before the shepherds' sleep grew thin. 

But listening to the changing of the din, 
Philonoe lay long upon her bed, 
Nor would sweet sleep come down to bless her head, 
No, not when all was still again ; for she, 
Oppressed with her new-found felicity, 
Had fallen to thoughts of life and death and change, 
And through strange lands her wearied heart did range, 
And knew no peace ; therefore at last she rose 
When all was utter stillness and stood close 
Unto the window. Such a night it was 
That a thin wind swept o'er the garden-grass 
And loosened the sick leaves upon the trees ; 
Promise of rain there was within the breeze, 
Yet was the sky not wholly overcast, 
But o'er the moon yet high the gray drift passed, 

H 



3H . THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And with a watery gleam at whiles she shone, 
And cast strange wavering shadows down upon 
The trembling beds of autumn blossoms tall, 
And made the dusk of the white garden wall 
Gleam like another land against the sky. 

She turned her from the window presently. 
And went unto her dainty bed once more ; 
But as she touched its silk a change came o'er 
Her anxious heart, and listening there she stood, 
Counting the eager throbbing of her blood : 
But nought she heard except the night's dim noise ; 
Then did she whisper (and her faint, soft voice 
Seemed hoarse and loud to her) — " Yet will I go 
To Pallas' shrine, for fain I am to know 
If all things even yet may go aright, 
For my heart fails me." 

To the blind dusk night 
She showed her loveliness awhile half-veiled, 
When she had spoke, as though her purpose failed ; 
Then softly did she turn and take to her 
A dusky cloak, and hid her beauty rare 
In its dark folds, and turned unto the door ; 
But ere she passed its marble threshold o'er 
Stayed pondering, and she said : 

" Alas, alas \ 
To-morrow must I say that all this was 
And is not — this sweet longing? — what say men — 
It cometh once and cometh not again, 
This first love for another ? holds the earth 
Within its circle aught that is of worth 
When it is dead ? — and this is part of it, 
This measureless sweet longing that doth flit, 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 315 

Never to come again, when all is won. 

And is our first desire so soon foredone, 

Like to the rose-bud, that through day and night 

In early summer strives to meet the light, 

And in some noon-tide of the June, bursts sheath, 

And ere the eve is past away in death ? 

Belike love dies then like the rest of life ? 

— Or falls asleep until it mix with strife 

And fear and grief ?— and then we call it pain, 

And curse it for its labor lost in vain. 

" Sweet pain 1 be kind to me and leave me not ! 
Leave me not cold, with all my grief forgot, 
And all the joy consumed I thought should fill 
My changing troubled days of life, until 
Death turned all measuring of the days to nought ! 

" And thou, O Death, when thou my life hast caught 
Within thy net, what wilt thou with my love, 
That now I deem no lapse of time can move ? 
O Death, maybe that though I seem to pass 
And come to nought, with all that once I was, 
Yet love shall live I called a part of me, 
And hold me in his heart despite of thee, 
And call me part of him, when I am dead 
As the world talks of dying." 

So she said, 
But scarcely heard her voice, and through the door 
Of her own chamber passed ; light on the floor 
Her white feet fell, her soft clothes rustled nought, 
As slowly, wrapped in many a changing thought, 
Unto the Maiden's shrine she took her way 
That midmost of the palace precincts lay ; 
But in a chamber that was hard thereby, 



316 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Although she knew it not, that night did lie 
Her love that was, her lord that was to be. 

Through the dark pillared precinct, silently 
She went now, pausing every now and then 
To listen, but heard little sound of men ; 
Though far off in the hill-side homesteads crowed 
The waking fowl, or restless milch-kine lowed 
In the fair pastures that her love had saved ; 
And from the haven, as the shipmen heaved 
Their sail aloft, a mingled strange voice came. 

So as she went, across her flitted shame 
Of her own loneliness, and eager love • 
That shut the world out so, and she 'gan move 
With quicker steps unto the temple-stead, 
Scarce knowing what her soft feet thither led. 

Within an open space the temple was, 
And dark-stemmed olives rose up from the grass 
About it, but a marble path passed o'er 
The space betwixt the cloister and its door 
Of some ten yards ; there on its brink she stayed, 
And from the cloister watched the black trees swayed 
In the night breeze. E'en as a bather might 
Shrink from the water, from the naked night 
She shrank a little — the wind wailed within 
The cloister walls, the clouds were gotten thin 
About the moon, and the night 'gan to wane — 
Then, even as she raised her skirts again 
And put her foot forth, did she hear arms clash, 
And fear and shame her heart did so abash, 



BBLLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 317 

She shrank behind a pillar ; then the sound 
Of footsteps smote upon the hardened ground, 
And 'gainst the white steps of the shrine she saw 
From out the trees a tall dark figure draw 
Unto the holy place : the moon withal 
Ran from a cloud now, and her light did fall 
Upon a bright steel helm : she trembled then, 
But her first thought was not of sons of men ; 
Of the armed goddess, rather, did she think, 
And closer in her hiding-place did shrink. 

Then though the moon grew dull again, yet she 
Ten shapes of armed men at the last could see 
Steal up the steps and vanish from the night, 
And a sharp pang shot through her ; but affright 
She felt not now of gods : she murmured low : 
" What do these men-at-arms in such guise now 
Amidst the feast ? God help me, we are caught 
Within a brazen net ! " 

And with that thought 
No more delay she made, but girt her gown 
Unto her, and with swift feet went adown 
The marble steps, and so from tree to tree, 
Through all the darkest shadow, silently 
Gained the dark side of the brass temple door ; 
And through its chink she saw the marble floor 
Just feebly lit by some small spark of light 
She saw not, and the gleam of armor white, 
And knew that she unto the men was close. 

E'en as some sound that loud and louder grows 
Within our dreams and yet is nought at all, 



318 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

She heard her heart, as clinging to the wall 

She strove to listen vainly ; but at last 

All feebleness from out her did she cast 

With thought of love — and death that drew anear — 

And therewithal a low voice did she hear. 

She thought she knew. 

" Milo the Colchian ? " 
It said as asking, and another man 
Said, " Here, " in a hoarse voice and low ; once more 
The first voice said : " The Clearer of the Shore, 
Known by no other name the people say, 
Art thou here too ? " a new voice muttered, " Yea." 
And then again the first : 

" My tale told o'er 
And none found wanting ; — since ye know wherefore 
We here are met, few words are best to-night : 
Within the ivory chamber, called the White, 
Lies the ill monster's bane, asleep belike, 
Or, at the worst without a sword to strike, 
Or shield to ward withal ; his wont it is 
To have few by him ; on this night of bliss 
Those few of night-cropped herbs enow have drunk, 
And deep in slumber like short death are sunk : 
So light our work is ; yet let those who lack 
Heart thereunto e'en at this hour go back ; 
Though — let these take good heed that whatsoe'er 
We risk hereafter they in likewise share, 
Except the risk of dying by his sword." 

He ceased awhile, and a low muttered word 
Seemed to say, " We are ready ; " then he said : ' 



BELLBROPHON IN LTCIA. 319 

" When he is slain, then shall ye bear his bed 
Intq this shrine, and burn what burned may be 
In little space ; but into the deep sea 
Thou Clearer of the Shore, with thy two men 
Shalt bear him forth. — Fellows, what say we then, 
When on the morn the city wakes to find 
Its savior gone ? This : — ' Men are fools and blind, 
And the gods all-wise ; this man born on earth 
By some strange chance, yet was of too great worth 
To live, and go as common men may go ; 
Therefore the gods, who set him work to do, 
When that was done, had no more will to see 
His head grow white ; or with man's frailty 
Burn out his heart ; they might not hear him curse 
His latter days, as unto worse and worse 
He fell at last ; therefore they took him hence 
To make him sharer in omnipotence, 
And crown him with their immortality, 
Nor may ye hope his body more to see. 
These ashes of the web wherein last lay 
His godlike limbs that took your fear away, 
(Limbs now a very god's), this fire-stained gold 
That, unharmed, very god might nowise hold, 
Are left for certain signs — so shall ye rear 
A temple to him nigh the gate ; and bear 
Gifts of good things unto the one who wrought 
Deliverance for you, when ye e'en were brought 
Unto the very gate of death and heuV . 

" Fellows, spread vaguely this tale that I tell ! 
But thou, O Chremes, when the work is done 
Get straight unto the forest all alone, 
And with some slaughtered beast come back again 



^ 



320 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Ere noon, as though of hearers thou wert fain ; 
Folk know thee for a wanderer through the wood, 
So make thy tale up as thou deemest good 
Of voices heard by thee at dead of night ; 
So shall our words live and all things be right 

" Come, then ; the night is changing ; good it were 
That dawn's first glimmer did not find us here ! " 

So spake he, and then opened wide the door, 
And all seemed lonely there as heretofore ; 
So one by one adown the steps they stole, 
Setting their anxious faces to the goal 
Of the White Chamber. 

But PhilonoS, 
Fair-footed, tender-limbed, and where was she ? 
Her sick heart did but note the name and place 
They spoke of, ere she moved her woe-worn face 
From the cold brass, and stayed to hear no more, 
But stole away as silent as before, 
Keeping love back till all were lost or won i 
Nor knew she what she set her feet upon 
Till, panting, through his chamber-door she passed : 
There through the dusk a quick glance round she cast 
And saw his men asleep, nor knew if they 
Were dead, or if in sleep indeed they lay ; 
Then with such haste as a spent man, borne down 
A swift stream, catches at some bare bough brown, 
From off the wall she took sword, shield, and spear, 
Hauberk and helm, and drew his bed anear, 
And stayed not now, nor thought, but on his breast, 
Laid bare before her, a light hand she pressed, 
And as he started upright in the bed 
Beneath her touch, bowed down to him and said : 



I 

\ 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 321 

" Speak not, but listen to PhilonoS, 
Thy love, and save thy life for thee and me ! 
Thy foes are on thee ! make no more delay 
As. thou art wise ! — needs must I go away ; 
I do my part — one minute more shall show 
If love in death or life we are to know." 

His lips yet trembled, yet his heart did ache 
With longing, ere he felt he was awake 
And knew that she was gone, and knew not where. 
So driving back desire he armed him there 
Over his nakedness, and hastily 
Caught up his weapons, and turned round to see 
What help was nigh : and when he saw his men 
Lie on the floor as dead, well deemed he then 
His hour was come ; and yet he felt as though 
He scarce might tell if it were hard to go, 
So short all life seemed that must end at last 
But therewith nowise hope from him he cast, 
But on the golden bed he took his stand, 
And poised the well-steeled spear in his right hand, 
And waited listening. 

'Mid the fallen leaves' sound. 
Driven by the autumn wind along the ground, 
Footfalls of stealthy men he seemed to hear ; 
Yet nowise might that minute teach him fear, 
Who life-long had not learned to speak the name ; 
Calm to his lips his steady breath still came, 
Well-nigh he smiled ; wide open were his eyes, 
As though they looked to see life's mysteries 
Unfolded soon before them ; as he gazed 
Through the dusk room, he heard the light latch raised 

14* 



322 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And saw the door move. 

Even therewithal 
A gleam of bright light from the sky did fall, 
As from a fleecy cloud the white moon ran, 
And smiling, stern, unlike the face of man, 
His helmed head high o'er the black-shadowed floor 
Showed strange and dreadful, as the ivory door 
Swung back on well-oiled hinges silently. 

Silence a little space yet, — then a cry 
Burst from his lips, and through the chamber rang 
A shriek of fear therewith, and a great clang 
Of falling arms, and the bright glittering brand 
Instead of the long spear was in his hand. 
But for his foes, across the threshold lay 
Their leader slain, and those his fellows, they 
Hung wavering by the door, and feared the night, 
And feared the godlike man, who in his might 
Seemed changed indeed according to the tale 
They were to tell : but as with faces pale 
And huddled spears they hung there, in their doubt 
If he were god or man, a mighty shout 
Came from his lips again, and there was cast 
Across the windy night a huge horn's blast, 
Hoarse, loud, and long-enduring ; and they fled 
This way and that, pursued by nought but dread. 

But strange tales of that night of fear they told 
In after days. Some said they did behold, . 
As through the mighty outer door they ran, 
A woman greater than a child of man, 
All armed and helmed : some told of a bright flame 



BELLEROPHON IN LTCIA. 323 

Glowing about the hero, when they came 
Unto the door, and said that his one word 
Had slain their leader swifter than a sword. 

But for Bellerophon, awhile he stood 
Nigh to the door until his wrathful mood 
Changed into scorn ; and then the moonlight wan 
With kindled light he helped, and then the man 
His spear had reached in strong arms he upraised ; 
But when he saw the eyes that on him gazed 
With dead stare, then he knew the captain's face. 
" Fool," said he, "fear hath brought thee to this case, 
Long hadst thou lived for me — but is this all ? 
Will not the voice of Sthenoboea call 
O'er the green waves to ghosts of lovers dead, 
Ere yet the bridal wreath is on my head ? " 

E'en as he spake he heard the horn once more, 
And then a sound as if on a low shore 
The sea were breaking, then a swelling shout 
That louder grew, till his own name leapt out 
From midst of it, and then he smiled and cried : 

" Prcetus, thy casket held a goodly bride, 
A noble realm for me ! O love, I come ; 
Surely thine heart has won me a fair home, 
Instead of that straight house I should have had 
If these eyes had not made thy dear heart glad." 

Therewith he sheathed his sword, and stepping o'er 
His cumbered threshold, made for the great door, 
Whither the wakened house now thronging ran : 



324 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Men armed and unarmed, child and ancient man ; 
For death it was to wind that mighty horn, 
But when in dangerous battle it was borne 
By the king's hand. Now nigher as he drew 
Unto the door .he 'gan to see therethrough 
The points of steel tossing amid the light 
Of torches, and the wind of waning night 
Bore sound of many men on it ; but dim 
The pillared hall was yet. Then close to him 
A slim close-mantled woman came and said : 

" Go forth and speak — we twain are not yet dead. 
I think we shall not die at all, dear heart ; 
Farewell ! " 

His soul and body seemed to part, 
As swiftly, shadow-like, she passed him by, 
And toward her chamber went : unwittingly 
He gained the great door's platform, and looked down 
Upon the tumult of the gathering town. 
While at his back a dark mass clustered now, 
With helmet on the head, and spear and bow ; 
So, gathering earthly thoughts, he stood and cried : 

" What will ye, good men, that ye make this tide 
More noisy than the day ? What will ye do ? " 
Speak out, that we may rest, some one of you ! " 

Then stood a man forth, clad in armor bright, 
And cried aloud : " O, well betide the night 
That hides thee not from us, Bellerophon ! 
Surely we deemed some horror had been done, 
And deemed the gods had ta'en thee from our hands ; 



BBLLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 325 

Because the horn, the terror of far lands, 
The gift of Neptune, did we seem to hear." 

Then said the hero : " Ah, then all the fear 
The beast divine brought with it is not gone ! 
Masters, ye dreamed belike — nor dreamed alone 
Strange dreams ; for I dreamed too, — that all-armed men 
Beset my door to take my life ; and when 
I went therefrom e'en now, why yet I dreamed 
E'en as I went upright — because meseemed 
Over my threshold lay a man new slain. 
Be merry, O my masters ; go again 
Unto your well-hung beds ; to-morrow comes, 
Whereon ye praise the gods for your saved homes 
With great rejoicings, and raise hands for me 
And my beloved midst your festivity." 

He ceased, and a great shout the twilight rent, 
And one by one unto their homes they went 

Then turned the Prince unto the palace band, 
And saw a certain one on his right hand, 
Making as he would speak, and knew him straight 
To be the man who had the heart to wait 
The beast now slain. Smiling on him, he said : 
" What, hast thou dreamed the monster was not dead ? 
Good is it that the grain is gathered in, 
Else should men dream that they the crop did win 
Last week, and let it stand afield to rot ! " 

" Nay," said the man, " O master, I dreamed not ; 
But from yon flanking tower, waking, I saw 
A shadowy figure toward the great horn draw, 






326 THE EARTH Lr PARADISE. 

And blow a blast thereon, then vanish quite, 
Not like a mortal thing, into the night." 

Then spake a gray old man : " Yea, think thereon 
As of a portent, O Bellerophon, 
Of wondrous things to come, that thou shalt see, 
As showing forth how great thy days shall be ; 
For doubt not this was Pallas, who would show 
How great a gift she gives the city now." 

Again from these there rang a joyous shout ; 
But the Prince hung his head, as if in doubt 
Of the new time with hidden lies begun. 
At last he said : 

" Go, friends, ere yet the sun 
Has slain the stars outright ; what things soe'er 
May hap, the gods will have of me good care, 
This night at least ! " 

So through the house they went 
Each to his place, when nigh the night was spent. 
But when to his own door Bellerophon 
Was come, the captain's body was clean gone, 
And the drugged men were waking. Then he thought, 
" Was it a dream, indeed, that these things brought 
Before mine eyes ? Nay, my lips tremble yet 
With that sweet touch. My breast may more forget 
This hauberk's weight, than that sweet clinging hand. 
I dreamed not, and this haunted Lycian land 
Holds for me good and evil infinite. 
So be it, and the new returning light 
Shall bring new rede to guard my troubled ways. 
May the gods give beginning of good days ! " 



BELLEROPHON IN LYCIA. 327 

Then on the bed he sat to think of her, 
But ere the end of the gray time was there 
His head had fallen aside ; sleeping he lay, 
And let the. bright sun bring about the day. 



TTE woke at last, and fresh and joyous felt, 

■*■-■• As forth he went ; no sword within his belt 

He set that morn ; he bore no biting spear ; 

But clad he was in gold and royal gear, 

Such as a King might bear in Saturn's reign ; 

And in such wise the great hall did he gain, 

And on the ivory throne he sat him down, 

And felt the golden circle of the crown, 

But light as yet, upon his unused head. 

Then to his presence were strange people led : 

Hunters from far-off corners of the realm, 

Shipmen with hands well hardened by the helm, 

Merchants who in strange tongues must bid him thrive, 

And dainty cherished things unto him give : 

And still he wearied, and their words forgot, 

And wondered why the other King came not. 

But yet, before the ending of the morn, 
The casket that his own hands once had borne, 
Was brought unto him by a man, who spake 
In this wise : 

" King Jobates bids thee take, 
O King Bellerophon, what lies herein, 
And saith that since thine office doth begin 



328 THE BARTHL Y PARADISE. 

This day, right good it were to judge of this — 
If the man did so utterly amiss 
To strive to keep his oath. He bids thee say 
Withal if thou wilt have what yesterday 
He gave unto thine hands — and, taking it, 
Forget wild dreams that o'er the year did flit" 

Then King Bellerophon looked down, and drew 
A letter from that casket that he knew, 
And opened it and read ; and in such wise 
It gave the key to half-deemed mysteries. 

King Proetus to Jobates, King of men, 
Sends goodly greeting. — Dost thou mind thee when 
I saved ihee from the Uonst then I had 
One gift from thee which has not made me glad, 
Thy daughter; though a goddess, all men said, 
Had scarce been fairer at my board and bed. — 
Another thing thou gaifst me then, — an oath 
To do my bidding once, if lieve or loath 
It were to thee. Now bring all to an end, 
And slay the man who bears this — once my friend, 
And still too close unto my memory, 
That on my skirts his treacherous blood should lie. 
Take heed, though, that I say, myself, at whiles, 
" The Gods are full of lies and luring smiles, 
A nd know no faith" A nd this Bellerophon 
May be a god; being even such an one 
As seemeth kind beyond the wont of men, 
yust and far-seeing, brave in those times when 
Men's hearts grow sick with fear. Lo, such is he, 
And yet a monster 1 He shall dwell with thee 



BELLBROPHON IN LTCIA. 329 

Life-long, perchance j and once or twice Desire 
Shall burn up all these things, as with a fire j 
And he shall tread his kindness underfoot, 
And turn a liar fen from his hearfs root, 
And turn a wretched fool. Yea, what say It 
Turn a mere trembling coward, loth to die, 
Rather than be all this. So take him, then, 
While yet thou deem'st him first of mortal men, 
And in forefront of battle let him fall j 
Or, lonely, on somefoemari*s spear-swept wall, 
If it may be; — that he may leave behind 
A savor, sweet in some metfs mouths, nor find 
That he has fallen to hell while yet he lives. 

Such counsel to thee, friend, King Proetus gives — 
A hapless man. But happy mayst thou dwell, 
As thou shall keep thy faith. Live hale and well A 

Not clear he saw these latter words of it, 
For many a memory through his heart did flit, 
Blinding his eyes belike : at last his head 
He raised, and to the messenger he said : 

" Say to Jobates that I deem the man 
Did even with his oath as such men can, 
Who fear the gods so much they may not tell 
What gifts men give them. Say that all is well, 
That I will take the gift he gave to me, 
And long right sore that World's Desire to see." 

So the man went, and left Bellerophon 
Pensive, and pondering on the days long gone 



330 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That brought him unto this : his happy love 

The heart within him did to pity move ; 

He thought, " Alas ! and can it ever be 

That one can say, ' Thou art enough for me — 

And I, and I — wilt thou not suffer it, 

That I, at least, before thy feet may sit 

Until perchance I grow enough for thee ? ' 

Alas, alas ! and can it ever be 

That thus a heart shall plead and plead, in vain ? " 

So did he murmur ; but withal a strain 
Of merry music made him lift his head 
Slaying all thought of suffering folk or dead ; 
And even as a man new made a god, 
When first he sets his foot upon the sod 
Of Paradise, and like a living flame 
Joy wraps him round, he felt, as now she came, 
Clear won at last, the thing of all the earth 
That made his fleeting life a little worth. 

My heart faints now, my lips that tell the tale 
Falter to think that such a life should fail ; 
That use, and long days dropping one by one, 
As the wan water frets away the stone, 
Should change desires of men, and what they bring, 
E'en while their hearts with sickening longing cling 
Unto the thought that they are still the same, 
When all they were is grown an empty name. 

O Death-in-life, O sure pursuer, Change, 
Be kind, be kind, and touch me not, till strange, 
Changed too, thy face shows, when thy fellow Death 
Delays no more to freeze my faltering breath ! 



FEBRUARY. 331 



THE dull day long had faded into night 
Ere all was done ; taper and fire-light 
Cast on the walPs fair painted images 
Shadows confused of some, amidst of these, 
The old men on the dais ; down below 
Amid the youths was stir and murmur now ; 
Some said they fain had known a little more 
Of that Bellerophon ere all was o'er ; 
Some said, that if the man lived, sure it was 
That happiness of his would soon o'erpass, 
Because he kept back something of the stake : 
Some said the story back their thoughts did take 
To Argos, and the deeds there, and the end 
Whereto the feet of Sthenoboea did wend 
So surely from the first, not without praise 
Of some, they said : some wondered of the days 
That Prcetus had, and if the godlike man 
And he, who clung to joy as cowards can, 
E'er met again, and what things they forgat 
And what remembered, if it came to that. 

But one youth who had sat alone and sad, 
While others friends and loves beside them had, 
Rose up amid their talk, and slowly turned 
To where the many lights that thereby burned 
Scarce reached, and in that dimness walked awhile ; 
And when he came back, with a quivering smile 
On his sad face, gazed at the elders there, 
As though he deemed his place among them were, 




332 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

Who had nigh done with life ; and one or two 
Among the youths looked up, as if they knew 
The pain that ailed him. 

Many-peopled earth ! 
In foolish anger and in foolish mirth, 
In causeless wars that never had an aim, 
In worshipping the kings that bring thee shame, 
In spreading lies that hide wrath in their breast, 
In breaking up the short-lived days of rest, — 
— In all thy folk care nought for, how they cling 
Each unto each, fostering the foolish thing, 
Nought worth, grown out of nought, that lightly lies 
'Twixt throat and lips, and yet works miseries ! 
While in this love that touches every one, 
Still wilt thou let each man abide alone, 
Unholpen, with his pain unnamable ! 
Is it, perchance, lest men should come to tell 
Each unto other what a pain it is, 
How little balanced by the sullied bliss 
They win for some few minutes of their life, — 
Lest they die out and leave thee void of strife, 
Empty of all their yearning and their fear, 
'Twixt storm and sunshine of thy changing year ? 



FEBRUARY. 333 



T ATE February days ; and now, at last, 

J — ' Might you have thought that winter's woe was 

past; 
So fair the sky was, and so soft the air. 
The happy birds were hurrying here and there, 
As something soon would happen. Reddened now 
The hedges, and in gardens many a bough 
Was overbold of buds. Sweet days, indeed, 
Although past road and bridge, through wood and mead, 
Swift ran the brown stream, swirling by the grass, 
And in the hill-side hollows snow yet was. 

Within sound of the city, yet amid 
Patches of woodland that its white walls hid, 
The house was, where the elders sat this tide, 
The young folk with them ; by the highway-side 
The first starred yellow blossoms of the spring 
Some held in hand ; some came in, hurrying 
From deeper in the woods, and now in fold 
Of skirt and gown its treasures did they hold ; 
And soon to garland-making youth and maid 
Were sat down ; then the Swabian smiled, and said : 

" However it be that I, so old and gray, 
A priest too, yet again must have to say 
More words of Venus, judge ye, maids : in sooth, 
I, wandering once in long-past days of youth, 
Came to the place my tale shall tell of now. 
Vague tales, wherein I was well fain to trow, 




334 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Being dreamy and a youth, I oft had heard 

Thereof, yet somewhat I did grow afeard 

Before that cavern, although not alone 

I was there, and the morn was such an one 

As this fair morn has been : my fellow there 

Was an old forester with thin white hair — 

Lo you, like mine now ! — but his deep-set eyes, 

Bright 'mid his wrinkles, made him seem right wise 

— As I would fain seem, maidens. — Ye may wot 

That many a tale of that place had he got, 

Because nearby, child, boy, and man, had he 

Dwelt ever ; so on a felled oaken tree 

We sat beside the cave's mouth there of old, 

While he this story, that I looked for, told. 



i 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 



ARGUMENT. 

THIS stay tells of a certain man who by strange adventure fell into t 
of Venus, and who, repenting of his life with her, was tain to reti 
world and amend all, but might not ; for his repentance was n 



t afternoon day hung 
■^ *■ Doubtful 'twixt storm and sunshine, and the earth 
Seemed waiting for the clouds to spread, that clung 
About the south-east, ere its morning mirth, 
Ere all the freshness of its hopeful birth, 
Should end in dreadful darkness, and the clash 
Of rain-beat boughs and wildering lightning-flash. 

Such a tide brooded o'er the ancient wood, 
Wild with sour waste and rough untended tree, 
Which, long before the coming of the Rood, 
Men held a holy place in Germany ; 
Yea, and still looked therein strange things to see, 
Still deemed that dark therein was uglier 
Than in all other wilds, more full of fear. 

Grim on that day it was, when the sun shone 
Clear through the thinner boughs, and yet its light 
Seemed threatening ; such great stillness lay upon 



336 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The wide-head oaks, such terror as of night 
Waylaying day, made the sward yet more bright, 
As, blotting out the far-away blue sky, 
The hard and close- packed clouds spread silently. 

Now 'twixt the trees slowly a knight there rode, 
Musing belike ; a seemly man and fair, 
No more a youth, but bearing not the load 
Of many years ; he might have seen the wear 
Of thirty summers : why he journeyed there 
Nought tells the tale, but Walter doth him name, 
And saith that from the Kaiser's court he came. 

Dull enow seemed his thoughts, as on he went 
From tree to tree, with heavy knitted brow, 
And eyes upon the forest grass intent ; 
And oft beneath his breath he muttered low, 
And once looked up and said : " The earth doth grow 
Day after day a wearier place belike ; 
No word for me to speak, no blow to strike : 

" Once I looked not for this and it has come ; 
What shall the end be now I look for worse ? 
Woe worth the dull walls of mine ancient home, 
The ragged fields laid 'neath the ancient curse ! 
Woe worth false Jiope that dead despair doth nurse, 
Woe worth the world's false love and babbling hate — 
O life, vain, grasping, uncompassionate ! " 

He looked around as thus he spake, and saw 
That he amidst his thoughts had ridden to where 
The close wood backward for a space did draw, 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 337 

Leaving a plain of sweet-grown sward all clear, 
Till at the end thereof a cliff rose sheer 
From the green grass, o'er which again arose 
A hill-side clad with fir-trees dark and close. 

Now nigh the cliff a little river ran, 
And bright with sun were hill and mead, although 
Already, far away, the storm began 
To rumble, and the storm-lift moving slow 
Over a full third of the sky to grow, 
Though still within its heart the tumult stayed, 
Content as yet to keep the world afraid. 

There had he drawn rein, and his eyes were set 
Upon a dark place in the sheer rock's side, 
A cavern's mouth ; and some new thought did get 
Place in his heart therewith, and he must bide 
To nurse the thing ; for certes far and wide 
That place was known, and by an evil fame ; 
The Hill of Venus had it got to name. 

And many a tale yet unforgot there was 
Of what a devilish world, dream-like, but true, 
Would snare the o'er-rash man whose feet should pass 
That cavern's mouth : old folk would say they knew 
Of men who risked it ; nor came back to rue 
The losing of their souls ; and others told 
Of how they watched, when they were young and bold, 

Midsummer night through : yea, and not in vain ; 
For on the stream's banks, and the flowery mead, 
Sights had they seen they might not tell again ; 

15 



338 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And in their hearts that night had sown the seed 
Of many a wild desire and desperate need ; 
So that, with longings nought could satisfy, 
Their lives were saddened till they came to die. 

For all the stories were at one in this : 
That still they told of a trap baited well 
With some first minutes of unheard-of bliss ; 
Then, these grasped greedily, the poor fool fell 
To earthly misery, or no doubtful hell. 
Yet, as these 'stories flitted by all dim, 
The knight's face softened, sweet they seemed to him. 

He muttered : " Yea, the end is hell and death, 
The midmost hid, yet the beginning Love. 
Ah me ! despite the worst Love threateneth, 
Still would I cling on to the skirts thereof, 
If I could hope his sadness still could move 

My heart for evermore. A little taste 

Of the King's banquet, then all bare and waste 

" My table is ; fresh guests are hurrying in 
With eager eyes, there to abide their turn, 
That they more hunger therewithal may win ! 
Ah me ! what skill for dying love to yearn ? 
Yet, O my yearning ! though my heart should burn 
Into light feathery ash, blown here and there, 
After one minute of that odorous flare." 

With that once more he hung his head adown ; 
The name of Love such thoughts in him had stirred, 
That somewhat sweet his life to him was grown, 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 339 

And like soft sighs his breathing now he heard ; 

His heart beat like a lover's heart afeard ; 

Of such fair women as he erst had seen, 

The names he named, and thought what each had been. 

Yet, as he told them over one by one, 
But dimly might he see their forms, and still 
Some lack, some coldness, cursed them all, and none 
The void within his straining heart might fill ; 
For evermore, as if against his will, 
Words of old stories, turned to images 
Of lovelier things, would blur the sight of these. 

Long dwelt he in such musings, though his beast 
From out his hand had plucked the bridle-rein, 
And, wandering slowly onward, now did feast 
Upon the short sweet herbage of the plain ; 
So when the knight raised up his eyes again, 
Behind his back the dark of the oakwood lay, 
And nigh unto its end was grown the day. 

He gazed round toward the west first, and the stream, 
Where all was bright and sunny, nor would he 
Have deemed himself deep fallen into a dream 
If he had seen the grass swept daintily 
By raiment that in old days used to be ; 
When white 'neath Pallas' smile and Juno's frown 
Gleamed Venus from the gold slow slipping down. 

But void was all the meadow's beauty now, 
And to the east he turned round with a sigh, 
And saw the hard lift blacker and blacker grow 



340 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

'Neath the world's silence, as the storm drew nigh ; 

And to his heart there went home suddenly 

A sting of bitter hatred and despair, 

That these things, his own heart had made so fair, 

He might not have ; and even as he gazed, 
And the air grew more stifling yet and still, 
Down in the east a crooked red line blazed, 
And soon the thunder the eve's hush did fill, 
Low yet, but strong, persistent as God's will. 
He cried aloud : " A world made to be lost, — 
A bitter life 'twixt pain and nothing tossed ! " 

And therewithal he stooped and caught the rein, 
And turned his horse about till he did face 
The cavern in the hill, and said : " Ah, vain 
My yearning for enduring bliss of days 
Amidst the dull world's hopeless, hurrying race, 
Where the past gain each new gain makes a loss, 
And yesterday's gold love to-day makes dross ! " 

And as he spake, slowly his horse 'gan move 
Unto the hill : " To-morrow and to-day, 
Why should I name you, so I once hold Love 
(Mose to my heart ? If others fell away, 
That was because within their souls yet lay 
Some hope, some thought of making peace at last 
With the false world, when all their love was passed." 

But strangely light therewith his heart did grow, 
He knew not why ; and yet again he said : 
" A wondrous thing that I this day must trow 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 341 

In tales that poets and old wives have made ! 
Time was when duly all these things I weighed. 
Yet, my heart — what sweetens the dull air ? 
What is this growing hope, so fresh and fair ? " 

Then therewithal louder the thunder rolled, 
And the world darkened, for the sun was down ; 
A fitful wind 'gan flicker o'er the wold, 
And in scared wise the woods began to moan, 
And fast the black clouds all the sky did drown ; 
But his eyes glittered, — a strange smile did gleam 
Across his face, as in a happy dream. 

Again he cried : " Thou callest me ; I come ; 
I come, O lovely one ! Oh, thou art nigh ; 
Like a sweet scent, the nearness of thine home 
Is shed around ; it lighteth up God's sky — 
O me, thy glory ! " Therewith suddenly 
The lightning streamed across the gathering night, 
And his horse swerved aside in wild affright 

He heeded not except to spur him on ; 
He drew his sword as if he saw a foe, 
And rode on madly till the stream he won, 
And, even as the storm-wind loud 'gan blow, 
And the great drops fell pattering, no more slow, 
Dashed through the stream and up the other bank, 
And leaped to earth amid his armor's clank, 

And faced the wild white rain, and the wind's roar, 
The swift wide dazzling lightning strange of hue, 
The griding thunder, saying : " No more, no more, 



342 THE EAR THL Y PARADISE. 

Helpless and cruel, do I deal with you, 
Or heed the things the false world calleth true. 
Surely mine eyes in spite of you behold 
The perfect peace Love's loving arms enfold." 

Then, whirling o'er his head his glittering sword, 
Into the night he cast it far away ; 
And turning round, without another word 
Left the wild tumult of the ruined day, 
And into the darkness that before him lay 
Rushed blindly, while the cold rain-bearing wind 
Wailed after him, and the storm clashed behind. 

A few steps through black darkness did he go, 
Then turned and stayed, and with his arms outspread 
Stood tottering there a little while, as though 
He fain would yet turn back ; some words he said 
If the storm heard, then fell, and as one dead 
Lay long, not moving, noting not how soon 
Above the dripping boughs outshone the moon. 



TTE woke up with the tears upon his cheek, 
■*-■*■- As though awakened from some dream of love, 
And as his senses cleared felt strange and weak, 
And would not open eyes or try to move, 
Since he felt happy and yet feared to prove 
His new-born bliss, lest it should fade from him 
E'en as in waking grows the love-dream dim. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 343 

A half hush was there round about, as though 
Beast, bird, and creeping thing went each their ways, 
Yet needs must keep their voices hushed and low, 
For worship of the sweet love-laden days. 
Most heavenly odors floated through the place, 
Whate'er it was, wherein his body lay, 
And soft the air was as of deathless May. 

At last he rose with eyes fixed on the ground, 
And therewithal his armor's clinking seemed 
An overloud and clean unlooked-for sound : 
He trembled ; even yet perchance he dreamed, 
Though strange hope o'er his wondering heart there 

streamed ; 
He looked up ; in the thickest of a wood 
Of trees fair-blossomed, heavy-leaved, he stood. 

He turned about and looked ; some memory 
Of time late past, of dull and craving pain, 
Made him yet look the cavern's mouth to see 
Anigh behind him : but he gazed in vain, 
For there he stood, as a man born again, 
'Mid a close break of eglantine and rose, 
With no deed now to cast aside or choose. 

Yet, as a man new-born at first may hear 
A murmur in his ears of life gone by, 
Then in a flash may see his past days clear, 
The pain, the pleasure, and the strife, all nigh, 
And stripped of every softening veil and lie, — 
So did he hear, and see, and vainly strive 
In one short minute all that life to live. 



344 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But even while he strove, as strong as sleep, 
As swift as death, came deep forgetfulness, 
Came fresh desire unnamed ; his heart did leap 
With a fresh hope, a fresh fear did oppress 
The new delight, that else cried out to bless 
The unchanging softness of that unknown air, 
And the sweet tangle round about him there. 

Trembling, and thinking strange things to behold, 
The interwoven boughs aside he drew, 
And softly, as though sleep the world did hold, 
And he should not awake it, passed them through 
Into a freer space ; yet nought he knew 
Why he was thither come, or where to turn, 
Or why the heart within him so did burn. 

Then through the wood he went on, and for long 
Heard but the murmur of the prisoned breeze, 
Or overhead the wandering wood-dove's song ; 
But whiles amid the dusk of far-off trees 
He deemed he saw swift-flitting images, 
That made him strive in vain to call to mind 
Old stories of the days now left behind. 

Slowly he went, and ever looking round 
With doubtful eyes, until he heard at last 
Across the fitful murmur of dumb sound, 
Far-off and faint the sound of singing cast 
Upon the lonely air ; the sound went past, 
And on the moaning wind died soft away, 
But, as far thunder startles new-born day, 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 3, 

So was his dream astonied therewithal, 
And his lips strove with some forgotten name, 
And on his heart strange discontent did fall, 
And wild desire o'ersweet therefrom did flame ; 
And then again adown the wind there came 
That sound grown louder ; then his feet he stayed 
And listened eager, joyous, and afraid. 

Again it died away, and rose again, 
And sank and swelled, and sweeter and stronger grew, 
Wrapping his heart in waves of joy and pain, 
Until at last so near his ears it drew 
That very words amid its notes he knew, 
And stretched his arms abroad to meet the bliss, 
Unnamed indeed as yet, but surely his. 



Song. 

Before our lady came on earth 
Little there was of joy or mirth j 
About the borders of the sea 
The sea-folk wandered heavily j 
About the wintry river side 
The weary fishers would abide. 

Alone within the weaving-room 
The girls would sit before the loom, 
And sing no song, and play no filay; 
Alone from dawn to hot mid-day, 
From mid-day unto evening, 
The men afield would work, nor sing, 



346 THE BARTHLr PARADISE. 

*Mid weary thoughts of man and God, 
Before thy feet the wet ways trod. 

Unkissed the merchant bore his care, 
Unkissed the knights went out to war, 
Unkissed the mariner came home, 
Unkissed the minstrel men did roam. 

Or in the stream the maids would stare, 
Nor know why they were made so fair ; 
Their yellow locks, their bosoms white, 
Their limbs well-wrought for all delight, 
Seemed foolish things that waited death, 
As hopeless as the flowers beneath 
The weariness of unkissed feet : 
No life was bitter then, or sweet. 

Therefore, O Venus, well may we 
Praise the green ridges of the sea 
O'er which, upon a happy day, 
Thou earnest to take our shame away. 
Well may we praise the curdling foam 
Amidst the which thy feet did bloom, 
Flowers of the gods ; the yellow sand 
They kissed atwixt the sea and land; 
The bee-beset ripe- seeded grass 
Through which thy fine limbs first did pass; 
The purple-dusted butterfly 
First blown against thy quivering thigh; 
The first red rose that touched thy side, 
And over-blown and fainting died ; 
The flickering of the orange shade, 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 347 

Where first in sleep thy limbs were laid; 
The happy da/'S sweet life and death. 
Whose air first caught thy balmy breath — 
Yea, all these things well praised may be, 
But with what words shall we praise thee — 
O Venus, O thou love alive, 
Born to give peace to souls that strive? 



Louder the song had grown to its last word, 
And with its growth grew odors strange and sweet, 
And therewithal a rustling noise he heard, 
As though soft raiment the soft air did meet, 
And through the wood the sound of many feet, 
Until its dusk was peopled with a throng 
Of fair folk fallen silent after song. 

Softly they flowed across his glimmering way, 
Young men and girls thin-clad and garlanded, 
Too full of love a word of speech to say 
Except in song ; head leaning unto head, 
As in a field the poppies white and red ; 
Hand warm with hand, as faint wild rose with rose, 
'Mid still abundance of a summer close. 

Softly they passed, and if not swiftly, still 
So many, and in such a gliding wise, 
That, though their beauty all his heart did fill 
With hope and eagerness, scarce might his eyes, 
Caught in the tangle of their first surprise, 
Note 'mid the throng fair face, or form or limb, 
Ere all amid the far dusk had grown dim. 



348 TH$ EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Awhile, indeed, the wood might seem more sweet, 
That there had been the passionate eyes of them 
Wandering from tree to tree loved eyes to meet ; 
That o'er-blown flower, or heavy-laden stem 
Lay scattered, languid 'neath the delicate hem 
That kissed the feet moving with love's unrest, 
Though love was nigh them, to some dreamed-of best 

A little while, then on his way he went, 
With all that company now quite forgot, 
But unforgot the name their lips had sent 
Adown the wave of song ; his heart waxed hot 
With a new thought of life, remembered not, 
Save as a waste passed through with loathing sore 
Unto a life, which, if he gained no more 

Than this desire, lonely, unsatisfied, 
This name of one unknown, unseen, was bliss ; 
And if this strange world were not all too wide, 
But he some day might touch her hand with his, 
And turn away from that lingranted kiss 
Not all unpitied, nor unhappy quite, 
What better knew the lost world of delight ? 

Now, while he thought these things, and had small 
heed 
Of what was round him, changed the place was grown 
Like to a tree-set garden, that no weed, 
Nor winter, or decay had ever known ; 
No longer now complained the dove alone 
Over his head, but with unwearying voice 
'Twixt leaf and blossom did the birds rejoice. v 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 349 

No longer strove the sun and wind in vain 
To reach the earth, but bright and fresh they played 
About the flowers of a wide-stretching plain, 
Where 'twixt the soft sun and the flickering shade 
There went a many wild things, unafraid 
Each of the other or of the wanderer, 
Yea, even when his bright arms drew anear. 

And through the plain a little stream there wound, 
And far o'er all there rose up mountains gray, 
That never so much did the place surround, 
But ever through their midmost seemed a way 
To whatsoe'er of lovely through them lay. 
But still no folk saw Walter ; nay, nor knew 
If those were dreams who passed the wild wood through. 

But on he passed, and now his dream to prove 
Plucked down an odorous fruit from overhead, 
Opened its purple heart and ate thereof; 
Then, where a path of wondrous blossoms led, 
Beset with lilies and with roses red, 
Went to the stream, and felt its ripples cold, 
As through a shallow, strewn with very gold 

For pebbles, slow he waded : still no stay 
He made, but wandered toward the hills ; no fear 
And scarce a pain upon his heart did weigh ; 
Only a longing made his life more dear, 
A longing for a joy that drew anear ; 
And well-nigh now his heart seemed satisfied, 
So only in one place he should not bide. 



350 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

And so he ever wandered on and on, 
Till clearer grew the pass 'twixt hill and hill ; 
Lengthened the shadows, sank adown the sun, 
As though in that dull world he journeyed still 
Where all day long men labor, night to fill 
With dreams of toil and trouble, and arise 
To find the daylight cold to hopeless eyes. 

Some vague thought of that world was in his heart, 
As, meeting sunset and gray moonrise there, 
He came unto the strait vale that did part 
Hill-side from hill-side ; through the golden air, 
Far off, there lay another valley fair ; 
Red with the sunset ran the little stream — 
Ah me ! in such a place, amid a dream, 

Two sundered lovers, each of each forgiven, 
All things known, all things past away, might meet. 
Such place, such time, as the one dream of heaven, 
Midst a vain life of nought. — With faltering feet 
He stayed awhile, for all grew over sweet ; 
He hid his eyes, lest day should come again 
As in such dream, and make all blank and vain. 

He trembled as the wind came up the pass, — 
Was it long time 'twixt breath and breath thereof? 
Did the shade creep slow o'er the flower-strewn grass ? 
Was it a long time that he might not move, 
Lest morn should bring the world and slay his love ? 
Surely the sun had set, the stream was still, 
The wind had sunk adown behind the hill. — 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 351 

Nay, through his fingers the red sun did gleam, 
In cadence with his heart's swift beating now 
Beat the fresh wind, and fell adown the stream. 
Then from his eyes his hands fell, and e'en so 
The blissful knowledge on his soul did grow 
That she was there, her speech as his speech, stilled 
By very love, with love of him fulfilled. 

O closet O close there, in the hilPs gray shade 
She stood before him, with her wondrous eyes 
Fixed full on his ! All thought in him did fade 
Into the bliss that knoweth not surprise, 
Into the life that hath no memories, 
No hope and fear ; the life of all desire, 
Whose fear is death, whose hope consuming fire. 

Naked, alone, unsmiling, there she stood, 
No cloud to raise her from the earth ; her feet 
Touching the grass that his touched, and her blood 
Throbbing as his throbbed through her bosom sweet ; 
Both hands held out a little, as to meet 
His outstretched hands ; her lips each touching each ; 
Praying for love of him, but without speech. 

He fell not and he knelt not ; life was strong 
Within him at that moment ; well he thought 
That he should never die ; all shame and wrong, 
Time past and time to come, were all made nought ; 
As, springing forward, both her hands he caught ; 
And, even as the King of Love* might kiss, 
Felt her smooth cheek and pressed her lips with his. 



352 THE BARTHLT PARADISE. 

What matter by what name of heaven or earth 
Men called his love ? Breathing and loving there 
She stood, and clung to him ; one love had birth 
In their two hearts — he said — all things were fair, 
Although no sunlight warmed the fresh gray air 
As their lips sundered. Hand in hand they turned 
From where no more the yellow blossoms burned. 

Louder the stream was, fallen dead was the wind, 
As up the vale they went into the night, 
No rest but rest of utter love to find 
Amid the marvel of new-born delight, 
And as her feet brushed through the dew, made white 
By the high moon, he cried : " For this, for this 
God made the world, that I might feel thy kiss ! " 



TTTHAT, is the tale not ended then ? Woe's me ! 
* * How many tales on earth have such an end : 
' I longed, I found, I lived long happily, 
And fearless in death's fellowship did wend ' ? 
— On earth, — where hope is that two souls may blend 

That God has made but she — who made her then 

To be a curse unto the sons of men ? 

And yet a flawless life indeed that seemed 
For a long while : as flowers, hot made to die 
Or sin, they were : no dream was ever dreamed, 
How short soe'er, wherein more utterly 
Was fear forgot or weariness worn by ; 
Wherein less thought of the world's woe and shame, 
Of men's vain struggles, o'er the sweet rest came. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 353 

• 

Men say he grew exceeding wise in love, 
That all the beauty that the earth had known, 
At least in seeming, would come back, and move 
Betwixt the buds and blossoms overblown ; 
Till, turning round to that which was his own, 
Blind would he grow with ecstasy of bliss, 
And find unhoped-for joy in each new kiss. 

Men say that every dear voice love has made 
Throughout that love-filled loneliness would floaty 
And make the roses tremble in the shade 
With unexpected sweetness of its note ; 
Till he would turn unto her quivering throat, 
And, deaf belike, would feel the wave of sound 
From out her lips change all the air around. 

Men say he saw the lovers of old time ; 
That Orpheus led in his Eurydice, 
Crooning o'er snatches of forgotten rhyme, 
That once had striven against eternity, 
And only failed, as all love fails, to see 
Desire grow into perfect joy, to make 
A lonely heaven for one beloved's sake. 

Thisbe he saw, her wide white bosom bare ; 
Thereon instead of blood the mulberries' stain ; 
And single-hearted Pyramus anear 
Held in his hand tufts of the lion's mane, 
And the gray blade that stilled their longings vain 
Smote down the daisies. — Changeless earth and old, 
Surely thy heart amid thy flowers is cold ! 



354 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Helen he saw move slow across the sward, 
Until before the feet of her she stood 
Who gave her, a bright bane and sad reward, 
Unto the Paris that her hand yet wooed : 
Trembled her lips now, and the shame-stirred blood 
Flushed her smooth cheek ; but hard he gazed, and 

yearned 
Unto the torch that Troy and him had burned. 

Then Ariadne came, her raiment wet 
From out the sea ; to her a prison wall, 
A highway to the love she could not get. 
Then upon Phyllis* ivory cheeks did fall 
The almond-blossoms. Then, black-haired and tall, 
Came Dido, with her slender fingers laid 
On the thin edge of that so bitter blade. 

Then, what had happed ? was the sun darker now ? 
Had the flowers shrunk, the warm breeze grown a-chill ? 
It might be ; but his love therewith did grow, 
And all his aching heart it seemed to fill 
With such desire as knows no chain nor will : 
Shoulder to shoulder quivering there they lay, 
In a changed world that had not night nor day. 

A loveless waste of ages seemed to part, 
And through the cloven dulness Brynhild came, 
Her left hand on the fire that was her heart, 
That paled her cheeks and through her eyes did flame, 
Her right hand holding Sigurd's ; for no shame 
Was in his simple eyes, that saw the worth 
So clearly now of all the perished earth. 



THE HILL OF VENUS, 355 

Then suddenly outbroke the thrushes' sound, 
The air grew fresh as after mid-spring showers, 
And on the waves of soft wind flowing round 
Came scent of apple-bloom and gilliflowers, 
And all the world seemed in its morning hours, 
•And soft and dear were kisses, and the sight 
Of eyes, and hands, and lips, and bosom white. 

Yea, the earth seemed a-babbling of these twain, 
Tristram and Yseult, as they lingered there, 
All their life days now nothing but a gain ; 
While death itself, wrapped in love's arms, must bear 
Some blossom grown from depths of all despair, 
Some clinging, sweetest, bitterest kiss of all, 
Before the dark upon their heads should fall 

Others he saw, whose names could tell him nought 
Of any tale they might have sorrowed through ; 
But their lips spake, when of their lives he sought, 
And many a story from their hearts he drew, 
Some sweet as any that old poets knew, 
Some terrible as death, some strange and wild 
As any dream that hath sad night beguiled. 

But all with one accord, what else they said, 
Would praise with eager words the Queen of Love ; 
Yet sometimes, while they spake, as if with dread, 
Would look askance adown the blossomed grove ; 
Till a strange pain within his heart would move, 
And he would cling to her enfolding arm, 
Trembling with joy to find her breast yet warm. 



356 THE BARTHLT PARADISE. 

Then a great longing would there stir in him, 
That all those kisses might not satisfy ; 
Dreams never dreamed before would gather dim 
About his eyes, and trembling would he cry 
To tell him how it was he should not die ; 
To tell him how it was that he alone 
Should have a love all perfect and his own. 

Ah me ! with softest words her lips could make, 
With touches worth a lifetime of delight, 
Then would she soothe him, and his hand would take, 
And lead him through all places fresh and bright, 
And show him greater marvels of her might, 
Till midst of smiles and joy he clean forgot 
That she his passionate cry had answered not 

Forgot to-day, and many days maybe : 
Yet many days such questions came again, 
And he would ask : " How do I better thee, 
Who never knewst a sorrow or a pain ? 
Folk on the earth fear they may love in vain, 
Ere first they see the love in answering eyes, 
And still from day to day fresh fear doth rise." 

Unanswered and forgot ! — forgot to-day, 
Because too close they clung for sight or sound ; 
But yet to-morrow : — " Changeless love, O say 
Why, since love's grief on earth doth so abound, 
No heart my heart that loveth so ere found 
That needed me ? — for wilt thou say indeed 
That thou, O perfect one, of me hast need ? n 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 357 

— Unanswered and forgot a little while ; — 
Asked and unanswered many a time and oft ; 
Till something gleamed from out that marvellous smile, 
And something moved within that bosom soft, 
As though the God of Love had turned and scofFed 
His worshipper, before his feet cast down 
To tell of all things for his sake o'erthrown. 

How many questions asked, nor answered aught ? 
How many longings met still by that same 
Sweet face, by anguish never yet distraught, 
Those limbs ne'er marred by any fear or shame ? 
How many times that dear rest o'er him came — 
And faded 'mid the fear that nought she knew 
What bitter seed within his bosom grew ? 

'Twixt lessening joy and gathering fear, grew thin 
That lovely dream, and glimmered now through it 
Gleams of the world cleft from him by his sin ; 
Hell's flames withal, heaven's glory, 'gan to flit 
Athwart his eyes sometimes, as he did sit 
Beside the Queen, in sleep's soft image laid ; 
And yet awhile the dreadful dawn was stayed. 

And in that while two thoughts there stirred in him, 
And this the first : " Am I the only one 
Whose eyes thy glorious kisses have made dim ? 
And what then with the others hast thou done ? 
Where is the sweetness of their sick love gone ? " 
— Ah me ! her lips upon his lips were laid, 
And yet awhile the dreadful dawn was stayed. 



358 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

And in that while the second thought was this : 
"And if, wrapped in her love, I linger here 
Till God's last justice endeth all our bliss, 
Shall my eyes then, by hopeless pain made clear, 
See that a vile dream my vain life held dear, 
And I am lone ? " — Ah, cheek to his cheek laid ! 
And yet awhile the dreadful dawn was stayed. 

How long who knoweth ? — and be sure meanwhile 
That could man's heart imagine, man's tongue say, 
The strange delights that did his heart beguile 
Within that marvellous place from day to day, 
Whoso might hearken should cast clean away 
All thought of sin and shame, and laugh to scorn 
The fear and hope of that delaying morn. 

But the third thought at last, unnamed for long, 
Bloomed, a weak flower of hope within his heart ; 
And by its side unrest grew bitter strong, 
And, though his lips said not the word, " Depart ; " 
Yet would he murmur : " Hopeless fair thou art ! 
Is there no love amid earth's sorrowing folk ? " 
So glared the dreadful dawn — and thus it broke. — 

For on a night, amid the lily and rose, 
Peaceful he woke from dreams of days bygone ; 
Peaceful at first ; and, seeing her lying close 
Beside him, had no memory of deeds done 
Since long before that eve he rode alone 
Amidst the wild wood ; still awhile him seemed 
That of that fair close, those white limbs he dreamed. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 359 

So there for long he lay in happy rest, 
As one too full of peace to wish to wake 
From dreams he knows are dreams. Upon her breast 
The soft wind did the dewy rose-leaves shake ; 
From out a gleaming cloud the moon did break ; 
Till, 'mid her balmy sleep, toward him she turned, 
And into his soul her touch his baseness burned. 

Then fled all peace, as in a blaze of flame 
Rushed dreadful memory back ; and therewithal, 
Amid the thoughts that crowding o'er him came, 
Clear vision of the end on him did fell ; 
Rose up against him a great fiery wall, 
Built of vain longing and regret and fear, 
Dull empty loneliness, and blank despair. 

A little space in stony dread he lay, 
Till something of a wretched hope at last 
Amidst his tangled misery drave its way. 
Slowly he rose, and, cold with terror, passed 
Through blossomed boughs, whose leaves, upon him cast 
As he brushed by, seemed full of life and sound, 
Though noiselessly they fell upon the ground. 

But soon he fled fast : and his goal he knew ; 
For each day's life once burdened with delight 
Rose clear before him, as he hurried through 
That lonely hell the gray moon yet made bright ; 
And midst them he remembered such a night 
Of his first days there, when, hand locked in hand, 
Sleepless with love, they wandered through the land ; 



36o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And how, as thus they went, and as he thought 
If he might still remember all her speech, 
Whatso fresh pleasure to him might be brought, 
A grove of windless myrtles they did reach, 
So dark, that closer they clung each to each, 
As children might ; and how, the grove nigh done, 
They came upon a cliff of smooth gray stone ; 

And how, because the moon shone thereabout 
Betwixt the boughs grown thinner, he could see, 
Gazing along her smooth white arm stretched out^ 
A cavern 'mid the cliff gape gloomily ; 
And how she said : " Hither I guided thee, 
To show thee the dark danger and the death, 
But if thou have heed, of thy love and faith." 

Ah me ! the memory of the sunrise sweet 
After that warning little understood, 
When stole the golden sun unto her feet, 
As she lay sleeping by the myrtle- wood, 
Watched by his sleepless longing ! — " O how good 
Those days were ! fool, go back, go back again, 
Shalt thou have lived and wilt thou die in vain ? " 

So cried he, knowing well now what it meant, 
That long-passed warning ; that there gaped the gate 
Whereby lost souls back to the cold earth went : 
Then through his soul there swept a rush of hate 
'Gainst hope, that came so cruel and so late 
To drive him forth from all the joys he knew, 
Yet scarcely whispering why or whereunto. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 361 

Therewith he stayed : midst a bright mead he was, 
Whose flowers across her feet full oft had met 
While he beheld ; a babbling stream did pass 
Unto the flowery close that held her yet. 
— O bliss-grown woe that he might ne'er forget ! 
But how shall he go back, just, e'en as now, 
Oft o'er again that bliss from him to throw ? 

He cried aloud with rage and misery, 
But once again gat onward through the night ; 
Nought met him but the wind as he drew nigh 
That myrtle-grove, black 'gainst the meadow bright ; 
Nought followed but the ghost of dead delight ; 
The boughs closed round him as still on he sped, 
Half deeming that the world and he were dead. 

But when he came unto the open space, 
Gray with the glimmer of the moon, he stayed 
Breathless, and turned his white and quivering face 
Back toward the spot where he had left her, laid 
Beneath the rose-boughs by their flowers down-weighed, 
As if he looked e'en yet to see her come, 
And lead him back unto her changeless home. 

Nought saw he but the black boughs, and he cried : 

" No sign, no sign for all thy kisses past ! 

For all thy soft speech that hath lied and lied ! 

No help, no cry to come back ! — Ah, at last 

I know that no real love from me I cast ; 

Nought but a dream ; and that God knoweth too ; 

And no great gift He deems this deed I do. 

16 



362 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

"Ome! if thou across the night wouldst cry, 
If through this dusky twilight of the moon 
Thou wouldst glide past and sob a-going by, 
Then would I turn and ask no greater boon 
Of God, than here with thee to dwell alone, 
And wait His day ! — but now, behold, I flee, 
Lest thy kissed lips should speak but mocks to me ! 

" But now I flee, lest God should leave us twain 
Forgotten here when earth has passed away, 
Nor think us worthy of more hell or pain 
Than such a never-ending, hopeless day ! — 
No sign yet breaketh through the glimmering gray ! 
Nought have I, God, for thee to take or leave, 
Unless this last faint hope thou wilt receive ! " 

And with that word he rushed into the cave. 
But when the depths of its chill dark he gained, 
Turning he saw without the black boughs wave ; — 
— And oh, amidst them swayed her form unstained ! 
But as he moved to meet her, all things waned : 
A void unfathomed caught him as he fell 
Into a night whereof no tongue can tell. 



TNTO bright sun he woke up suddenly, 
■*- And sprang up like a man with foes beset 
Amidst of sleep ; and crying an old cry 
Learned in the tilt-yard, blind and tottering yet, 
He stretched his hand out, that a tree-trunk met, 
Dank with the dew of morn, and through his blood 
A shiver ran, as hapless there he stood. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 363 

Until, though scarce remembering aught at all, 
Clearly he saw the world and where he was ; 
For as he gazed around, his eyes did fall 
Upon a tree-encompassed plain of grass, 
Through which anigh him did a fair stream pass. 
He stood and looked, nor a long while did dare 
To turn and see what lay behind him there. 

At last he did turn, and the cave's mouth, black, 
Threatening, and dreadful, close to him did see, 
And thither now his first thought drove him back ; 
A blind hope mingled with the misery 
That 'gan to close about him ; and yet he 
Had no will left to move his feet thereto. 
Yea, vague that passed joy seemed — yea, hardly true. 

Again he looked about : the sun was bright, 
And leafless were the trees of that lone place, 
Last seen by him amid the storm's wild light ; 
He passed his hand across his haggard face, 
And touched his brow ; and therefrom did he raise, 
Unwittingly, a strange-wrought golden crown^ 
Mingled with roses, faded now and brown. 

The cold March wind across his raiment ran 
As his hand dropped, and the crown fell to earth ; 
An icy shiver caught the wretched man 
As he beheld his raiment of such worth 
For gems, that in strange places had their birth, 
But frail as is the dragon-fly's fair wing 
That down the July stream goes flickering. 



364 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Cold to the very bone, in that array 
He hugged himself against the biting wind, 
And toward the stream went slow upon his way ; 
Nor yet amidst the mazes of his mind 
The whole tale of his misery might he find, 
Though well he knew he was come back again 
Unto a lost world fresh fulfilled of pain. 

But ere he reached the rippling stony ford, 
His right foot smote on something in the grass, 
And, looking down, he saw a goodly sword, 
Though rusted, tangled in the weeds it was ; 
Then to his heart did better memory pass, 
And in one flash he saw that bygone night, 
Big with its sudden hopes of strange delight 

For, lo you, now his blanched and unused hand 
Clutched the spoiled grip of his once trusty blade ! 
There, holding it point downward, did he stand, 
Until he heard a cry, and from a glade 
He saw a man come toward him ; sore afraid 
Of that new face he was, as a lone child 
Of footsteps on a midnight road and wild. 

There he stood still, and watched the man draw near ; 
A forester, who, gazing on him now, 
Seemed for his part stayed by some sudden fear 
That made him fit a shaft unto his bow, 
As his scared heart wild tales to him did show 
About that haunted hill-side and the cave, 
And scarce he thought by flight his soul to save. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 365 

Now when he saw that, out into the stream 
The knight strode, with a great and evil cry, 
Since all men suddenly his foes did seem : 
Then quailed the man, yet withal timidly 
His bowstring drew, and close the shaft did fly 
To Walter's ear, but the carle turned and fled, 
E'en as he drew the bowstring to his head. 

But the knight reached the other side, and stood 
Staring with hopeless eyes through that cold day ; 
And nothing that he now might do seemed good : 
Then muttered he : " Why did I flee away ? 
My .tears are frozen, and I cannot pray ; 
Nought have I, God, for thee to take or leave, 
Unless that last faint hope thou didst receive." 

But as he spake these words unwittingly, 
He moaned ; for once again the moonlit place 
Where last he said them did he seem to see, 
And in his heart such longing did that raise, 
That a bright flush came o'er his haggard face, 
And round he turned unto the cliff once more, 
And moved as if the stream he would cross o'er. 

Who shall tell what thought stayed him ? who shall 
tell 
Why pale he grew ? of what was he afraid, 
As, turning, fast his hurried footsteps fell 
On the wind-bitten blooms of spring delayed ? 
What hope his dull heart tore, as brown birds made 
Clear song about the thicket's edge, when he 
Rushed by their thorny haunts of melody ? 



. I 

t 

I 



366 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

Heavily now his feet, so well wont, trod 
The blind ways of the wood, till it grew thin, 

And through the beech-trunks the green sunlit sod *! 

He saw again ; and presently did win 
Into another cleared space, hemmed within 
A long loop of the stream, and midmost there 
Stood the abode of some stout wood-dweller. 

Now as he came anigher to the sun, 
Upon his glittering, gauzy, strange array 
The bough-flecked, dazzling light of mid-day shone, 
And at the wood's edge made he sudden stay, 
And, writhing, seemed as he would tear away 
The bright curse from him, till he raised his face, 
And knew the cottage midmost of the place : 

Knew it, as one a-dying might behold 
His cup made joyous once with wine and glee, 
Now brought unto him with its ruddy gold, 
Stained with the last sad potion scantily ; 
For he, a youth, in joyous company, 
Maying or hunting, oft had wandered there, 
When maiden's love first known was fresh and fair. 

He moaned, and slowly made unto the door, 
Where sat a woman spinning in the sun, 
Who oft belike had seen him there before, 
Among those bright folk not the dullest one ; 
But now when she had set her eyes upon. 
The wild thing hastening to her, for a space 
She sat regarding him with scared white face ; 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 367 

But as he neared her, fell her rock adown. 
She rose, and fled with mouth that would have cried 
But for her terror. Then did Walter groan : 
" O wretched life ! how well might I have died 
Here, where I stand, on many a happy tide, 
When folk fled not from me, nor knew me cursed, 
And yet who knoweth that I know the worst ? " 

Scarce formed upon his lips, the word " Return " 
Rang in his heart once more ; but a cold cloud 
Of all despair, however he might yearn, 
All pleasure of that bygone dream did shroud, 
And hopes and fears, long smothered, now 'gan crowd 
About his heart : nor might he rest in pain, 
But needs must struggle on, howe'er in vain. 

Into the empty house he passed withal ; 
As in a dream the motes did dance and grow 
Amidst the sun, that through the door did fall 
Across its gloom, and on the board did show 
A bag of silver pieces, many enow, 
The goodman's market-silver ; and a spear 
New-shafted, bright, that lay athwart it there. 

Brooding he stood, till in him purpose grew ; 
Unto the peasants' coffer, known of old, 
He turned, and raised the lid, and from it drew 
Raiment well worn by miles of wind-beat wold. 
And, casting to the floor his gauzy gold, 
Did on these things, scarce thinking in mean while 
How he should deal with his life's new-born toil. 



368 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But now, being clad, he took the spear and purse, 
And on the board his clothes begemmed he laid, 
Half wondering would their wealth turn to a curse, 
As in the tales he once deemed vainly made 
Of elves and such-like — once again he weighed 
The bright web in his hand, and a great flood 
Of evil memories fevered all his blood, 

Blinded his eyes, and wrung his heart full sore ; 
Yet grew his purpose among men to dwell, 
He scarce knew why, nor said he any more 
That word " Return : " perchance the threatened hell, 
Disbelieved once, seemed all too possible 
Amid this anguish, wherefrom if the grain 
Of hope should fall, then hell would be a gain. 

He went his ways, and once more crossed the stream, 
And hastened through the wood, that scantier grew 
Till from a low hill he could see the gleam 
Of the great river that of old he knew, 
Which drank the woodland stream : 'neath the light blue 
Of the March sky, swirling and bright it ran, 
A wonder and a tale to many a man. 

He went on wondering not ; all tales were nought 
Except his tale ; with ruin of his own life, 
To ruin the world's life, hopeful once, seemed brought ; 
The changing year seemed weary of the strife 
Ever recurring, with all vain hope rife ; 
Earth, sky, and water seemed too weak and old 
To gain a little rest from waste and cold. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 369 

He wondered not, and no pain smote on him, 
Though from a green hill on the further side, 
Above the green meads set with poplars slim, 
A white wall, buttressed well, made girdle wide 
To towers and roofs where yet his kin did bide : — 
— His father's ancient house ; yea, now he saw 
His very pennon toward the river draw. 

No pain these gave him, and no scorn withal 
Of his old self; no rage that men were glad 
And went their ways, whatso on him might fall ; 
For all seemed shadows to him, good or bad ; 
At most the raiment that his yearning clad, . 
Yearning made blind with misery, for more life, 
If it might be love yet should lead the strife. 

He stood a space and watched the ferry-boat 
Take in its load of bright and glittering things ; 
He watched its head adown the river float, 
As o y er the water came the murmurings 
Of broken talk : and as all memory clings 
To such dumb sounds, so dreamlike came back now 
The tale of how his life and love did grow. 

He turned away and strode on, knowing not 
What purpose moved him ; as the river flowed 
He hastened, where the sun of March blazed hot 
Upon the bounding wall and hard white road, 
The terraced blossoming vines, the brown abode 
Where wife and child and dog of vine-dressers 
With mingled careless clamor cursed his ears. 

16* 



370 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

— How can words measure misery, when the sun 
Shines at its brightest over plague and ill ? 
How can I tell the woe of any one, 
When the soft showers with fair-hued sweetness fill, 
Before the feet of those grief may not kill, 
The tender meads of hopeful spring, that comes 
With eager hours to mock all hopeless homes ? 

« 

So let it pass, and ask me, not to weigh 
Grief against grief: — ye who have ever woke 
To wondering, ere came memory back, why day, 
Bare, blank, immovable, upon you broke — 
— Untold shall ye know all — to happy folk 
All heaviest words no more of meaning bear 
Than far-off bells saddening the summer air. 

But tells my tale, that all that day he went 
Along the highway by the river side, 
Urged on by restlessness without intent ; 
Until when he was caught by evening-tide, 
Worn out withal, at last must he abide 
At a small homestead, where he gat him food 
And bed of straw, among tired folk and rude. 

A weary ghost within the poor hall there, 
He sat amid their weariness, who knew 
No whit of all his case, yet half with fear 
And half with scorn gazed on him, as, with few 
And heavy words, about the fire they drew, 
The goodman and goodwife, both old and gray, 
Three stout sons, and one rough uncared-for may. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 371 

A ghost he sat, and as a ghost he heard 
What things they spoke of; but sleep-laden night 
Seemed to have crushed all memory of their word, 
When on the morrow, in the' young sun's light, 
He plodded o'er the highway hard and white, 
Unto what end he knew not : though swift thought 
Memory of things long spoken to him brought. 

That day he needs must leave the streamside road, 
Whereon he met of wayfarers no few ; 
For sight of wondering eyes now 'gan to goad 
His misery more, as still more used he grew 
To that dull world he had returned unto ; 
So into a deep-banked lane he turned aside, 
A little more his face from men to hide. 

Slowly he went, for afternoon it was, 
And with the long way was he much foreworn ; 
Nor far between the deep banks did he pass, 
Ere on the wind unto his ears was borne 
A stranger sound than he had heard that morn, 
Sweet sound of mournful singing ; then he stayed 
His feet, and gazed about as one afraid : 

He shuddered, feeling as in time long past, 
When 'mid the utter joy of his young days 
The sudden sound of music would be cast 
Upon the bright world with the sun ablaze, 
And he would look to see a strange hand raise 
The far-off blue, and God in might come down 
To judge the earth, and make all hid things known. 



372 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And therewithal came memory of that speech 
Of yesternight, and how those folk had said, 
That now so far did wrong and misery reach, 
That soon belike earth would be visited 
At last with that supreme day of all dread ; 
When right and wrong, and weal and woe of earth, 
Should change amid its fiery second birth. 

He hastened toward the road as one who thought 
God's visible glory would be passing by, 
But, when he looked forth tremblingly, saw nought 
Of glorious dread to quench his misery ; 
There was the sky, and, like a second sky, 
The broad stream, the white road, the whispering trees 
Swaying about in the sound-laden breeze. 

For nigher and nigher ever came the song, 
And presently at turning of the way 
A company of pilgrims came along, 
Mostly afoot, in garments brown and gray : 
Slowly they passed on through the windy day, 
Led on by priests who bore aloft the rood, 
Singing with knitted brows as on they strode. 

Then sank his heart adown, however sweet, 
Pensive and strange, their swinging song might be, 
For nought like this he had in heart to meet ; 
But rather something was he fain to see 
That should change all the old tale utterly ; — 
— The old tale of the world, and love and death, 
And all the wild things that man's yearning saith. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 373 

Nathless did he abide their coming there, 
And noted of them as they drew anigh, 
That in that fellowship were women fair, 
And young men meet for joyous company, 
Besides such elders, as might look to die 
In few years nowj or monks who long had striven 
With life desired and feared, life for death given. 

Way-worn they seemed, yet many there strode on 
With flashing eyes and flushed cheeks, as though all 
Within a little space should be well won : 
Still as he gazed on them, despair did fall 
Upon his wasted heart ; a fiery wall 
Of scorn and hate seemed 'twixt their hearts and his ; 
While delicate images of bygone bliss 

Grew clear before his eyes, as rood and saint 
Gleamed in the sun o'er raiment coarse and foul, 
O'er dusty limbs, and figures worn and faint : 
Well-nigh he shrieked ; yet in his inmost soul 
He felt that he must ask them of their goal, 
And knew not why : so at a man he clutched, 
Who, as he passed, his shoulder well-nigh touched. 

"Where goest thou then, O pilgrim, with all these ?" 
" Stay me not ! " cried he ; " unto life I go, 
To life at last, and hope of rest and peace ; 
I whom my dreadful crime hath hunted so 
For years, though I am young — O long and slow 
The way to where the change awaiteth me — 
To Rome, where God nigh visible shall be ! 



374 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Where He who knoweth all, shall know this too, 
That I am man — e'en that which He hath made, 
Nor be confounded at aught man can do. — 
— And thou, who seemest too with ill down-weighed, 
Come on with us, nor be too much afraid, 
Though some men deem there is but left small space, 
Or ere the world shall see the Judge's face." 

He answered not, nor moved ; the man's words seemed 
An echo of his thoughts, and, as he passed, 
Word and touch both might well be only dreamed. 
Yea, when the vine-clad terraced hill at last 
Had hid them all, and the slim poplars cast 
Blue shadows on the road, that scarce did show 
A trace of their passed feet, he did not know 

But all had been a dream ; all save the pain, 
That, mingling with the palpable things around, 
Showed them to be not wholly vague and vain, 
And him not dead, in whatso hard bonds bound 
Of wandering fate, whose source shall ne'er be found. 
He shivered, turned away, and down the same 
Deep lane he wandered, whence e'en now he came.. 

He toward the night through hapless day-dreams 
passed, 
That knew no God to come, no love : he stood 
Before a little town's gray gate at last, 
And in the midst of his lost languid mood 
Turned toward the western sky, as red as blood, 
As bright as sudden dawn across the dark, 
And through his soul fear shot a kindling spark. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 375 

But as he gazed, the rough-faced gate-warder, 
Who leaned anigh upon his spear, must turn 
Eyes on him, with an answering anxious fear, 
That silent, questioning, dared not to learn, 
If he too deemed more than the sun did burn 
Behind the crimson clouds that made earth gray — 
If yet perchance God's host were on its way. 

So too, being come unto his hostelry, 
His pain was so much dulled by weariness, 
That he might hearken to men's words, whereby 
It seemed full sure that great fear did oppress 
Men's hearts that tide, that the world's life, grown less 
Through time's unnoted lapse, this thousandth year 

Since Christ was born, unto its end drew near. 

• 

Time and again, he, listening to such word, 
Felt his heart kindle ; time and again did seem 
As though a cold and hopeless tune he heard, 
Sung by gray mouths amidst a dull-eyed dream ; 
Time and again across his heart would stream 
The pain of fierce desire whose aim was gone, 
Of baffled yearning loveless and alone. 

Other words heard he too, that served to show 
The meaning of that earnest pilgrim train ; 
For the folk said that many a man would go 
To Rome that Easter, there more sure to gain 
Full pardon for all sins, since frail and vain, 
Cloudlike the very earth grew 'neath men's feet : 
Yea, many thought, that there at Rome would meet 



376 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The half-forgotten Bridegroom with the Bride, 
Stained with the flushed feast of the world ; that He, 
Through wrack and flame, would draw unto His side 
In the new earth where there is no more sea. 
So spake men got together timorously ; 
Though pride slew fear in some men's souls, that they 
Had lived to see the Arm earth melt away. 

Next morn were folk about the market cross 
Gathered in throngs, and as through these he went 
He saw above them a monk's brown arms toss 
About his strained and eager mouth, that sent 
Strong speech around, whose burden was " Repent ; " 
He passed by toward the gate that Romeward lay, 
Yet on its other side his feet did stay. 

Upon a daisied patch of road-side grass 
He cast himself, and down the road he gazed ; 
And therewithal the thought through him did pass, 
How long and wretched was the way he faced. 
Therewith the smouldering fire again outblazed 
Within him, and he moaned : " O empty earth, 
What shall I do, then, 'mid thy loveless dearth ? " 

But as he spake, there came adown the wind 
From out the town the sound of pilgrims' song, 
And other thoughts were borne across his mind, 
And hope strove with desire so hopeless strong, 
Till in his heart, wounded with pain and wrong, 
Something like will was born ; until he knew 
Now, ere they came, what thing he meant to do. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 3; 

So through the gate at last the pilgrims came 
Led by an old priest, fiery-eyed and gray ; 
Then Walter held no parley with his shame, 
But stood before him midmost of the way. 
"Will one man's sin so heavy on you weigh," 
He cried, " that ye shall never reach your end J 
Unto God's pardon with you would I wend." 

The old man turned to him : " My son," he said, 
" Come with us, and be of us ! turn not back 
When once thine hand upon the plough is laid ; 
The telling of thy sin we well may lack, 
Because the Avenger is upon our track, 
And who can say the while we tarry here, 
Amid this seeming peace, but God draws near ? " 

The crowd had stayed their song to hear the priest, 
But now, when Walter joined their company, 
Like a great shout it rose up and increased, 
And on their way they went so fervently 
That swept away from earth he seemed to be ; 
And many a thought o'er which his heart had yearned, 
Amid their fire to white ash now seemed burned. 

For many days they journeyed on, and still 
Whate'er be deemed that he therein should do, 
The hope of Rome his whole soul seemed to fill ; 
And though the priest heard not his story through, 
Yet from him at the last so much he knew, 
That he had promised when they reached the place 
To bring him straight before the Pope's own face. 



378 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Through many a town they passed ; till on a night 
Long through the darkness they toiled on and on 
Down a straight road, until a blaze of light 
On the gray carving of an old gate shone ; 
And fast the tears fell down from many an one, 
And rose a quavering song, for they were come 
Unto the threshold of that mighty Rome. 

They entered : like a town of ghosts it seemed 
To Walter, a beleaguered town of ghosts ; 
And he felt of them, little if he dreamed 
Amid his pain of all the marshalled hosts 
That lay there buried 'mid forgotten boasts ; 
But dead he seemed as those his pleasures were, 
Dead in a prison vast and void and drear. 

Unto a convent that eve were they brought, 
Where with the abbot spake the priest for long, 
Then bade the hapless man to fear him nought, 
But that the Pope next day would right his wrong ; 
" And let thy heart," quoth he, " O son, be strong, 
For no great space thou hast to sin anew : 
The days of this ill world are grown but few." 

Night passed, day dawned, and at the noon thereof 
The priest came unto Walter : " Fair my son, 
Now shalt thou know," he said, "of God's great love ; 
Moreover thou shalt talk with such an one 
As hath heard told the worst deeds man hath done, 
And will not start at thine or mock at thee : 
Be of good heart, and come thy ways with me." 




THE HILL OF VENUS. 379 

Amid the tumult of his heart, they went 
Through the calm day, by wonders wrought of old ; 
And fresh young folk they met, and men intent 
On eager life ; the wind and the sun's gold 
Were fresh on bands of monks that did uphold 
The carven anguish of the rood above 
The wayfarers, who trusted in God's love. 

But no more dead the gray old temples seemed 
To him than fresh-cheeked girl or keen-eyed man ; 
And like a dream for some dim .purpose dreamed, 
And half forgotten, was the image wan 
Nailed on the cross : no tremor through him ran, 
No hope possessed him, though his lips might say, 
" O love of God, be nigh to me to-day ! " 

For surely all things seemed but part of him ; 
Therefore what help in them ? Still on he passed 
Through all, and still saw nothing blurred or dim, 
Though with a dread air was the world o'ercast, 
As of a great fire somewhere ; till at last, 
At a fair convent door the old priest stayed, 
And touched his fellow's shoulder, as he said : 

" Thou tremblest not ; thou look'st as other men : 
Come then, for surely all will soon be well, 
And like a dream shall be that ill day, when 
Thou hangedst on the last smooth step of hell ! " 
But from his shoulder therewith his hand fell, 
And long he stared astonished in his place, 
At a new horror fallen o'er Walter's face. 



3&> THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then silently he led him on again 
Through daintily wrought cloisters, to a door, 
Whereby there stood a gold-clad chamberlain : 
Then, while the monk his errand to him bore, 
Walter turned round and cast a wild look o'er 
Fair roof, and painted walls, and sunlit green, 
That showed the slim and twisted shafts between. 

He shut his eyes and moaned sore, for as clear 
As he beheld these, did he now behold 
A woman white and lovely drawing near, 
Whose face amidst her flower-wreathed hair of gold 
Mocked the feint images of saints of old ; 
Mocked with sweet smile the pictured mother of God, 
As o'er the knee-worn floor her fair feet trod. 

Through his shut eyes he saw her still, as he 
Heard voices, and stepped onward, as he heard 
The door behind him shut to noisily, 
And echo down the cloisters, and a word 
Spoke by a thin low voice : " Be not afeard f 
Look up ! for though most surely God is nigh, 
Yet nowise is he with us visibly." 

He looked up, and beside him still she stood, 
With eyes that seemed to question : What dost thou. 
What wilt thou say f The fever of his blood 
Abated not, because before him now ' 
There sat an old man with high puckered brow, 
Thin lips, long chin, and wide brown eyes and mild, 
That o'er the sternness of his mouth still smiled. 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 381 

" Wilt thou kneel down, my son ? " he heard him say, 
" God is anigh, though not to give thee fear ; 
Folk tell me thou hast journeyed a long way 
That I the inmost of thine heart might hear ; 
It glads me that thou holdest me so dear. 
But more of this thy love I yet would win, 
By telling thee that God forgives thy sin." 

He knelt down, but all silent did abide 
While the Pope waited silent ; on the ground 
His eyes were fixed, but still anigh his side 
He knew she stood ; and all the air around 
Was odorous with her, yea, the very sound 
Of her sweet breath, moving of hair and limb, 
Mixed with his own breath in the ears of him. 

Outside the sparrows twittered ; a great tree 
Stirred near the window, and the city's noise 
Still murmured : long the Pope sat patiently 
Amid that silence, till the thin weak voice 
Spake out and said : . " O son, have the world's joys 
Made thee a coward ? what is thy degree ? 
Despite thy garb no churl thou seem'st to me." 

Fearfully Walter raised his eyes, and turned, 
As though to ask that vision what to say, 
And with a bitter pain his vexed heart burned, 
When now he found all vanished clean away : 
Great wrath stirred in him : shame most grievous lay 
Upon his heart, and spreading suddenly 
His hands abroad, he 'gan at last to cry : 



38a THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Look at me, father ! I have been a knight, 
And held my own 'mid men : such as I kneel 
Before thee now, amidst a hopeless fight 
Have I stood firm against the hedge of steel, 
Casting aside all hope of life and weal 
For nought — because folk deemed I would do so, 
Though nought there was to gain or win unto. 

" Yet before thee an old man small and weak 
I quail indeed : not because thou art great, 
Not because God through thy thin pipe doth speak, 
As all folk trow : but, rather, that man's hate, 
Man's fear, God's scorn shall fall in all their weight 
Upon my love when I have spoken out. — 

— Yea, let me bide a minute more in doubt ! 

" Man hates it and God scorns, and I, e'en I — 

— How shall I hate my love and scorn my love ? 
Weak, weak are words — but, O my misery ! 
More hate than man's hate in my soul doth move ; 
Greater my scorn than scorn of God above — 
And yet I love on. — Is the pain enow 

That thou some hope unto my heart mayst show ? — 

" Some hope of peace at last that is not death ? 
Because with all these things I know for sure 
I cannot die, else had I stopped my breath 
Long time agone — thereto hath many a lure 
Drawn on my hand ; but now God doth endure, 
And this my love, that nevermore shall bring 
Delight to me or help me any thing." 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 383 

Calm sat the Pope, and said : " Hope, rather, now ; 
For many a sinner erewhile have I shriven 
As utterly o'erwhelmed in soul as thou, 
Who, when awhile with words his mouth had striven, 
Went forth from me at peace and well forgiven. 
Fall we to talk ; and let me tell thee first, 
That there are such as fain would be the worst 

" Among all men, since best they cannot be, 
So strong is that wild lie that men call pride ; 
And so to-day it is, perchance, with thee : — 
Cast it aside, son ; cast it clean aside, 
Nor from my sight thy utmost vileness hide ; 
Nought worse it makes thy sin, when all is done, 
That every day men do the same, my son ! " 

The strained lines of the kneeling wretch's face 
Were softened ; as to something far away 
He seemed a-listening : silent for a space 
The two men were — who knows what 'twixt them lay, 
What world of wondrous visions, of a day 
Passed or to come ? — to one lost love so clear, 
God's glory to the other present there. 

At last the Pope spake ; well-nigh musical 
His voice was grown, and in his thin dry cheek 
There rose a little flush : " Tell of thy fall, 
And how thy weak heart its vain lust must seek, 
Cursing the kind and treading down the weak ! 
Tell all the blindness of thy cruelties, 
Thy treason, thine unkindness and thy lies ! — 



384 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

"And be forgiven — these things are of earth : 
The fire of God shall burn them up apace. 
And leave thee calm in thy pure second birth ; 
No sin, no lust forgotten, in the place 
Where, litten by the glory of God's face, 
The souls that He hath made for ever move 
'Mid never-dying, never-craving love. 

" How fair shall be the dawning of that day 
When thy cleared eyes behold the thing thou wast, 
Wherefore, and all the tale : hate cast away, 
And all the yearning of thy love at last 
Full satisfied, and held for ever fast ! 
O never-dying souls, how sweet to hear 
Your laughter in the land that knows no fear ! 

" All this thou gainest if to God thou turn, 
Since nought but with thy fellows hast thou dealt, 
And well He wotteth how vexed hearts may yearn, 
Who in the very midst of them hath dwelt, 
Whose own soul, too, the world's hard wrong hath felt, 
The serpent's burning clutch upon his heel — 
Speak, then, and pray, and earn unending weal ! n 

A strange look crossed the knight's face as he said : 
" Surely all these shall love their God full well ; 
Good to be one of these ; yet have I read 
That other things Cod made, and that they dwell 
In that abode He made, too, men call hell. 
If every man that will become God's friend 
Shall have great joy that nevermore shall end, — 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 385 

" Yet is it so that evil dureth still, 
Unslain of God ? — what if a man's love cling, 
In sore despite of reason, hope, and will, 
Unto the false heart of an evil thing ? — 
— O me ! " he cried, " that scarce heard murmuring 
Beside me, and that faint sound of thy feet ! 
Must thou be wordless this last time we meet ? " 

Then the Pope trembled, for, half-risen now, 
Walter glared round him through the empty air ; 
" O man, " he said, " speak out : what seest thou ? 
What ill thing 'twixt thy God and thee stands there ? " 
u Ah, me ! " cried Walter, " kind thou wert and fair 
In the past days, and now wilt thou be gone, 
And leave me with this cruel God alone ? 

" Is it then so as I have deemed erewhile, 
That thou fear'st God too, even as I fear ? 
That I shall see the death of thy kind smile, 
When, hand in hand, amid the unshadowed air, 
Unto God's face forgot we draw anear ? 
O mocking lie, that told me while ago, 
One minute's bliss was worth unending woe ! " 

The Pope caught at the staff across his knees, 
And, rising, stood, leaned heavily thereon, 
And said : " Why kneelest thou 'mid words like these ? 
Rise up, and tell me swift what thou hast done, 
E'en as one man speaks to another one ; 
Or, let me go, lest I begin to deem 
That I myself spake thus in some ill dream ! " 

17 



386 THE BARTHLT PARAD.ISE. 

But, cowering down again, cried out the knight : 
" Nay, leave me not ! wait, father ; thou shalt hear ! 
Lo, she is gone now ! — surely thou said'st right ; 
For the whole world is trembling with my fear 
And tainted with my sin. — I will speak clear 
And in few words, and know the end at last 
Yea, though e'en now I know myself outcast 

" Hast thou not heard about the gods, who erst 
Held rule here where thou dwellest ? dost thou think 
That people 'neath their rule were so accurst 
That they forgot in joy to eat and drink, 
That they slept not, and loved not, and must shrink 
From the world's glory? — how if they loved these 
Thou callest devils and their images ? 

" And did God hate the world, then, for their sake, 
When fair the sun rose up on every day, 
And blade and bloom through the brown earth did 

break, 
And children were as glad as now ? — nay, nay, 
Time for thy wrath yet — what if these held sway 
Even now in some wise, father ? — Nay, say then, 
Hast thou not heard, from certain Northern men, 

" Of lonely haunters of the wild-woods there, 
Not men, nor angels, soulless as men deem, 
But of their bodily shape most wondrous fair ? 
What — thinkest thou I tell thee of some dream, 
Some wandering glimmer of the moon's gray beam, 
Seen when men's hearts sink 'mid black-shadowed trees, 
And unknown words are in the tangled breeze ? 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 387 

" Belike I dreamed then ! O belike some shade 
Of nought that is I saw with these mine eyes ! — 

— I saw her feet upon the blossoms laid, 

The flowers o'er which no God-made sun shall rise ! — 
Belike I am a mad fool 'mid the wise, 
But nothing therefor of God's wrath need fear, 
Because my body and soul I gave her there. 

" What ! — must I name her, then, ere thou mayst 
know 
What thing I mean ? or say where she doth dwell — 
A land that new life unto me did show — 
Which thou wilt deem a corner cut from Hell, 
Set in the world lest all go there too well ? 

— Lo, from the Hill of Venus do I come, 
That now henceforth I know shall be my home ! " 

He sprang up as he spoke, and faced the Pope, 
Who through his words had stood there trembling sore, 
With doubtful anxious eyes, whence every hope 
Failed with that last word ; a stern look came o'er 
His kind vexed face : " Yea, dwell there evermore ! " 
He cried : "just so much hope I have of thee 
As on this dry staff fruit and flowers to see ! " 

Walter laughed loud, and knew not who was there, 
And who was gone, nor how long he abode 
Within that place, or why his feet must fere 
Round about Rome that night — or why that load 
Was on his heart ; or why next morn the road 
Beneath his hurrying feet was white and dry, 
And no cloud flecked the sunny April sky. 



388 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

He knew not — though he wondered at all these, 
And where he went — but nought seemed strange to him, 
And nought unknown, when the great forest-trees 
Around a cleared space of the wood were dim 
In windless dawn, with white mist that did swim 
About a pine-clad cliff, above a stream 
Dark, scarcely seen, and voiceless as a dream. 

No ignorance, no wonder, and no hope 
Was in his heart, as his firm feet passed o'er 
The shallow's pebbles, and the flowery slope, 
And reached the black-mouthed cavern, the dark door, 
Unto the fate now his for evermore, 
As now at last its echoing stony dearth 
And dull dark closed betwixt him and the earth. 



AND what more would ye hear of him ? Meseems 
■**■ It passes mind of man to picture well 
His second sojourn in that land ; yet gleams 
There might be thence, if one had heart to tell, 
In sleepless nights, of horrors passing hell, 
Of joys by which our joys are misery ; 
But hopeless both, if such a thing may be. 

Let us be silent then, but hear at least 
What the old tale tells : that the morrow morn 
The Pope was busy at the Holy Feast ; 
Then through the ancient solemn streets was borne, 
Where stood the folk as thick as summer corn ; 
Then o'er their bowed heads and their weeping stilled, 
With his small blessing voice the hushed air thrilled . 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 389 

And, many other things being said and done, 
Unto his own house came back at the last, 
And in his quiet garden walked alone 
Pondering, his mind perplexed and overcast, 
Not with the hurry of the day late past ; 
Rather that haggard face, those hopeless eyes, 
Despite himself would still before him rise. 

The shadows fell their longest ; a great flood 
Of golden light glowed through the peaceful place ; 
The Pope sat down ; the staff of olive-wood 
Cursed, as it were, at ending of that case, 
Fell from him as he turned his weary face 
Unto the western glory : close beside 
A babbling conduit from its stone did glide. 

Well sang the birds ; all was so sweet and fair, 
It melted those dull troublous thoughts within 
The old man's heart, transmuted all his care 
Into a loving peace right hard to win : 
He murmured in his faded voice and thin, 
'Mid the full sweetness of the spring : " Would God 
That man and I this peace together trod ! 

" For he mayhap had things to say to me 
He could not say then, knowing not what I was ; 
And I — God wot that there are things I see 
To tell of ; if the words my lips would pass : 
Things dimly seen, indeed, as in a glass. — 
Woe's me ! for who shall help me if I erred ! ' 
Yet God, I deemed, had given me that last word. 



390 THE EARTH LT PARADISE. 

" God, if I have done thee deadly wrong, 
And lost a soul thou wouldst have saved and blessed, 
Yet other words thou knowest were on my tongue, 
When 'twixt that soul and mine thine image pressed : 
Thou wilt remember this and give him rest ! 
And as for me, thou knowest I fear thee nought, 
Since this my body and soul thine own hand wrought" 

The sun was sunken now, the west was red, 
And still the birds poured forth their melody, 
A marvellous scent about him seemed to spread, 
'Mid strange new bliss the tears his eyes drew nigh ; 
He smiled and said : " Too old to weep am I ; 
Unless the very end be drawing near, 
And unimagined sounds I soon shall hear. 

"And yet, before I die, I needs must go 
Back to my house, and try if I may write, 
For there are some things left for me to do, 
Ere my face glow with that ineffable light." 
He moved and stooped down for his staff; still bright 
The sky was, as he cast his eyes adown, 
And his hand sought the well-worn wood and brown. 

With a great cry he sprang up ; in his hand 
He held against the sky a wondrous thing, 
That might have been the bright archangel's wand, 
Who brought to Mary that fair summoning ; 
For lo, in God's unfaltering timeless spring, 
Summer, and autumn, had that dry rod been, 
And from its barrenness the leaves sprang green, 



THE HILL OF VENUS. 391 

• 

And on its barrenness grew wondrous flowers, 
That earth knew not ; and on its barrenness 
Hung the ripe fruit of heaven's unmeasured hours ; 
And with strange scent the soft dusk did it bless. 
And glowed with fair light as earth's light grew less, — 
Yea, and its gleam the old man's face did reach, 
Too glad for smiles, or tears, or any speech. 

Who seeth such things and liveth ? That highrtide 
The Pope was missed from throne and chapel-stall, 
And when his frightened people sought him wide, 
They found him lying by the garden wall, 
Set out on that last pilgrimage of all, 
Grasping his staff — " and surely," all folk said," 
" None ever saw such joy on visage dead." 



392 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



CAD eyes there were the while the tale was told, 
^ And few among the young folk were so bold 
As to speak out their thoughts concerning it, 
While still amidst that concourse they did sit. 
But some when to the fresh bright day they turned, 
And smooth cheeks even in that freshness burned, 
'Neath burning glances might find words to speak, 
Wondering that any tale should make love weak 
To rule the earth, all hearts to satisfy ; 
Yet as they spake, perchance, some doubt wentt)y 
Upon the breeze, till out of sight and sound 
Of other folk, their longing lips had found, 
If but a little while, some resting-place, 
On hand, on bosom, on bright eager face. 

But the old men, learned in earth's bitter lore, 
Were glad to leave untouched the too rich store 
Of hapless memories, if it might be done ; 
And wandered forth into the noonday sun, 
To watch the blossoms budding on the wall, 
And hear the rooks among the elm-trees call, * 
And note the happy voices on the breeze, 
And see the lithe forms ; making out of these 
No tangled story, but regarding them 
As hidden elves upon the forest's hem 
Gaze on the dancers through the May-night green, 
Not knowing aught what troubled looks may mean. 



EPILOGUE. 393 



EPILOGUE. 

O O is a year passed of the quiet life, 

^ That these old men from such mishap and strife, 

Such springing up, and dying out of dreams 

Had won at last What further then ? Meseems 

Whate'er the tale may know of what befell 

Their lives henceforth I would not have it tell ; 

Since each tale's ending needs must be the same : 

And we men call it Death. Howe'er it came 

To those, whose bitter hope hath made this book, 

With other eyes, I think, they needs must look 

On its real face, than when so long agone 

They thought that every good thing would be won, 

If they might win a refuge from it. 

Lo, 
A long life gone, and nothing more they know, 
Why they should live to have desire and foil, 
And toil, that overcome, brings yet more toil, 
Than that day of their vanished youth, when first 
They saw Death clear, and deemed all life accurst 
By that cold overshadowing threat, — the End. 

That night, when first they 'gan their way to wend, 
And each dash in the moonlight of the sweep, 
That broke the green bay's little-resting sleep, 



N, 



394 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Drew their stern further from the plague-cursed shore, 
Did no cold doubt their gathering hope cross o'er 
Of sweet rest fled from ? Or that day of days, 
When first the sun the veil of mist did raise, 
And showed the new land real before them there, 
Did no shame blot the victory over fear, 
(Ah, short-lived victory ! ) that, whate'er might grow 
And change, there changeless were they fettered now, 
And with blind eyes must gaze upon the earth, 
Forgetting every word that tells of birth, 
And still be dead-alive, while all things else 
Beat with the pulse that 'mid the struggle dwells ? 

Ah, doubt and shame they well might have indeed 
Cry out upon them, ye who have no need 
Of life to right the blindness and the wrong ! 
Think scorn of these, ye, who are made so strong, 
That with no good-night ye can loose the hand 
That led you erst through love's sweet flowery land ! 
Laugh, ye whose eyes are piercing to behold 
What makes the silver seas and skies of gold ! 
Pass by in hate, ye folk, who day by day 
Win all desires that lie upon your way 1 

Yet 'mid your joyous wisdom and content, 
Methinks ye know not what those moments meant, 
When ye, yet children, 'mid great pleasure stayed, 
Wondering for why your hearts were so downweighed ; 
Or, if ye ever loved, then, when her eyes 
In happiest moments changed in sudden wise, 
And nought ye knew what she was thinking of; 
Yet, O belike, ye know not much of love, 



EPILOGUE. 395 

Who know not that this meant the fearful threat, 
The End, forgotten much, remembered yet 
Now and again, that all perfection mocks. 

" And yet the door of many a tale unlocks, 
Makes love itself," saith one, " with all its bliss." 

— Ah, could I speak the word that in me is ! — 
I dare not, lest to cursing it should turn. 

But hearken — if Death verily makes Love burn, 
It is because we evermore should cry, 
If we had words, that we might never die : 
Words fail us : therefore, " O thou Death," we say, 
" Thus do we work that thou mayst take away ! 
Look at this beauty of young children's mirth, 
Soon to be swallowed by thy noiseless dearth ! 
Look at this faithful love that knows no end 
Unless thy cold thrill through it thou shouldst send ! 
Look at this hand ripening to perfect skill 
Unless the fated measure thou didst fill ; 
This eager knowledge that would stop for nought, 
Unless thy net both chase and hunter caught ! 

— O Death ! with deeds like these 'gainst thee we pray, 
That thou, like those thou slewest, mayst pass away ! " 

And these folk — these poor tale-tellers, who strove 
In their wild way the heart of Death to move, 
E'en as we singers, and failed, e'en as we, — 
Surely on their side I at least will be, 
And deem that when at last, their fear worn out, 
They fell asleep, all that old shame and doubt 
Shamed them not now, nor did they doubt it good 
That they in arms against that Death had stood. 



39^ 



THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 



Ah me ! all praise and blame, they heed it not ; 
Cold are the yearning hearts that once were hot ; 
And all those images of love and pain, 
Wrought as the year did wax, perfect, and wane, 
If they were verily loving there alive, 
No pleasure to their tale-tellers could give. 
And thou, O tale of what these sleepers were, 
Wish one good-night to them thou holdest dear, 
Then die thyself, and let us go our ways, 
And live awhile amid these latter days ! 



VENVOI. 397 



L'ENVOI. 



TTERE are we for the last time face to face, 
*• -*• Thou and I, Book, before I bid thee speed 
Upon thy perilous journey to that place 
For which I have done on thee pilgrim's weed, 
Striving to get thee all things for thy need — 
— I love*thee, whatso time or men may say 
Of the poor singer of an empty day. 

Good reason why I love thee, fen if thou 
Be mocked or clean forgot as time wears on; 
For, ever as thy fashioning did grow, 
Kind word and praise because of thee I won 
From those without whom were my world all gone, 
My hope fallen dead, my singing cast away, 
And I set soothly in an empty day. 

I love thee; yet this last time must it be 
That thou must hold thy peace and I must speak, 
Lest if thou babble I begin to see 
Thy gear too thin, thy limbs and heart too weak, 
To find the land thou goest forth to seek — 
— Though what harm if thou die upon the way, 
Thou idle singer of an empty day t 



1 

i 

398 THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 

But though this land desired thou never reach, \ 

Yet folk who know it maystthou meet or death) 
Therefore a word unto thee would I teach 
To answer these, who, noting thy weak breath, 
Thy wandering eyes, thy heart of little faith, . 
May make thy fond desire a sport and play, 
Mocking the singer of an empty day. 

That land's name, say'st thou ? and the road thereto ? 
Nay, Book, thou mockest, saying thou know'st it notj 
Surely no book of verse I ever knew 
But ever was the heart within him hot 
To gain the Land of Matters Unforgot^ 
— There, now we both laugh — as the whole world may, 
At us poor singers of an empty day. 

Nay, let it pass, and hearken / Hast thou heard 
That therein I believe I have a friend, 
Of whom for love I may not be afeardf 
It is to him indeed I bid thee wend; 
Yea, he perchance may meet thee ere thou end, 
Dying so far off from the hedge of bay, 
Thou idle singer of an empty day / 

Well, think of him, I bid thee, on the road, \ 

And if it hap that midst of thy defeat, \ 

Fainting beneath thy follies' heavy load, 
My Master, Geoffrey Chaucer, thou do meet, 
Then shall thou win a space of rest full sweet; 
Then be thou bold, and speak the words I say, 
The idle singer of an empty day 1 



VBNVOL 399 

" O Master, O thou great of heart and tongue, 
Thou well mayst ask me why I wander here, 
In raiment rent of stories oft besungf 
But of thy gentleness draw thou anear, 
And then the heart of one who held thee dear 
Mayst thou behold/ So near as that I lay 
Unto the singer of an empty day. 

" For this he ever said, who sent me forth 
To seek a place amid thy company ; 
That howsoever little was my worth, 
Yet was he worth fen just so much as I; 
He said that rhyme hath little skill to lie; 
Nor feigned to cast his worser part away 
In idle singing for an empty day. 

" I have beheld him tremble oft enough 
At things he could not choose but trust to me, 
Although he knew the world was wise and rough : 
And never did he fail to let me see 
His love, — his folly and faithlessness, maybe; 
And still in turn I gave him voice to pray 
Such prayers as cling about an empty day. 

" Thou, keen-eyed, reading me, mayst read him th? 
For surely little is there left behind; 
No power great deeds unnamable to do; 
No knowledge for which words he may not find, 
No love of things as vague as autumn wind — 
— Earth of the earth lies hidden by my clay, 
The idle singer of an empty day / 



\\ 




400 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Children we twain are, saith he, late made wise 
In love, but in all else most childish still, 
And seeking still the pleasure of our eyes, 
And what our ears with sweetest sounds may fill j 
Not fearing Love, lest these things he should kill j 
However his pain by pleasure doth he lay, 
Making a strange tale of an empty day. 



" Death have we hated, knowing not what it meant ; 
Life have we loved, through green leaf and through sere, 
Though still the less we knew of its intent: 
The Earth and Heaven through countless year on year, 
Slow changing, were to us but curtains fair 
Hung roundabout a little room, where play 
Weeping and laughter of man 1 s empty day. 

" O Master, if thine heart could love us yet, 
Spite of things left undone, and wrongly done, 
Someplace in loving hearts then should we get, 
For thou, sweet-souled, didst never, stand alone, 
But knew*st the joy and woe of many an one — 
— By lovers dead, who live through thee, we pray, 
Help thou us singers of an empty day I " 

Fearest thou, Book, what answer thou may st gain, 
Lest he should scorn thee, and thereof thou die t 
Nay, it shall not be. — Thou mayst toil in vain, 
And never draw the House of Fame anighj 
Yet he and his shall know whereof we cry, 
Shall call it not ill done to strive to lay 
The ghosts that crowd about life's empty day. 



UENVOI. • 401 

Then let the others go / and if indeed 
In some old garden thou and I have wrought. 
And made fresh flowers spring up from hoarded seed, 
And fragrance of old days and deeds have brought 
Back to folk weary ; all was not for nought. 
— No little part it was for me to play — 
The idle singer of an empty day* 



THE END. 



Cambridge : Press of John Wilson & Son. 




r h' 



1 



V 

£ 

7 

1. 
\ 





THE 


EARTHLY PARADISE 

A TOEM. 



by 

WILLIAM MOftfflS: 

Author ok Tub Lit^^CjtAjit^r Jason. - 
Wi' Jl* 

ELEVENTH ■ IMPRESSION 


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO. 

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, 

NEW YORK AND BOMBAY. 





TO 

MY WIFE 

f DEDICATE THIS BOOK. 




CONTENTS. 


pa an 

An Apology , I 

Prologue — The Wanderers , . 3 

The Author to the Reader . ,102 

MARCH ...... 103 

A in lan ids Race . . . .107 

The Man born to be King . .137 

, 4 Pi?iX ...... 216 

The Doom oj King Acrisius . 218 

The Proud King . . „ ,310 




THE 


EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Q/ Heaven or Hell I have no power to sing, 

I cannot ease the burden of your fears , 

Or make quick-coming death a little thing ; 

Or bring again the pleasure of past years, 

Nor for my words shall ye forget your tears , 

Or hope again for aught that I can say , 

The idle singer of an empty day. 

But rather, when aweary of your mirth , 

From full hearts still unsatisfied ye sigh , 

And, feeling kindly unto all the earth, 

Grudge every minute as it passes by. 

Made the more mindful that the sweet days die — 
— Remember me a little then I pray, 

The idle singer of an empty day. 

The heavy trouble, the bewildering care 
That weighs us down who live and earn our bread, 
These idle verses have no power to bear ; 


9 



THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


So let me sing of names remembered, \ 

Because they, living tiot \ can nder be dead, \ 

Or long time take their memory quite away 
From us poor singers of an empty day. 

Dreamer of dreams, born out of my due time. 
Why should I strive to set the crooked straight t 
Let it suffice me that my murmuring rhyme 
Beats with light whig against the ivory gate , 
Telling a tale not too importunate 
To those who in the sleepy region stay , 

Lulled by the singer of an empty day , 

Folk say, a wizard to a northern king 
At Christmas-tide such wondrous things aid short*, 
That through one window mm beheld the spring. 
And through another saw ike summer glow. 

And through a third the fruited vines a-row. 

While still \ unheard, but in its wonted way. 

Piped the drear wind of that December day* 

So with this Earthly Paradise it is, 

Jf ye wiS read aright, and pardon me, 

Who strive to build a shadowy isle of bliss 
Midmost the beating of the steely sea, 

Wh&e tossed about all hearts of men must be/ 
Whose ravening monsters mighty mm shall s/ay. 
Mi ihefo&rsinger of an empty day* 



PROLOGUE: THE WASDERERk 


ARGUMENT. 

Certain gentlemen and mariners of Norway, having considered 
all that they had heard of the Earthly Paradise, set sail to 
find it, and after many troubles and the lapse of many years 
came old men to some Western land, of which they had never 
before heard : there they died, when they had dwelt there 
certain years, much honoured of the strange people. 

F ORGET six counties overhung with smoke, 
Forget the snorting steam and piston stroke, 
Forget the spreading of the hideous town ; 

Think rather of the pack-horse on the down. 

And dream of London, small, and white, and dean. 
The clear Thames bordered by its gardens green ; 
Think, that below bridge die green lapping waves 
Smite some few keels that bear Levantine staves, 

Cat from the yew wood on the bumt-up hill, 

And pointed jars that Greek hands toiled to fill, 

And treasured scanty spice from some far sea, 

Florence gold cloth, and Ypres napeiy, 

And doth of Bruges, and hogsheads* of Grnenne^ 
While nigh the thronged wharf Geoffrey Chaucer’s pen 
Moves over bills of lading — mid such times 
SMI dwell the hollow puppets of my rhymes* 



4 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


A nameless city in a distant sea, 

White as the changing walls of faerie, 

Thronged with much people clad in anrient guise 
I now am fain to set before your eyes ; 

There, leave the clear green water and the quays. 
And pass betwixt its marble palaces, 

Until ye come unto the chiofest square ; 

A bubbling conduit is set midmost there, 

And round about it now the maidens throng, 

With jest and laughter, and sweet broken song, 
Making but light of labour new begun 
While in their vessels gleams the morning sun. 

On one side of the square a temple stands, 
Wherein the gods worshipped in ancient Lands 
Still have their altars; a great market-place 
Upon two other sides fills all the spare, 

And thence the busy hum of men comes forth ; 

But on the cold side looking toward the north 
A pillared council-house may you behold, 

Within whose porch are images of gold, 

Gods of the nations who dwelt anciently 
About the borders of the Grecian sea- 

Pass now between them, push the brazen door, 
And standing on the polished marble door 
Leave afi the noises of the square behind ; 

Most c a l m that reverent chamber shall ye find, 
Silent at first, but for the noise you made 
When on the brazen door your hand you laid 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 5 

To shut it after you — but now behold 
The city rulers on their thrones of gold, 

Clad in most fair attire, and in their hands 
Long carven silver-banded ebony wands ; 

Then from the dais drop your eyes and see 
Soldiers and peasants standing reverently 
Before those elders, round a little band 
Who bear such arms as guard the English land, 

But battered, rent, and rusted sore, and they. 

The men themselves, are shrivelled, bent, and grey; 
And as they lean with pain upon their spears 
Their brows seem furrowed deep with more than years : 
For sorrow dulls their heavy sunken eyes, 

Bent are they less with time than miseries. 

Pondering on them the city grey-beards gaze 
Through kindly eyes, midst thoughts of other days, 
And pity for poor souls, and vague regret 
For all the things that might have happened yet, 

Until, their wonder gathering to a head, 

The wisest man, who long that land has led, 

Breaks the deep silence, unto whom again 
A wanderer answers. Slowly as in pain, 

And with a hollow voice as from a tomb 
.At first he tells the story of his doom, 

But as it grows and once more hopes and fears, 

Both measureless, are ringing round his ears, 

His eyes grow bright, his seeming days decrease, 

For grief once told brings somewhat back of peace, 



6 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


The Elder of the City. 

From what unheard-of world, in what strange keel, 
Have ye come hither to our commonweal ? 

No barbarous folk, as these our peasants say, 

But learned in memories of a long-past day, 
Speaking, some few at least, the ancient tongue 
That through the lapse of ages still has clung 
To us, the seed of the Ionian race. 

Speak out and fear not \ if ye need a place 
Wherein to pass the end of life away, 

That shall ye gain from us from this same day, 
Unless the enemies of God ye are j 
We fear not you and yours to bear us war, 

And scarce can think that ye will try again 
Across the perils of the shifting plain 
To seek your own land whereso that may he : 

For folk of ours bearing the memory 
Of our old land, in days past oft have striven 
To reach it, unto none of whom was given 
To come again and tell us of the tale, 

Therefore our ships are now content to sail, 

About these happy islands that we know. 

The Wanderer, 

Mastery I have to tell a tale of woe, 

A tale of folly and of wasted life, 

Hope against hope, the bitter dregs of strife, 

Ending, where .aH things end, in death at last 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 

So if I tell the story of the past, 

Let it be worth some little rest, I pray, 

A little slumber ere the end of day. 

No wonder if the Grecian tongue I know. 

Since at Byzantium many a year ago 
My father bore the twibil valiantly; 

There did he many, and get me, and die, 

And I went back to Norway to my kin, 

Long ere this beard ye see did first begin 
To shade my mouth, but nathless not before 
Among the Greeks I gathered some small lore. 

And standing midst the Vaering warriors heard 
From this or that man many a wondrous word ; 

For ye shall know that though we worshipped God, 
And heard mass duly, still of Swithiod 
The Greater, Odin and his house of gold, 

The .noble stories ceased not to be told; 

These moved me more than words of mine can say 
E’en while at Micklegarth my folk did stay ; 

But when I reached one dying autumn-tide 
My uncle’s dwelling near the forest side, 

And saw the land so scanty and so bare, 

And all the hard things men contend with there, 

A little and unworthy land it seemed, 

And all the more of Asgard’s days I dreamed, 

And worthier seemed the ancient faith of praise. 


But now, but now — when one of all those days 



8 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Like Lazarus* finger on my heart should be 
Breaking the fiery fixed eternity, 

But for one moment — could I see once more 
1 he grey-roofed sea-port sloping towards the shore. 
Or note the brown boats standing in from sea, 

Or the great dromond swinging from the quay, 

Or in the beech-woods watch the screaming jay 
Shoot up betwixt the tall trunks, smooth and grey— 
Yea, could I see the days before distress 
When very longing was but happiness. 

Within our house there was a Breton squire 
Well learned, who fail'd not to blow up the fire 
That evermore unholpen burned in me 
Strange lands and things beyond belief to see ; 
Much lore of many lands this Breton knew ; 

And for one tale I told, he told me two. 

He, counting Asgard but a new-told thing, 

Yet spoke of gardens ever blossoming 
Across the western sea where none grew old, 

E’en as the books at Micklegarth had told, 

And said moreover that an English knight 
Had had the Earthly Paradise in sight; 

And heard the songs of those that dwelt therein, 
But entered not, being hindered by his sin. 

Shortly, so much of this and that he said 
That in my heart the sharp barb entered, 

And like real life would empty stories seem, 

And life from day to day an empty dream. 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 9 

Another man there was, a Swabian priest, 

Who knew the maladies of man and beast, 

And what things helped them ; he the stone still sought 
Whereby base metal into gold is brought, 

And strove to gain the precious draught, whereby 
Men live midst mortal men yet never die ; 

Tales of the Kaiser Redbeard could he tell 
Who neither went to Heaven nor yet to Hell, 

When from that fight upon the Asian plain 
He vanished, but still lives to come again 
Men know not how or when ; but I listening 
Unto this tale thought it a certain thing 
That in some hidden vale of Swithiod 
Across the golden pavement still he trod. 

But while our longing for such things so grew, 

And ever more and more we deemed them true. 

Upon the land a pestilence there fell 
Unheard of yet in any chronicle, 

And, as the people died full fast of it, 

With these two men it chanced me once to sit, 

This learned squire whose name was Nicholas, 

And Swabian Laurence, as our manner was j 
For could we help it scarcely did we part 
From dawn to dusk : so heavy, sad at heart, 

We from the castle-yard beheld the bay 
Upon that ne'er-to-be-forgotten day, 

Little we said amidst that dreary mood, 
knd certes nought that we could say was good. 



io THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

It was a bright September afternoon, 

The parched-up beech-trees would be yellowing soon 
The yellow flowers grown deeper with the sun 
Were letting fall their petals one by one ; 

No wind there was, a haze was gathering o’er 
The furthest bound of the faint yellow shore ; 

And in the oily waters of the bay 

Scarce moving aught some fisher-cobbles lay, 

And all seemed peace ; and had been peace indeed 
But that we young men of our life had need, 

And to our listening ears a sound was borne 
That made the sunlight wretched and forlorn — 

— The heavy tolling of the minster bell — 

And nigher yet a tinkling sound did tell 

That through the streets they bore our Saviour Christ 

By dying lips in anguish to be kissed. 

At last spoke Nicholas, “ How long shall we 
Abide here, looking forth into the sea 
Expecting when our turn shall come to die? 

Fair fellows, will ye come with me and try 
Now at our worst that long-desired quest, 

Now — when our worst is death, and life our best” 

“Nay, but thou knoVst,” I said, “that I but wait 
The coming of some man, the turn of fate, 

To make this voyage — but I die meanwhile, 

For I am poor, though my blood be not vile, 

Nor yet for all his lore doth Laurence hold 
Within his crucibles aught like to gold; 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS, n 


And what hast thou, whose father driven forth 
By Charles of Blois, found shelter in the North? 

But little riches as I needs must deem.” 

“Well,” said he, “things are better than they seem, 
For ’neath my bed an iron chest I have 
That holdeth things I have made shift to save 
E’en for this end; moreover, hark to this, 

In the next firth a fair long ship there is 
Well victualled, ready even now for sea, 

And I may say it ’Jongeth unto me ; 

Since Marcus Erling, late its owner, lies 
Dead at the end of many miseries, 

And little Kirslin, as thou well mayst know. 

Would be content throughout the world to go 
If I but took her hand, and now still more 
Hath heart to leave this poor death-stricken shore 
Therefore my gold shall buy us Bordeaux swords 
And Bordeaux wine as we go oceanwards. 

“ What say ye, will ye go with me to-night, 

Setting your faces to undreamed delight, 

Turning your backs unto this troublous hell, 

Or is the time too short to say farewell?” 

“Not so,” I said, “rather would I depart 
Now while thou speakest, never has my heart 
Been set on anything within this land.” 

Then said the Swabian, “Let us now take hand 
And swear to follow evermore this quest 
Till death or Kfe have set our hearts at rest" 



id 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


So with joined hands we swore, and Nicholas said, 
“To-night, fair friends, be ye apparelled 
To leave this land, bring all the arms ye can 
And such men as ye trust, my own good man 
Guards the small postern looking towards St. Bride, 
And good it were ye should not be espied, 

Since mayhap freely ye should not go hence, 

Thou Rolf in special, for this pestilence 
Makes all men hard and cruel, nor are they 
Willing that folk should 'scape if they must stay : 

Be wise; I bid you for a while farewell, 

Leave ye this stronghold when St Peter's bell 
Strikes midnight, all will surely then be still, 

And I will bide you at King Tryggvi’s hill 
Outside the city gates.” 

Each went his way 

Therewith, and I the remnant of that day 
Gained for the quest three men that I deemed true, 
And did such other things as I must do, 

And still was ever listening for the chime 
Half maddened by the lazy lapse of time, 

Yea, scarce I thought indeed that I should live 
Till the great tower the j'oyful sound should give 
That set us free : and so the hours went past, 

Till startled by the echoing clang at last 
That told of midnight, armed from head to heel 
Down to the open postern did I steal, 

Bearing smal l wealth — this sword that yet hangs here 
Worn thin and narrow with so many a year, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 13 

My father’s axe tnat from Byzantium, 

With some few gems my pouch yet held, had come, 
Nought else that shone with silver or with gold. 

But by the postern gate could I behold 
Laurence the priest all armed as if for war, 

And my three men were standing not right far 
From off the town-wall, having some small store 
Of arms and furs and raiment : then once more 
I turned, and saw the autumn moonlight fall 
Upon the new-built bastions of the wall, 

Strange with black shadow and grey flood of light, 
And further off I saw the lead shine bright 
On tower and turret-roof against the sky, 

And looking down I saw the old town lie 
Black in the shade of the o’er-hanging hill, 

Stricken with death, and dreaiy, but all still 
Until it reached the water of the bay, 

That in the dead night smote against the quay 
Not all unheard, though there was little wind. 

But as I turned to leave the place behind, 

The wind’s light sound, the slowly falling swell, 

Were hushed at once by that shrill-tinkling bell, 

Fhat in that stillness jarring on mine ears, 

With sudden jangle checked the rising tears, 

\nd now the freshness of the open sea 
Seemed ease and joy and very life to me; . 

So greeting my new mates with little sound. 

We made good haste to reach King Tryggvi’s mound, 
ind there the Breton Nicholas beheld* 



14 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Who by the hand fair Kirstin Erling held, 

And round about them twenty men there stood, 

Of whom the more part on the holy rood 
Were sworn till death to follow up the quest, 

And Kirstin was the mistress of the rest 
Again betwixt us was there little speech, 

But swiftly did we set on toward the beach, 

And coming there our keel, the Fighting Man, 

We boarded, and the long oars out we ran, 

And swept from out the firth, and sped so well 
That scarcely could we hear St Peter’s bell 
Toll one, although the light wind blew from land ; 
Then hoisting sail southward we ’gan to stand, 

And much I joyed beneath the moon to see 
The lessening land that might have been to me 
A kindly giver of wife, child, and friend, 

And happy life, or at the worser end 
A quiet grave till doomsday rend the earth. 

Night passed, day dawned, and we grew full of mirth 

As with the ever-rising morning wind 

Still further lay our threatened death behind, 

Or so we thought ; some eighty men we were, 

Of whom but fifty knew the shipman*s gear, 

The rest were uplanders ; midst such of these 
As knew not of our quest, with promises 
Went Nicholas dealing florins round about. 

With still a fresh tale for each new man's doubt, 

Till all were fairly won or seemed to be 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 15 
To that strange desperate voyage o’er the sea. 

Now if ye ask me from what land I come 
With all my folly, — Wick was once my home, 

Where Tryggvi Olafs son and Olaf s sire 
Lit to the ancient Gods the sacred fire, 

Unto whose line am I myself akin, 

Through him who Astrid in old time did win. 

King Olaf ’s widow : let all tliat go by, 

Since I was born at least to misery. 

Now Nicholas came to Laurence and to me 
To talk of what he deemed our course should be, 

To whom agape I listened, since I knew 
Nought but old tales, nor aught of false and true 
Midst these, for all of one kind seemed to be 
The Vineland voyage o’er the unknown sea 
And Swegdips search for Godhome, when he found 
The entrance to a new world underground ; 

But Nicholas o’er many books had pored 
And this and that thing in his mind had stored. 

And idle tales from true report he knew. 

—Would he were living now, to tell to you 
This story that my feeble lips must tell 1 

Now he indeed of Vineland knew full well, 

Both from my tales where truth perchance touched lies, 
And from the ancient written histories j 
But nw he sai4 “The laiid was good enow 
That Leif the son of Eric came unto. 



i6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But this was not our world, nay scarce could be 
The door into a place so heavenly 
As that we seek, therefore my rede is this, 

That we to gain that sure abode of bliss 
Risk dying in an unknown landless sea ; 

Although full certainly it seems to me 
All that we long for there we needs must find. 

“ Therefore, O friends, if ye are of my mind. 

When we are passed the French and English strait 
Let us seek news of that desired gate 
To immortality and blessed rest 
Within the landless waters of the west, 

But still a little to the southward steer. 

Certes no Greenland winter waits us there, 

No year-long night, but rather we shall find 
Spice-trees set waving by the western wind, 

And gentle folk who know no guile at least, 

And many a bright-winged bird and soft-skinned beast, 
For gently must the year upon them fall. 

“Now since the Fighting Man is over small 
To hold the mighty stores that we shall need* 

To turn as now to Bremen is my rede, 

And there to buy a new keel with my gold, 

And fill her with such things as she may hold \ 

And thou thenceforward, Rolf, her lord shalt be, 

Since thou art not unskilled upon the sea.” 

But unto me most fair his saying seemed. 

For of a land unknown to all I dreamed, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 17 

And certainly by some warm sea I thought 
That we the soonest thereto should be brought. 
Therefore with mirth enow passed every day 
Till in the Weser stream at last we lay 
Hearkening the bells of Bremen ring to mass, 

For on a Sunday mom our coming was. 

There in a while to chaffer did we fall, 

And of the merchants bought a dromond tall 
They called the Rose-Garland, and her we stored 
With such-like victuals as we well might hoard, 

And arms and raiment ; also there we gained 
Some few men more by stories true and feigned, 

And by that time, now needing nought at aU, 

We weighed, well armed, with good hope not to fall 
Into the hands of rovers of the sea, 

Since at that time had we heard certainly 
Edward of England drew all men to him, 

And that his fleet held whatso keel could swim 
From Jutland to Land’s End ; for all that, we 
Thought it but wise to keep the open sea 
And give to warring lands a foil wide berth ; 

Since unto all of us our lives seemed worth 
A better purchase than they erst had been. 

So it befell that we no sail had seen 
Till the sixth day at mom, when we drew near 
The land at last and saw the French coast clear,— 
The high land, ova: Guinea our pilot said* 

There at the day-break, we, apparelled 

c 



18 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Like merchant ships in seeming, now perforce 
Must meet a navy drawing thwart our course. 

Whose sails and painted hulls not far away 
Rolled slowly o'er the leaden sea and grey, 

Beneath the night-clouds by no sun yet cleared ; 

But we with anxious hearts this navy neared, 

For we sailed deep and heavy, and to fly 
Would nought avail since we were drawn so nigh, 
And fighting, must we meet but certain death. 

Soon with amazement did I hold my breath 
As from the wide bows of the Rose-Garland, 

I saw the sun, new risen o'er the land, 

Light up the shield-hung side of keel on keel, 

Their sails like knights' coats, and the points of steel 
Glittering from waist and castle and high top. 

And well indeed awhile my heart might stop 
As heading all the crowded van I saw, 

Huge, swelling out without a crease or flaw, 

A sail where, on the quartered blue and red. 

In silk and gold right well apparelled, 

The lilies gleamed, the thin gaunt leopards glared 
Out toward the land where even now there flared 
The dying beacons. Ah, with such an one 
Could I from town to town of France have run 
To end my life upon some glorious day 
Where stand the banners brighter than the May 
Above the deeds, of men, as certainly 
This king himself has fill 1 oft wished to diet 

And who know now beneath what field he lies. 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 19 

Amidst what mighty bones of enemies ? 

Ah, surely it had been a glorious thing 
From such a field to lead forth such a king, 

That he might live again with happy days, 

And more than ever win the people’s praise. 

Nor had it been an evil lot to stand 
On the worse side, with people of the land 
’Gainst such a man, when even this might fall, 

That it might be my luck some day to call 
My battle-cry o’er his low lying head, 

And I be evermore remembered. 

Well as we neared and neared, such thoughts I had 
Whereby perchance I was the less a-drad 
Of what might come, and at the worst we deemed 
They would not scorn our swords ; but as I dreamed 
Of fair towns won and desperate feats of war, 

And my old follies now were driven afar 
By that most glorious sight, a loud halloo 
Came down the wind, and one by me who knew 
The English tongue cried that they bade us run 
Close up and board, nor was there any one 
Who durst say nay to that, so presently 
Both keels were underneath the big ship’s lee ; 

While Nicholas and I together passed 
Betwixt the crowd of archers by the roast 
. Unto the poop, where ’neath his canopy 
The king sat, eyeing us as we drew nigh. 

Broad-browed he was, hook-nosed, with wide geeyeyes 



30 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


No longer eager for the coming prize, 

But keen and steadfast, many an ageing line, 

Half hidden by his sweeping beard and fine, 

Ploughed his thin cheeks, his hair was more than grey 
And like to one he seemed whose better day 
Is over to himself though foolish fame 
Shouts louder year by year his empty name. 

Unarmed he was, nor clad upon that mom 
Much like a king, an ivory hunting-horn 
Was slung about him, rich with gems and gold, 

And a great white ger-falcon did he hold 
Upon his fist ; before his feet there sat 
A scrivener making notes of this or that 
As the king bade him, and behind his chair 
His captains stood in armour rich and fair ; 

And by his side unhelmed, but armed, stood one 
I deemed none other than the prince his son ; 

For in a coat of England was he clad, 

And on his head a coronel he had. 

Tall was he, slim, made apt for feats of war, 

A splendid lord, yea, he seemed prouder fax 
Than was his sire, yet his eyes therewithal 
With languid careless glance seemed wont to Ml 
On things about, as though he deemed that nought 
Could fail unbidden to do all his thought 
But dose by him stood a war-beaten knight, 

Whose coat of war bore on a field of white 
A sharp red pile, and he of all men there 
Methought would be the one that I should fear 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS, tx 
If I led men. 

But midst my thoughts 1 heard 
The king’s voice as the high seat now we neared, 

And knew his speech because in French it was, 

That erewhile I had learnt of Nicholas. 

“ Fair sirs, what are ye ? for on this one day, 

I rule the narrow seas mine ancient way. 

Me seemeth in the highest bark I know 
The Flemish handiwork, but yet ye show 
Unlike to merchants, though your ships are deep 
And slowly through the water do ye creep ; 

And thou, fair sir, seem’st journeying from the north 
With peltries Bordeaux-ward ? Nay then go forth 
Thou wilt not harm us : yet if ye be men 
Well-born and warlike, these are fair days, when 
The good heart wins more than the merchant keeps, 
And safest still in steel the young head sleeps ; 

And here are banners thou mayest stand beneath 
And not be shamed either in life or death — 

What, man, thou reddenest, wouldst thou say me no, 
If underneath my banner thou shouldst go ? 

Nay, thou mayest speak, or let thy fellow say 
What he is stuffed with, be it yea or nay.” 

For as he spoke my fellow gazed on me 
With something like to fear, and hurriedly 
As I bent forward, thrust me on one side, 

And scarce the king’s last word would he abide 
But ’gan to say, “ Sire, from the north we come, 
fhough as for me far nigher is my home. 



22 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE 


Thy foes, my Lord, drove out my kin and me, 

Ere yet thine armed hand was upon the sea ; 
Chandos shall surely know my father's name, 

Loys of Dinan, which ill-luck, sword, and flame, 
Lord Charles of Blois, the French king, and the j>est 
In this and that land now have laid to rest, 

Except for me alone. And now, my Lord, 

If I shall seem to speak an idle word 
To such as thou art, pardon me therefore ,* 

But we, part taught by ancient books and lore, 

And part by what, nor yet so long ago, 

This man's own countrymen have come to do, 

Have gathered hope to find across the sea 
A land where we shall gain felicity 
Past tongue of man to tell of ; and our life 
Is not so sweet here, or so free from strife, 

Or glorious deeds so common, that, if we 
Should think a certain path at last to see 
To such a place, men then could think us wist 
To turn away therefrom, and shut our eyes, 

Because at many a turning here and there 
Swift death might lurlc, or unaccustomed fear. 

O King, I pray thee in this young man's face 
Flash not thy banner, nor with thy frank grace 
Tear him from life; but go thy my, let us 
Find hidden death, or life more glorious 
Than thou durst think of, knowing not the gate 
Whereby to flee from that all-shadowing fate, 

M G King, since I could walk a yard or twain 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 23 

Or utter anything but cries of pain, 

Death was before me ; yea, on the first mom 
That I remember aught, among the com 
I wandered with my nurse, behind us lay 
The walls of Vannes, white in the summer day, 

The reapers whistled, the brown maidens sung, 

As on the wain the topmost sheaf they hung, 

The swallow wheeled above high up in air, 

And midst the labour all was sweet and fair; 

When on the winding road between the fields 
I saw a glittering line of spears and shields, 

And pleased therewith called out to some one by 
E'en as I could ; he scarce for fear could cry 
* The French, the French P and turned and ran his best 
Toward the town gates, and we ran with the rest, 

I wailing loud who knew not why at all, 

But ere we reached the gates my nurse did fall, 

I with her, and I wondered much that she 
Just as she fell should still lie quietly ; 

Nor did the coloured feathers that I found 
Stuck in her side, as frightened I crawled round, 

TeU me the tale, though I was sore afeard 
At all the cries and wailing that I heard. 

“ I say, my Lord, that arrow-flight now seems 
The first thing rising dear from feeble dreams, 

And that was death ; and the next thing was death. 
For through our house all spoke with bated breath 
And wore black clothes, withal they came to me 
A little child, and did off hastily 



H 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


My shoon and hosen, and with that I heard 
The sound of doleful singing, and afeard 
Forebore to question, when I saw the feet 
Of all were bare, like mine, as toward the street 
We passed, and joined a crowd in such-like guise 
Who through the town sang woeful litanies. 
Pressing the stones with feet unused and soft, 
And bearing images of saints aloft, 

In hope gainst hope to save us from the rage 
Of that fell pest, that as an unseen cage 
Hemmed France about, and me and such as me 
They made partakers of their misery* 

“ Lo death again, and if the time served now 
Full many another picture could I show 
Of death and death, and men who ever strive 
Through every misery at least to live. 

The priest within the minster preaches it, 

And brooding o'er it doth the wise man sit 
Letting life’s joys go by. Well, blame me then. 

If I who love this changing life of men, 

And every minute of whose life were bliss 
Too great to long for greater, but for this— - 
Mock me, who take this death-bound life in hand 
And risk the rag to find a happy land, 

Where at the worst death is so far away 
No man need think of him from day to day— 
Mock me, but let us go, for I am ftin 
Our restless road the landless sea, to gain.* 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 25 

His words nigh made me weep, but while he spoke 
I noted how a mocking smile just broke 
The thin line of the Prince’s lips, and he 
Who carried the afore-named armoury 
Puffed out his wind-beat cheeks and whistled low : 
But the king smiled, and said, “ Can it be so ? 

I know not, and ye twain are such as find 
The things whereto old kings must needs be blind. 
For you the world is wide — but not for me, 

Who once had dreams of one great victory 
Wherein that world lay vanquished by my throne, 
And now, the victor in so many an one, 

Find that in Asia Alexander died 
And will not live again ; the world is wide 
For you I say, — for me a narrow space 
Betwixt the four walls of a fighting place. 

“ Poor man, why should I stay thee? live thy fill. 
Of that fair life, wherein thou seest no ill 
But fear of that fair rest I hope to win 
One day, when I have purged me of my sin. 

“Farewell, it yet may hap that I a king 
Shall be remembered but by this one thing, 

That on the mom before ye crossed the sea 
Ye gave and took in common talk with me 5 
But with this ring keep memory of the mom, 

O Breton, and thou Northman, by this horn 
Remember me, who am of Odin’s blood, 

As heralds say : moreover it were good 
Ye had some lines of writing ’neath my sea^ 



36 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Or ye might find it somewhat hard to deal 
With some of mine, who pass not for a word 
Whate’er they deem may hold a hostile sword.” 

So as we kneeled this royal man to thank, 

A derk brought forth two passes scaled and blank. 
And when we had them, with the horn and ring, 
With few words did we leave the noble king, 

And as adown the gangway steps we passed, 

We saw the yards swing creaking round the mast, 
And heard the shipman’s ho, for one by one 
The van outsailed before, by him had run 
E’en as he stayed for us, and now indeed 
Of his main battle must he take good heed : 

But as from off the mighty side we pushed, 

And in between us the green water rushed, 

I heard his scalds strike up triumphantly 
Some song that told not of the weary sea, 

But rather of the mead and fair green-wood. 

And as we leaned o’er to the wind, I stood 
And saw the bright sails leave us, and soon lost 
The pensive music by the strong wind tossed 
From wave to wave, then turning I espied 
Glittering and white upon the weather side 
The land he came from, o’er the bright green sea. 
Scarce duller than the land upon our lee, 

For now the clouds had fled before the sun 
And the bright autumn day was well begum 
Then I cried out for music too, and heard 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 27 

Die minstrels sing some well-remembered word, 

And while they sung, before me still I gazed, 

Silent with thought of many things, and mazed 
With many longings ; when I looked again 
To see those lands, nought but the restless plain 
With some far-off small fisher-boat was left ; 

A little hour for evermore had reft 

The sight of Europe from my helpless eyes, 

And crowned my store of hapless memories. 

The Elder of the City. 

Sit, friends, and tell your tale which seems to us 
Shall be a strange tale and a piteous, 

Nor shall it lack our pity for its woe, 

Nor ye due thanks for all the things ye show 
Of kingdoms nigh forgot that once were great, 

And small lands come to glorious estate. 

But, sirs, ye faint, behold these maidens stand 
Bearing the blood of this our sunburnt land 
In well-wrought cups, — drink now of this, that while 
Ye poor folk wandered, hid from fortune's smile 
Abode your coming, hidden none the less 
Below the earth from summer's happiness. 

The Wanderers 

Fair sirs, we thank you, hoping we have come 
Through many wanderings to a quiet home 
Befitting dying men — Good health and peace 



fits THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

To yon and to this land, and fair increase 
Of everything that ye can wish to have l 

But to my tale : A fair south-east wind drove 
Our ships for ten days more, and ever we 
Sailed mile for mile together steadily, 

But the tenth day I saw the Fighting Man 
Brought up to wait me, and when nigh I rnn 
Her captain hailed me, saying that he thought 
That we too far to northward had been brought. 

And we must do our southing while we could, 

So as his will to me was ever good 

In such-like things, we changed our course straight way 

And as we might till the eleventh day 

Stretched somewhat south, then baffling grew the wind 

But as we still were ignorant and blind 

Nor knew our port, we sailed on helplessly 

O’er a smooth sea, beneath a lovely sky. 

And westward ever, but no signs of land 
All through these days we saw on either hand, 

Nor indeed hoped to see, because we knew 
Some watery desert we must journey through, 

That had been huge enough to keep all men 
From gaining that we sought for until then. 

Yet when I grew downcast, I did not fail 
To call to mind, how from our land set sail 
A certain man, and, after he had passed 
Through many unknown seas, did reach at last 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 29 

A rocky island’s shore one foggy day, 

And while a little off the land he lay 
As in a dream he heard the folk call out 
In his own tongue, but mazed and all in doubt 
He turned therefrom, and afterwards in strife 
With winds and waters, much of precious life 
He wasted utterly, for when again 
He reached his port after long months of pain. 

Unto Biarmeland he chanced to go, 

And there the isle he left so long ago 
He knew at once, where many Northmen were. 

And such a fate I could not choose but fear 
For us sometimes \ and sometimes when at night 
Beneath the moon I watched the foam fly white 
From off our bows, and thought how weak and small 
Showed the Rose-Garland’s mast that looked so tall 
Beside the quays of Bremen ; when I saw 
With measured steps the watch on toward me draw, 
And in the moon the helmsman’s peering face, 

And ’twixt the cordage strained across my place 
Beheld the white sail of the Fighting Man 
Lead down the pathway of the moonlight wan — 
Then when the ocean seemed so measureless 
The very .sky itself might well be less, 

When midst the changeless piping of the wind, 

The intertwined slow waves pressed on behind 
Rolled o’er our wake and made it nought again, 
Then would it seem an ill thing and a vain 
To leave the hopeful world that we had known. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE 


3 ° 

When all was o'er, hopeless to die alone 
Within this changeless world of waters grey. 

But hope would come back to me with the day, 
The talk of men, the viol’s quivering strings, 

Would bring my heart to think of better things. 

Nor were our folk down-hearted through all this ; 

For partly with the hope of that vague bliss 
Were they made happy, partly the soft air 
And idle days wherethrough we then did fare 
Were joy enow to rude sea-faring folk. 

But this our ease at last a tempest broke 
And we must scud before it helplessly, 

Fearing each moment lest some climbing sea 
Should topple o’er our poop and end us there, 
Nathless we ’scaped, and still the wind blew fair 
For what we deemed was our right course ; but when 
On the third eve, we, as delivered men, 

Took breath because the gale was now blown out. 
And from our rolling deck we looked about 
.Over the ridges of the dark grey seas, 

And saw the sun, setting in golden ease, 

Smile out at last from out the just-cleared sky 
Over the ocean’s weltering misery, 

Still nothing of the Fighting Man we saw. 

Which last was seen when the first gusty flaw 
Smote them and us j but nothing would avail 
To mend the thing, so onward did we Mil, 

But slowly, though die moonlit night sad fair, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 31 


With all sails set that we could hoist in air, 

And rolling heavily at first, for still 
Each wave came on a glittering rippled hill, 

And lifting us aloft, showed from its height 
The waste of waves, and then to lightless night 
Dropped us adown, and much ado had we 
To ride unspilt the wallow of the sea. 

But the sun rose up in a cloudless sky, 

And from the east the wind blew cheerily, 

And southwest still we steered \ till on a day 
As nigh the mast deep in dull thoughts I lay, 

I heard a shout, and turning could I see 
One of the shipmen hurrying fast to me 
With something in his hand, who cast adown 
Close to my hand a mass of sea-weed brown 
Without more words, then knew I certainly 
The wrack, that oft before I had seen lie 
In sandy bights of Norway, and that eve 
Just as the sun the ridgy sea would leave, 

Shore birds we saw, that flew so nigh, we heard 
Their hoarse loud voice that seemed a heavenly word 

Then all were glad, but I a fool and young 
Slept not that night, but walked the deck and sung 
Snatches of songs, and verily I think 
I thought next mom of some fresh stream to drink. 
What say I ? next mom did I think to be 
Set in my godless fair eternity. 

Sirs, ye are old, and ye have seen perchance 



3 * 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Some little child for very gladness dance 
Over a scarcely-noticed worthless thing, 

Worth more to him than ransom of a king, 

Did not a pang of more than pity take 
Your heart thereat, not for the youngling’s sake, 

But for your own, for man that passes by, 

So like to God, so like the beasts that die.-- 
Lo, sirs, my pity for myself is such, 

When like an image that my hand can touch 
My old self grows unto myself grown old. 

— Sirs, I forget my story is not told. 

Next mom more wrack we saw, more birds, but stil 1 
No land as yet either for good or ill, 

But with the light increased the favouring breeze, 

And smoothly did we mount the ridgy seas. 

Then as a-nigh the good ship’s stem I stood 
Gazing adown, a piece of rough-hewn wood 
On a wave’s crest I saw, and loud I cried, 

“Drift-wood ! drift-wood I* and one from by my side, 
Maddened with joy, made for the shrouds, and clomb 
Up to the top to look on his new home, 

For sure he thought the green earth soon to see ; 

But gazing thence about him, presently 
He shouted out, “A sail astern, a sail I” 

Freshening the hope that now had ’gun to fail 
Of seeing our fellows with the earth new found; 
Wherefore we shortened sail, and sweeping round 
The hazy edges of &e sea and sky 



PROLOGUE— TUB WANDERERS. 33 

Soon from the deck could see that sail draw nigh, 
Half fearful lest she yet might chance to be 
The floating house of some strange enemy. 

Till on her sail we could at last behold 
The ruddy lion with the axe of gold, 

And Marcus Erling’s sign set comer-wise, 

The green, gold-fruited tree of Paradise. 

— Ah, what a meeting as she drew a-nigh, 

Greeted with ringing shouts and minstrelsy ; 

Alas, the joyful fever of that day, 

When all we met still told of land that lay 
Not far ahead ! Yet at our joyous feast 
A word of warning spoke the Swabian priest 
To me and Nicholas, for, “ O friends,” he said, 

“ Right welcome is the land that lies ahead 
To us who cannot turn, and in this air, 

Washed by this sea, it cannot but be fair, 

And good for us poor men I make no doubt ; 

Yet, fellows, must I warn you not to shout 
Ere we have left the troublous wood behind 
Wherein we wander desperate and blind : 

Think what may dwell there l Cali to mind the tale 
We heard last winter o’er the yule-tide ale, 

When that small, withered, black-eyed Genoese 
Told of the island in the outer seas 
He and his fellows reached upon a tide, 

And how, as lying by a streamlet’s side, 

With ripe fruits ready unto every hand, 

And lacking not for women of the land, 



34 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE , 


The devils came and slew them, all but hint, 
Who, how he scarce knew, made a shift to swim 
Off to his ship : nor must ye, fellows, fear 
Such things alone, for mayhap men dwell here 
Who worship dreadful gods, and sacrifice 
Poor travellers to them in such horrid wise 
As I have heard of ; or let this go by. 

Yet we may chance to come to slavery, 

Or all our strength and weapons be too poor 
To conquer such beasts as the unknown shore 
May breed; or set all these ill things aside. 

It yet may be our lot to wander wide 
Through many lands before at last we come 
Unto the gates of our enduring home.” 


But what availed such warning unto us 
Who by this change made nigh delirious 
Spake wisdom outward from the teeth, but though: 
That in a little hour we should be brought 
Unto that bliss our hearts were set upon, 

That more than very heaven we now had won. 


Well, the next mom unto our land we Game, 
And even now my cheeks grow red with shame* 
To think what words I said to Nicholas, 

(Smce on that night in the great ship I was,) 



a# if he were God, 


Or at the -feast hi that fair land had trod, 


And kBew it'weB, smd stiH he answered me 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 


35 


As some great doctor in theology 

Might his poor scholar, asking him of heaven. 

But unto me next mom the grace was given 
To see land first, and when men certainly 
That blessed sight of all sights could desciy, 

All hearts were melted, and with happy tears, 

Bom of the death of all our doubts and fears, 

Yea, with loud weeping, each did each embrace 
For joy that we had gained the glorious place. 
Then must the minstrels sing, then must they play 
Some joyous strain to welcome in the day, 

But for hot tears could see nor bow nor string, 

Nor for the rising sobs make shift to sing; 

Yea, some of us in that first ecstasy 
For joy of ’scaping death went near to die. 

Then might be seen how hard is this world's lot 
When such a marvel was our grief forgot. 

And what a thing the world’s joy is to bear, 

When on our hearts the broken bonds of care 
Had left such scars, no man of us could say 
The burning words upon his lips that lay ; 

Since, trained to hide the depths of misery, 

Amidst that joy no more our tongues were free 
Ah, then it was indeed when first I knew, 

When all our wildest dreams seemed coming true, 
And we had reached the. gates of Paradise 
And endless bliss, at what unmeasured price 
vfan sets his life, and drawing happy breath. 

. shuddered at the once familiar death. . 



3<5 


THE EAJRTHL Y TAR A DISK* 


Alas, the happy day ! the foolish day ! 

Alas, the sweet time, too soon passed away ! 

Well, in a while I gained the Rose-Garland, 
And as toward shore we steadily did stand 
With all sail set, the wind, which had been light 
Since the beginning of the just past night, 

Failed utterly, and the sharp ripple slept, 

Then toiling hard forward our keels we swept, 
Making small way, until night fell again, 

And then, although of landing we were fain, 
Needs must we wait, but when the sun was set 
Then the cool night a light air did beget, 

And ’neath the stars slowly we moved along. 
And found ourselves within a current strong 
At daybreak, and the land beneath our lec. 

There a long line of breakers could we see, 
That on a yellow sandy beach did fall, 

And then a belt of grass, and then a wall 
Of green trees, rising dark against the sky. 

Not long we looked, but anchored presently 
A furlong from the shore, and then, all armed, 
Into the boats the most part of us swarmed. 

And pulled with eager hands unto the beach. 
But when the seething surf our prow did reach 
From off the bows I leapt into the sea 
Waist deep, and, wading, was the first to be 
Upon that land ; then to the flowers I ran, 

And cried aloud like to a drunken man 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS 37 

Words without meaning, whereof none took heed, 

For all across the yellow beach made speed 
To roll among the fair flowers and the grass. 

But when our folly somewhat tempered was, 

And we could talk like men, we thought it good 
To try if we could pierce the thick black wood, 

And see what me& might dwell in that new land ; 

But when we entered it, on either hand 
Uprose the trunks, with underwood entwined 
Making one thicket, thorny, dense, and blind; 

Where with our axes, labouring half the day, 

We scarcely made some half a rod of way ; 

Therefore, we left that place and tried again, 

Yea, many times, but yet was all in vain ; 

So to the ships we went, when we had been 
A long way in our arms, nor yet had seen 
A sign of man, but as for living things, 

Gay birds with many-coloured crests and wings, 
Conies a-nigh the beach, and while we hacked 
Within the wood, grey serpents, yellow-backed, 

And monstrous lizards ; yea, and one man said 
That 'midst the thorns he saw a dragon's head; 

And keeping still his eyes on it he felt 
For a stout shaft he had within his belt ; 

But just as he had got it to die string 
And drawn his hand aback, the loathly thing 
Vanished away, and how he could not tell 

Now spite of all* little our courage fell, 



3 » 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


For this day’s work, nay rather, all things seemed 
To show that we no foolish dream had dreamed — 
The pathless, fearful sea, the land that lay 
So strange, so hard to find, so fai away, 

The lovely summer air, the while we knew 
That unto winter now at home it grew, 

The flowery shore, the dragon-guarded wood, 

So hard to pierce — each one of these made good 
The foolish hope that led us from our home, 

That we to utter misery might come. 

Now next morn when the tide began to flow 
We weighed, and somewhat northward did we go 
Coasting that land, and every now and then 
We went ashore to try the woods again, 

But little change we found in them, until 
Inland we saw a bare and scarped white hill 
Rise o’er their tops, and going further on 
Unto a broad green river’s mouth we won, 

And entering there, ran up it with the flood, 

For it was deep although ’twixt walls of wood 
Darkly enough its shaded stream did flow, 

And high trees hid the hill we saw just now. 

So as we peered about from side to side 
A path upon the right bank we espied 
Through the thick wood, and mooring hastily 
Our ships unto the trunks of trees thereby, 
Laurence and I with sixty men took land 
With bow or cutting sword or bill in hand, 



PROLOGUE — THE WANDERERS. 


tod bearing food to last till the thiid day ; 

But with the others there did Nicholas stay 
To guard the ships, with whom was Kirstin still, 
Who now seemed pining for old things, and ill, 
Spite of the sea-breeze and the lovely air. 

But as for us, we followed up With care 
A winding path, looking from left to right 
Lest any deadly thing should come in sight ; 

And certainly our path a dragon crossed 
That in the thicket presently we lost ; 

And some men said a leopard they espied, 

And further on we heard a beast that cried; 
Serpents we saw, like those we erst had seen, 

And many-coloured birds, and lizards green, 

And apes that chattered from amidst the trees. 

So on we went until a dying breeze 
We felt upon our faces, and soon grew 
The forest thinner, till at last we knew 
The great scarped hill, which if we now could scale 
For sight of much far country would avail j 
But coming there we climbed it easily, 

For though escarped and rough toward the sea, 
The beaten path we followed led us round 
To where a soft and grassy slope we found, 

And there it forked, one arm led up the hill 
Another through the forest wound on still ; 

Which last we left, in good hope soon to see 
Some signs of man, which happened presently; 

For two-thirds up the hill we reached a space 



40 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Levelled by man’s hand in the mountain’s face, 

And there a rude shrine stood, of unhewn stones 
Both walls and roof, with a great heap of bones 
Piled up outside it : there awhile we stood 
In doubt, for something there made cold our blood. 
Till brother Laurence, with a whispered word, 
Crossed himself thrice, and drawing forth his sword 
Entered alone, but therewith presently 
From the inside called out aloud to me 
To follow, so I trembling, yet went in 
To that abode of unknown monstrous sin, 

And others followed : therein could we see, 

Amidst the gloom by peering steadily, 

An altar of rough stones, and over it 
We saw a god of yellow metal sit, 

A cubit long, which Laurence with his tongue 
Had touched and found pure gold ; withal there hung 
Against the wall men’s bodies brown and dry, 

Which gaudy rags of raiment wretchedly 
Did wrap about, and all their heads were wreathed 
With golden chaplets ; and meanwhile we breathed 
A heavy, faint, and sweet spice-laden air, 

As though that incense late were scattered there. 

But from that house of devils soon we passed 
Trembling and pale, Laurence the priest, the last, 

And got away in haste, nor durst we take 
Those golden chaplets for their wearers’ sake, 

Or that grim golden devil whose they were; 

Yet for the rest, although they brought us fear 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 41 

They did but seem to show our heaven a-nigh 
Because we deemed these might have come to die 
In seeking it, being slain for fatal sin. 

And now we set ourselves in haste to win 
Up to that mountain’s top, and on the way 
Looked backward oft upon the land that lay 
Beneath the hill, and still on every hand 
The forest seemed to cover all the land, 

But that some four leagues off we saw a space 
Cleared of the trees, and in that open place 
Houses we seemed to see, and rising smoke 
That told where dwelt the unknown, unseen folk 
But when at last the utmost top we won 
A dismal sight our eyes must look upon ; 

The mountain’s summit, levelled by man’s art. 

Was hedged by high stones set some yard apart 
All round a smooth paved space, and midst of these 
We saw a group of well-wrought images, 

Or so they seemed at first, who stood around 
An old hoar man laid on the rocky ground 
Who seemed to live as yet ; now drawing near 
We saw indeed what things these figures were ; 

Dead corpses, by some deft embalmer dried, 

And on this mountain after they had died 
Set up like players on a yule-tide feast ; 

Here stood a hunter, with a spotted beast 
Most Hke a leopard, writhing up his spear ; 

Nigh the old man stood one as if drawn near 
To give him drink, and on each side his head 



4 * 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Two damsels daintily apparelled ; 

And then again, nigh him who bore the cup, 

Were two who ’twixt them bore a litter up 
As though upon a journey he should go, 

And round about stood men with spear and bow, 

And painted targets as the guard to all, 

Headed by one beyond man's stature tall, 

Who, half turned round, as though he gave the word, 
Seemed as he once had been a mighty lord. 

But the live man amid the corpses laid, 

Turning from side to side, some faint word said 
Now and again, but kept his eyes shut fast, 

And we when from the green slope we had passed 
On to this dreadful stage, awe-struck and scared, 
Awhile upon the ghastly puppets stared, 

Then trembling, with drawn swords, came close a-nigh 
To where the hapless ancient man did lie, 

Who at the noise we made now oped his eyes 
And fixing them upon us did uprise, 

And with a fearful scream stretched out his hand, 
While upright on his head his hair did stand 
For very tenor, while we none the less 
Were rooted to the ground for fcarfulness, 

And scarce our weapons could make shift to hold 
But as we stood and gazed, over he rolled 
Like a death-stneken bull, and there he lay, 

With his long-hoarded life quite past away. 

Then in our hearts did wonder conquer teai. 

And to the dead men did we draw anear 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 


And found them such-like things as I have said, 
But he, their master, was apparelled 
Like to those others that we saw e'en now 
Hung up within the dreary house below. 

Right little courage had we there to stay, 

So down the hill again we took our way, 

When looking landward thence we had but seen. 
All round about, the forest dull and green, 
Pierced by the river where our ships we left. 

And bounded by far-off blue mountains, cleft 
By passes here and there ; but we went by 
The chapel of the gold god silently, 

For doubts had risen in our hearts at last 
If yet the bitterness of death were past. 

But having come again into the wood, 

We there took counsel whether it were good 
To turn back to the ships, or push on still 
Till we had reached the place that from the hill 
We had beheld, and since the last seemed best 
Onward we marched, scarce staying to take rest 
And eat some food, for feverish did we grow 
For haste the best or worst of aH to know. 

Along the path that, as I said before, 

Led from the hill, we went, and laboured sore 
To gain the open ere the night should fall, 

But yet in vain, for like a dreary pall 

Cast o'er the world, the darkness hemmed us m, 

And though we struggled desperately to win 



44 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


From out the forest through the very night, 

Yet did that labour so abate our might, 

We thought it good to rest among the trees, 

Nor come on those who might be enemies 
In the thick darkness, neither did we dare 
To light a fire lest folk should slay us there 
Mazed and defenceless ; so the one half slept 
As they might do, the while the others kept 
Good guard in turn; and as we watched we heard 
Sounds that might well have made bold men afeard 
And cowards die of fear, but we, alone, 

Apart from all, such desperate men were grown, 

If we should fail to win our Paradise, 

That common life we now might well despise. 

So by the day-break on our way we were 
When we had seen to all our fighting gear; 

And soon we came unto that open space 
And here and there about a grassy place 
Saw houses scattered, neither great nor fair, 

For they were framed of trees as they grew there. 
And walled with wattle-work from tree to tree ; 

And thereabout beasts unknown did we see, 
Four-footed, tame; and soon a man came out 
From the first house, and with a startled shout 
Took to his heels, and soon from far and near, 

The folk swarmed out, and still as in great fear 
Gave us no second look, but ran their beat, 

And they being clad but lightly for the rest 
To follow them seemed little mastery. 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 45 

So to their houses gat we speedily 
To see if we might take some loiterer ; 

And some few feeble folk we did find there, 

Though most had fled, and unto these with pam 
We made some little of our meaning plain, 

And sent an old man forth into the wood 
To show his fellows that our will was good 
Who going from us came back presently 
His message done, and with him two or three 
The boldest of his folk, and they in turn 
A little of us by our signs did learn, 

Then went their way : and so at last all fear 
Was laid aside, and thronging they drew near 
To look upon us ; and at last came one 
Who had upon his breast a golden sun, 

And in strange glittering gay attire was clad ) 

He let us know our coming made him glad, 

And bade us come with him ; so thereon we, 
Thinking him some one in authority, 

Rose up and followed him, who with glad face 
Led us through closer streets of that strange place, 
And brought us lastly to a shapely hall 
Round and high-roofed, held up with tree-trunks tall, 
And midst his lords the barbarous king sat there, 
Gold-crowned, in strange apparel rich and fair, 
Whereat we shuddered, for we saw that he 
Was dad like him that erewhile we did see 
Upon the MB, and like those other ones 
Hung in the dismal shrine of unhewn stones. . 



46 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE 


Yet nought of evil did he seem to think. 

But bade us sit by him and eat and drink, 

So eating did we speak by signs meanwhile 
Each unto each, and they would laugh and smile 
As folk well pleased ; and with them all that day 
Well feasted, learning some things did we stay. 

And sure of all the folk I ever saw 
These were the gentlest : if they had a law 
We knew not then, but still they seemed to be 
Like the gold people of antiquity. 

Now when we tried to ask for that good land, 
Eastward and seaward did they point the hand ; 

Yet if they knew what thing we meant thereby 
We knew not ; but when we for our reply 
Said that we came thence, they made signs to say 
They knew it well, and kneeling down they lay 
Before our feet, as people worshipping. 

But we, though somewhat troubled at this thing, 
Failed not to hope, because it seemed to us 
That this so simple folk and virtuous, 

So happy midst their dreary forest bowers, 

Showed at the least a better land than ours. 

And some yet better thing far onward lay. 

Amidst all this we made a shift to pray 
That some of them would go with us, to be 
Our fellows on the perilous green sea, 

And much did they rejoice when this they knew, 

And straightway midst their young men lots they drew 
And the next mom of these they gave us ten, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. a 7 

And wept at our departing. 

Now these men, 

Though brown indeed through dint of that hot sun, 
Were comely and well knit, as any one 
I saw in Greece, and fit for deeds of war, 

Though as I said of all men gentlest far ; 

Their arms were axe and spear, and shield and bow, 
But nought of iron did they seem to know, 

For all their cutting tools were edged with flint, 

Or with soft copper, that soon turned and bent ; 

With cloths of cotton were their bodies clad, 

But other raiment for delight they had 
Most fairly woven of some unknown thing ; 

And all of them from little child to king 
Had many ornaments of beaten gold : 

Certes, we might have gathered wealth untold 
Amongst them, if thereto had turned our thought. 
But none the glittering evil valued aught. 

Now of these foresters, we learned, that they, 
Hemmed by the woods, went seldom a long way 
From where we saw them, and no boat they had, 

Nor much of other people good or bad 
They knew, and ever had they little war : 

But now and then a folk would come from far 
In ships unHke to ours, and for their gold 
Would give diem goods ; and some men over bold 
Who dwelt beyond the great hill we had seen. 

Had waged them war, but these all slain had been 
Among the tangled woods by men who knew 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


4 & 

What tracks of beasts the thicket might pierce through 
Such things they told us whom we brought away, 
But after this, for certes on that day 
Not much we gathered of their way of life. 

So to the ships we came at last, and rife 
With many things new learned, we told them all, 

And though our courage might begin to fall 
A little now, yet each to other we 
Made countenance of great felicity, 

And spoke as if the prize were well-nigh won. 

Behold then, sirs, how fortune led us on. 

Little by little till we reached the worst, 

And still our lives grew more and more accurst. 

The Elder of tiik City. 

Nay, friends, believe your worser life now past. 

And that a little bliss is reached at last ; 

Take heart, therefore, for like a talc so told 
Is each man’s life : and ye, who have been hold 
To see and suffer such unheard-of things, 

Henceforth shall be more worshipped than the kings 
We hear you name; since then ye reach this day, 
How are ye worse for what has passed away ? 

The Wanderer. 

Kind folk, what words of ours can give you praise 
That fits your kindness ; yet for those past days, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 


49 


If we bemoan our lot, think this at least : 

We are as men, who cast aside a feast 
Amidst their lowly fellows, that they may 
Eat with the king, and who at end of day, 

Bearing sore stripes, with great humility 
Must pray the bedesmen of those men to be 
They scorned that day while yet the sun was high. 

Not long within the river did we lie, 

But put to sea intending as before 

To coast with watchful eyes the unknown shore, 

And strive to pierce the woods : three days we sailed 
And little all our watchfulness availed, 

Though all that time the wind was fair enow ; 

But on the fourth day it began to blow 
From off the land, and still increased on us 
Until the storm grown wild and furious, 

Although at anchor still we strove to ride, 

Had blown us out into the ocean wide, 

Fax out of sight of land \ and when at last. 

After three days, its fury was o’erpast, 

Of all our counsels this one was the best 
To beat back blindly to the longed-for west ; 

Baffling the wind was, toilsome was the way. 

Nor did we make land till the thirtieth day. 

When both flesh-meat and water were nigh spent, 

But anchoring at last, ashore we went, 

And found the land far better than die first, 

For this with no thick forest was accurst, 

E - 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


5 ° 

Though here and there were scattered clumps of wood. 
The air was cooler, too, but soft and good, 

Fair streams we saw, and herds of goats and deer. 

But nothing noisome for a man to fear. 

So since at anchor safe our good ships lay 
Within the long horns of a sandy bay, 

We thought it good ashore to take our ease, 

And pitched our tents a-nigh some maple-trees 
Not far from shore, and there with little pain 
Enough of venison quickly did we gain 
To feast us all, and high feast did we hold 
Lighting great fires, for now the nights were cold, 

And we were fain a noble roast to eat ; 

Nor did we lack for drink to better meat, 

For from the dark hold of the Rose-Garland 
A well-hooped cask our shipmen brought a-land, 

That knew some white-walled city of the Rhine. 

There crowned with flowers, and flushed with noble 
wine, 

Hearkening the distant murmur of the main, 

And safe upon, our promised land again, 

What wonder if our vain hopes rose once more 
And Heaven seemed dull beside that twice-won shore 
By midnight in our tents were we asleep, 

And little watch that night did any keep, 

For as qur garden that fair land we deemed. 

But in my sleep of lovely things I dreamed, 

For I was back at Mickiegarth once more, 

But not a court-man’s son there as of yore, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 5 

But the Greek king, or so I seemed to be, 

Set on the throne whose awe and majesty 
Gold lions guard ; before whose moveless feet 
A damsel knelt, praying in words so sweet 
For what I know not now, that both mine eyes 
Grew full of tears, and I must bid her rise 
And sit beside me ; step by step she came 
Up the gold stair, setting my heart a-fkrne 
With all her beauty, till she reached the throne 
And there sat down, but as with her alone 
In that vast hall, my hand her hand did seek, 

And on my face I felt her balmy cheek, 

Throughout my heart there shot a dreadful pang. 
And down below us, with a sudden clang 
The golden lions rose, and roared aloud, 

And in at every door did armed men crowd, 
Shouting out death and curses, and I fell 
Dreaming indeed that this at last was hell. 

But therewithal I woke, and through the night 
Heard shrieks and shouts and clamour of the fight. 
And snatching up my axe^ unarmed beside 
Nor scarce awaked, my rallying cry I cried. 

And with good haste unto the hubbub went ; 

But even in the entry of the tent 

Some dark mass hid the star-besprinkled sky, 

And whistling past my head a spear did fly, 

And striking out I saw a naked man 
Fall *neafh my blow, nor heeded him, but ran 



52 


THE EARTH! Y PARADISE . 


Unto the captain’s tent, for there indeed 
I saw my fellows stand at desperate need, 

Beset with foes, nor yet armed more than I, 
Though on the way I rallied hastily 
Some better armed, with whom I stiaightway fell 
Upon the foe, who with a hideous yell 
Turned round upon us ; but we desperate 
And fresh, and dangerous for our axes’ weight, 
Fought so that they must needs give back a pace 
And yield our fellows some small breathing space 
Then gathering all together, side by side 
We laid our weapons, and our cries we cried 
And rushed upon them, who abode no more 
Our levelled points, but scattering from the shore 
Ran here and there, but when some two or three 
We in the chase had slain right easily, 

We held our hands, nor followed more their flight, 
Fearing the many chances of the night. 

Then did we light our watch-fires up again 
And armed us all, and found three good men slain f 
Ten wounded, among whom was Nicholas, 

Though little heedful of these things he was, 

For in his tent he sat upon the ground, 

Holding fair Kirstin’s hand, whom he had found 
Dead, with a feathered javelia in her breast 

But taking counsel now, we thought it best 
To gather up our goods and get away 
Unto the ships, and there to wait the day ; 

Nor did we loiter, fearful lest the foe, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS, 


Who somewhat now our feebleness must know, 
Should come on us with force made manifold. 

And all our story quickly should be told. 

So to our boats in haste the others gat, 

But in his tent, not speaking, Nicholas sat, 

Nor moved when o’er his head we struck the tent. 
But when all things were ready, then I went 
And raised the body up, and silently 
Bore it adown the beach unto the sea ; 

Then he arose and followed me, and when 
He reached at last the now embarking men, 

And in a boat my burden I had laid, 

He sat beside ; but no word had he said 
Since first he knew her slain. Such ending had 
The night at whose beginning all were glad. 

One wounded man of theirs we brought with us 
Hoping for news, but he grew furious 
When he awoke aboard from out his swoon, 

And tore his wounds, and smote himself, and soon 
Died outright, though his hurts were slight enow. 
So nought from him of that land could we know. 
But now as we that luckless country scanned, 

Just at the daybreak did we see a band 
Of these barbarians come with shout and yell 
Across the place where all these things befell; 
Down to the very edges of the sea ; 

But though armed now, by day, we easily 
Had made a shift no few erf them to slay, 



54 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE 


It seemed to us the better course to weigh 
And try another entry to that land ; 

So southward with a light wind did we stand, 

Not losing sight of shore, and now and then 
I led ashore the more part of our men 
Well armed, by daylight, and the barbarous folk 
Once and again from bushments on us broke. 
Whom without loss of men we brushed away. 

But in our turn it happed to us one day 
Upon a knot of them un wares to come, 

These we bore back with us, the most of whom 
Would neither eat nor drink, but sullenly 
Sat in a comer of the ship to die ; 

But ’mongst them was a woman, who at last, 

Won by the glitter of some toy we cast 
About her neck, by soft words and by wine. 

Began to answer us by sign to sign \ 

Of whom we learned not much indeed, but when 
We set on shore those tameless savage men, 

And would have left her too, she seemed to pray. 
For terror of her folk, with us to stay: 

Therefore we took her back with us, and she, 
Though learning not our tongue too easily, 

Unto the forest-folk began to speak. 

Now midst all this passed many a weary week. 
And we no nigher all the time had come 
Unto the portal of our blissful home, 

And needs oui bright hope somewhat must decay , 



PROLOGUE — THE WANDERERS. 55 

Yet none the less as dull day passed by day, 

Still onward by our folly were we led, 

And still with lies our wavering hearts we fed. 

Happy we were in this, that still the wind 
Blew as we wished, and still the air was kind , 

Nor failed we of fresh water as we went 
Along the coast, and oft our bows we bent 
On beast and fowl, and had no lack of food. 

Upon a day it chanced, that as we stood 
Somewhat off shore to fetch about a ness, 

Although the wind was blowing less and less, 

We were entrapped into a fearful sea, 

And carried by a current furiously 
Away from shore, and there were we so tost 
That for awhile we deemed ourselves but lost 
Amid those tumbling waves \ but now at last, 

When out of sight of land we long had passed, 

The sea fell, and again toward land we stood, 

Which, reached upon the tenth day, seemed right good, 
But yet untilled, and mountains rose up high 
Far inland, mingling with the cloudy sky. 

Once more we took the land, and since we found 
That, more than ever, beasts did there abound, 

We pitched our camp beside a little stream, 

But scarcely there of Paradise did dream 
As heretofore. Our camp we fortified 
With wall and dyke, and then the land we tried, 

And found the people most untaught and wild. 

Nigh void of arts, but harmless, good, and mild, 



5 ^ 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Nor fearing us : with some of these we went 
Back to our camp and people, with intent 
To question them by her we last had got. 

But when she heard their tongue she knew it not, 
Nor they her tongue : howbeit they seemed to say, 
That o’er the mountains other lands there lay 
Where folk dwelt, clothed and armed like unto us. 

But made withal as they were timorous 

And feared them much. Then we made signs that we. 

So little feared by all that tumbling sea, 

Would go to seek them ; but they still would stay 
Our journey ; nathless what they meant to say 
We scarce knew yet : howbeit, since these men 
Were friendly, and the weather, which till then 
Had been most fair, now grew to storm and rain, 

And the wind blew on land, and not in vain 
To us poor fools, that tale, half understood 
Those folk had told : midst all, we thought it good 
To haul our ships ashore, and build us there 
A place where we might dwell, till we could fare 
Along the coast, or inland it might be, 

That fertile realm, those goodly men to see. 

Right foul the weather was a dreary space 
While we abode with people of that place, 

And built them huts, as well we could, for we 
Who dwell in Norway have great mastery 
In woodwright's craft; but they in turn would bring 
Wild fruits to us, and many a woodland thing, 

And catch us fish, and show us how to take 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 57 


The smaller beasts, and meanwhile for our sake 
They learned our tongue, and we too somewhat learned 
Of words of theirs j but day by day we yearned 
To cross those mountains, and I woke no mom, 

To find myself lost, wretched, and forlorn, 

But those far-off white summits gave me heart ; 

Now too those folk their story could impart 
Concerning them, and that in short was this — 

— Beyond them lay a fair abode of bliss 
Where dwelt men like the Gods, and clad as we, 

Who doubtless lived on through eternity 
Unless the very world should come to nought , 

But never had they had the impious thought 
To scale those mountains ; since most surely, none 
Of men they knew could follow up the sun, 

The fearful sun, and live ; but as for us 
They said, who were so wise and glorious 
It might not be so. 

Thus they spoke one eve 
Wien the black rain-clouds for a while did leave 
Upon the fresh and teeming earth to frown, 

And we they spoke to had just set us down 
Midmost their village : from the resting earth 
Sweet odours rose, and in their noisy mirth 
The women played, as rising from the brook 
Off their long locks the glittering drops they shook ; 
Betwixt the huts the children raced along ; 

Some man was singing a wild barbarous song 
A-nigh us, and these folk possessing nought^ 



58 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

And lacking nought, lived happy, free from thought, 
Or so it seemed— but we, what tiling could pay 
For all that we had left so far away? 

Such thoughts as these I uttered murmuringly, 

But lifting up mine eyes, against the sky 
Beheld the snowy peaks brought near to us 
By a strange sunset, red and glorious, 

That seemed as through the much-piaised land it lit, 
And would do, long hours after wc must sit 
Beneath the twinkling stars with none to heed : 

And though I knew it was not so indeed, 

Yet did it seem to answer me, as though 
It called us once more on our quest to go. 

Then springing up I raised my voice and said,— 
“What is it, fellows, fear ye to be dead 
Upon those peaks, when, if ye loiter here 
Half dead, with very death still drawing near, 

Your lives are wasted all the more for this, 

That ye in this world thought to garner bliss ; 

Unless indeed ye chance to think it well 
With this unclad and barbarous folk to dwell, 
Heedless and hopeless ; ye, to whom the land, 

That o’er the world has sent so many a band 
Of conquering men, was yet not good enough. 

“Did ye then deem the way would not be rough 
Unto the lovely land ye so desire? 

Did ye not rather swear through blood and fire, 

■\nd all ill things to follow up this quest 
Till life or death your longing laid to rest? 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS 59 

“ Let us not linger here then, until fate 
Make longing unavailing, hope too late, 

And turn to lamentations all our prayers, 

But with to-morrow cast aside your cares, 

And stout of heart make ready for the strife 
’Twixt this short time of dreaming and real life. 

“ Lo now, if but the half will come with me, 

The summit of those mountains will I see, 

Or, else die first ; yea, if but twenty men 
Will follow me ; nor will I stay if ten 
Will share my trouble or felicity — 

What do I say ? alone, O friends, will I 
Seek for my life, for no man can die twice, 

And death or life may give me Paradise ! ” 

Then Nicholas said, “ Rolf, I will go with thee ; 

For desperate do I think the quest to be, 

And I shall die, and that to me is well, 

Or else I may forget, I cannot tell — 

Still I will go." 

Then Laurence said, “I too 
Will go remembering what I said to you, 

When any land, the first to which we came 
Seemed that we sought, and set your hearts aflame, 
And all seemed won to you : hut still I think, 
Perchance years hence, the fount of life to drink, 
Unless by some ill chance I first am slain, 

But boundless risk must pay for boundless gam/ 1 

So most men said, but yet a few there were 



6o 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Who said, “ Nay, soothly let us live on here. 

We have been fools and we must pay therefore 
With this dull life, and labour very sore 
Until we die ; yet are we grown too wise 
Upon this earth to seek for Paradise ; 

Leave us, but ye may yet come back again 
When ye have found your trouble nought and vain.” 

Well, in three days we left those men behind, 

To dwell among the simple folk and kind 
Who were our guides at first, until that we 
Reached the green hills clustered confusedly 
About the mountains, then they turned, right glad 
That till that time no horrors they had had j 
But we still hopeful, making nought of time, 

The rugged rocks now set ourselves to climb, 

And lonely there for days and days and days 
We stumbled through the blind and bitter ways, 

Now rising to the never-melting snow, 

Now beaten thence, and fain to try below 
Another kingdom of that world of stone. 

At last when all our means of life were gone, 

And some of us had fallen in the fight 
With cold and weariness, we came in sight 
Of what we hungered for — what then — what then? 
— A savage land, a land untilled again, 

No lack of food while lasted shaft or bow. 

But folk the worst of all we came to know ; 

Scarce like to men, yea, worse than most of beasts, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 6 1 

For of men slain they made their impious feasts } 
These, as I deem for our fresh blood athirst 
From out the thick wood often on us burst 
Not heeding death, and in confused fight 
We spent full many a wretched day and night, 

That yet were happiest of the times we knew, 

For with our grief such fearful foes we grew, 

That Odin's gods had hardly scared men more 
As fearless through the naked press we bore. 

At first indeed some prisoners did we take, 

Asking them questions for our fair land's sake, 
Hoping 'gainst hope \ but when in vain had been 
Our questioning, and we one day had seen 
Their way of banqueting, then axe and spear 
Ended the wretched life and sullen fear 
Of any wild man wounded in the fight. 

So with the failing of our hoped delight 
We grew to be like devils — then I knew 
&t my own cost, what each man cometh to 
When every pleasure from his life is gone, 

\&a hunger and desire of life alone, 

That still beget dull rage and bestial fears, 

Like gnawing serpents through the world he bears. 

What time we spent there ? nay, I do not know • 
For happy fok no time can pass too slow 
Because they die ; because at last they die 
\nd are at rest, no time too fast can fly 
For wretches ; but eternity of woe 
Had hemmed us in, and neither fast or slow 



62 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Passed the dull time as we held reckoning. 

Yet midst so many a wretched, hopeless thing 
One hope there was, if it was still a hope, 

At last, at last, to turn, and scale the cope 
Of those dread mountains we had clambered o'er 
And we did turn, and with what labour sore, 

What thirst, what hunger, and what wretchedness* 
We struggled daily, how can words express ? 

Yet amidst all, the kind God led us on 
Until at last a high raised pass we won 
And like grey clouds afar beheld the sea, 

And weakened with our toil and misery 
Wept at that sight, that like a friend did seem 
Forgotten long, beheld but in a dream 
When we know not if we be still alive. 

But thence descending, we with rocks did strive 
Till dwindled, worn, at last we reached the plain 
And came unto our untaught friends again, 

And those we left, who yet alive and well, 

Wedded to brown wives, fain would have us tell 
The story of our woes, which when they heard, 
The country people wondered at our word, 

But not our fellows ; and so all being said 
A little there we gathered lustihead 
Still talking over what was best to do. 

And we the leaders yet were fain to go 
From sea to sea and take what God might send* 
Who at the worst our hopes and griefs would end 
With that same death we once had hoped to stay, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 63 

Or even yet might send us such a day, 

That our past troubles should but make us glad 
As men rejoice in pensive songs and sad. 

This was our counsel ; those that we had left 
Said, that they once before had been bereft 
Of friends and country by a sick man’s dream, 

That this their life not evil did they deem 
Nor would they rashly cast it down the wind ; 

But whoso wandered, they would stay behind. 

Others there were who said, whate’er might come, 
They would at least seek for the happy home 
They had forgotten once, and there at last 
In penitence for sins and follies past 
Wait for the death that they in vain had fled. 

Well, when all things by all sides had been said 
We drew the ships again unto the sea, 

Which those who went not with us, carefully 
Had tended for those years we were away 
(Which still they said was ten months and a dav) ; 
And these we rigged, and in a little while 
The Fighting Man looked o’er the false sea’s smile 
Unto the land of Norway, and our band 
Across the bulwarks of the Rose-Garland, 

Amidst of tears and doubt and misery 
Sent after them a feeble farewell cry, 

And they returned a tremulous faint cheer, 

While from the sandy shell-strewn beach anear 
The soft west wind across the waves bore out 



6 4 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


A strange confused noise of wail and shout 
For there the dark line of the outland folk 
A few familiar grey-eyed faces broke, 

That minded us of Norway left astern, 

Ere we began our heavy task to learn. 

The Elder of the City. 

Sirs, by my deeming had ye still gone on 
When ye had crossed the mountains, ye had won 
Unto another sea at last, and there 
Had found clad folk, and cities great and fair 
Though not the deathless country of your thought 

The Wanderer. 

Yea, sirs, and short of that we had deemed nought. 
Ere yet our hope of life had fully died, 

And for those cities scarce should we have tried. 

E’en had we known of them, and certainly 
Nought but those bestial people did we see : 

But let me hasten now unto the end. 

Fair wind and lovely weather God did send 
To us deserted men, who but two score 
Now mustered, so we stood off from the shore 
Still stretching south till we lost land again, 

Because we deemed the labour would be vain 
To try the shore too near where we had been, 

Where none of us as yet a sign had seen 
Of that which we desired. And now we few, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 65 

Thus left alone, each unto other grew 

The dearer friends, and less accursed we seemed 

As still the less of ’scaping death we dreamed, 

And knew the lot of all men should be ours, 

A chequered day of sunshine and of showers 
Fading to twilight and dark night at last. 

Those forest folk with ours their lot had cast, 

And ever unto us were leal and true, 

And now when all our tongue at last they knew 
They told us tales, too long to tell as now ; 
y'et this one tiling I fain to you would show 
About the dying man our sight did kill 
Amidst the corpses on that dreary hill : 

Namely, that when their king drew nigh to death. 

But still had left in him some little breath, 

They bore him to that hill, when they had slain, 

By a wild root that killed with little pain. 

His servants and his wives like as we saw, 

Thinking that thence the gods his soul would draw 
To heaven ; but the king being dead at last, 

The servants dead being taken down, they cast 
Into the river, but the king they hung 
Embalmed within that chapel, where they sung 
Some office over him in solemn wise, 

Amidst the smoke of plenteous sacrifice. 

Well, though wild hope no longer in us burned. 
Unto the land within a while we turned, 

And found it much the same, and still untilled, 
t 



66 THE EARTHL V PARADISE. 

And still its people of all aits unskilled ; 

And some were dangerous and some were kind ; 

But midst them no more tidings did we find 
Of what we once had deemed well won, but now 
Was like the dream of some past kingly show. 

What shall I say of all these savages, 

Of these wide plains beset with unsown trees, 

Through which untamed man-fearing beasts did range ? 
To us at least there seemed but little change, 

For we were growing weary of the world. 

Whiles did we dwell ashore, whiles were we hurled 
Out to the landless ocean, whiles we lay 
Long time within some river or deep bay ; 

And so the months went by, until at last, 

When now three years were fully overpast 
Since we had left our fellows, and grown old 
Our leaky ship along the water rolled, 

XJpon a day unto a land we came 
Whose people spoke a tongue well-nigh the same 
As that our forest people used, and who 
A little of the arts of mankind knew, 

And tilled the kind earth, certes not in vain; 

For wealth of melons wc saw there, and grain 
Strange unto us. Now battered as we were, 

Grown old before our time, in worn-out gear, 

These people, when we first set foot ashore, 

Garlands of flowers and fruits unto us bore, 

And worshipped us as gods, and for no words 
That we could say would cease to call us lords, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS . 67 

And pray our help to give them bliss and peace, 

And fruitful seasons of the earth’s increase. 

Withal at last, they, when in talk they fell 
With our good forest-folk, to them did tell 
That they were subject to a mighty king, 

Who, as they said, ruled over everything, 

And, dwelling in a glorious city, had 

All things that men desire to make them glad. 

“ He,” said they, “none the less shall be but slave 
Unto your lords, and all that he may have 
Will he but take as free gifts at their hands, 

If they will deign henceforth to bless his lands 
With their most godlike presence.” 

Ye can think 

How we poor wretched souls outworn might shrink 
From such strange worship, that like mocking seemed 
To us, who of a godlike state had dreamed, 

And missed it in such wise j yet none the less 
An earthly haven to our wretchedness 
This city seemed, therefore we ’gan to pray 
That some of them would guide us on our way, 

Which words of ours they heard most joyously, 

And brought us to their houses nigh the sea. 

And feasted us with such things as they might 
But almost ere the ending of the night 
-We started on our journey, being up-borne 
In litters, like to kings, who so forlorn 
Had been erewhile ; so in some ten days' space 
They brought us nigh their king’s abiding place i 



68 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


And as we went the land seemed fair enough, 

Though sometimes did we pass through forests rough, 
Deserts and fens, yet for the most the way 
Through ordered villages and tilled land lay, 

Which after all the squalid miseries 

We had beheld, seemed heaven unto our eyes, 

Though strange to us it was. 

But now when we 

From a hill-side the city well could see, 

Our guides there prayed us to abide awhile, 

Wherefore we stayed, though eager to beguile 
Our downcast hearts from brooding o’er our woe 
By all the new things that abode might show ; 

So while we bided on that flowery down 
The swiftest of them sped on toward the town 
To bear them news of this unhoped-for bliss ; 

And we, who now some little happiness 
Could find in that fair place and pleasant air, 

Sat ’neath strange trees, on new flowers growing there 
Of scent unlike to those we knew of old, 

While unfamiliar tales the strange birds told. 

But certes seemed that city fair enow 
That spread out o’er the well-tilled vale below, 

Though nowise built like such as we had seen; 

Walled with white walls it was, and gardens green 
Were set between the houses everywhere ; 

And now and then rose up a tower foursquare 
Lessening in stage on stage : with many a hue 
The house walls glowed, of red and green and blue, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS . 69 

And some with gold were well adorned, and one 
From roofs of gold flashed back the noontide sun. 
Had we but seen such things not long ago 
We should have hastened us to come thereto, 

In hope to find the very heaven we sought. 

But now while quietly we sat, and thought 
Of many things, the gate wherein that road 
Had end, was opened wide, and thereout flowed 
A glittering throng of people, young and old, 

And men and women, much adorned with gold ; 
Wherefore we rose to meet them, who stood still 
When they beheld us winding down the hill. 

And lined both sides of the grey road, but we 
Now drawing nigh them, first of all could see 
Old men in venerable raiment clad, 

White-bearded, who sweet flowering branches had 
In their right hands, then young men armed right well 
After their way, which now were long to tell, 

Then damsels dad in radiant gold array, 

Who with sweet-smelling blossoms strewed the way 
Before our feet, then men with gleaming swords 
And glittering robes, and crowned like mighty lords, 
And last of all, within the very gate 
The king himself, round whom our guides did wait, 
Kneeling with humble faces downward bent 

What wonder if, as , twixt these fblk we went; 
Heamening their singing and sweet minstrelsy, 

A little nigher now seemed our heaven to be— 

Alas, a fair folk, a sweet spot of earth, 



jo THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

A land where many a lovely thing has birth, 

But where all fair things come at last to die. 

Now when we three unto the king drew nigh 
Before our fellows, he, adored of all, 

Spared not before us on his knees to fall, 

And as we deemed who knew his speech but ill, 
Began to pray us to bide with him still, 

Telling withal of some old prophecy 

Which seemed to say that there we should not die. 

What could we do amidst these splendid loids? 
No time it was to doubt or make long words. 

Nor with a short but happy life at hand 
Durst we to ask about the deathless land, 

Though well we felt the life whereof he spoke, 
Could never be among those mortal folk. 

Therefore we way-worn, disappointed men, 

So richly dowered with three-score years and ten, 
Vouchsafed to grant the king his whole request, 
Thinking within that town awhile to rest, 

And gather news about the hope that fled 
Still on before us, risen from the dead, 

From out its tomb of toil and misery, 

That held it while we saw but sea and sky. 

Or untilled lands and people void of bliss, 

And our own faces heavy with distress. 

But entering now that town, what huge delight 
We had therein, how lovely to our sight 
Was the well-ordered life of people there, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 71 

Who on that night within a palace fair 
Made 11s a feast with great solemnity, 

Till we forgot that we came there to die 
If we should leave our quest, for e’en as kings 
They treated us, and whatsoever things 
We asked for, or could think of, those were ours. 

Houses we had, noble with walls and towers, 
Lovely with gardens, cooled with running streams. 
And rich with gold beyond a miser’s dreams, 

And men and women slaves, whose very lives 
Were in our hands ; and fair and princely wives 
If so we would ; and all things for delight, 

Good to the taste or beautiful to sight 

The land might yield They taught us of their law, 

The muster of their men-at-arms we saw, 

As men who owned them ; in their judgment-place 
Our lightest word made glad the pleader’s face, 

And the judge trembled at our faintest frown. 

Think then, if we, late driven up and down 
Upon the uncertain sea, or struggling sore 
With barbarous men upon an untilled shore, 

Or at the best, midst people ignorant 
Of arts and letters, fighting against want 
Of very food — think if we now were glad 
From day to day, and as folk crazed and mad 
Deemed our old selves, the wanderers on the sea. 

And if at whiles midst our felicity 
We yet remembered us of that past day 
When in the long swell off the land we lay, 



72 


THE EARTHL V PARADISE. 


Weeping for joy at our accomplished dieam. 

And each to each a very god did seem, 

For fear was dead — if we remembered this, 

Yet after all, was this our life of bliss, 

A little thing that wc had gained at last ? 

And must we sorrow for the idle past, 

Or think it ill that thither we were led ? 

Thus seemed our old desire quite quenched and dead 

You must remember that we yet were young, 

Five years had passed since the grey fieldfare sung 
To me a dreaming youth laid ’neath the thorn, 

And though while we were wandering and forlorn 
I seemed grown old and withered suddenly, 

But twenty summers had I seen go by 
When I left Wickland on that desperate cruise. 

But now again our wrinkles did we lose 
With memory of our ills, and like a dream 
Our fevered quest with its bad days did seem, 

And many things grew fresh again, forgot 
While in our hearts that wild desire was hot : 

Yea, though at thought of Norway we might sigh, 
Small was the pain which that sweet memory 
Brought with its images seen fresh and clear, 

And many an old familiar thing grown dear, 

But little loved the while we lived with it 

So smoothly o’er our heads the days did flit, 

Yet not eventless either, for we taught 
Such lore as we from our own land had brought 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 73 


Unto this folk, who when they wrote must draw 
Such draughts as erst at Micklegarth I saw, 

Writ for the evil Pharaoh-kings of old ; 

Their arms were edged with copper or with gold, 
Whereof they had great plenty, or with flint ; 

No armour had they fit to bear the dint 
Of tools like ours, and little could avail 
Their archer craft ; their boats knew nought of sail, 
And many a feat of building could we show, 

Which midst their splendour still they did not know. 

And midst of all, war fell upon the land, 

And in forefront of battle must we stand, 

To do our best, though little mastery 
We thought it then to make such foemen flee 
As there we met ; but when again we came 
Into the town, with something like to shame 
We took the worship of that simple folk 
Rejoicing for their freedom from the yoke 
That round about their necks had hung so long. 

For thus that war began : some monarch strong 
Conquered their land of old, and thereon laid 
A dreadful tribute, which they still had paid 
With tears and curses ; for as each fifth year 
Came round, this heavy shame they needs must heart 
Ten youths, ten maidens must they choose by lot 
Among the fairest that they then had got, 

Who a long journey o’er the hills must go 
Unto the tyrant, nor with signs of woe 
Eater his city, but in bright array, 



74 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


And harbingered by songs and carols gay, 
Betake them to the temple of his god ; 

But when the streets their weary feet had trod 
Their wails must crown the long festivity, 

For on the golden altar must they die. 

Such was the sentence till the year wc came, 
And counselled them to put away this shame 
If they must die therefore, so on that year 
Barren of blood the devil’s altars were, 
Wherefore a herald clad in strange attire 
The tyrant sent them, and but blood and lire 
His best words were ; him they sent back again 
Defied by us, who made his threats but vain, 
When face to face with those ill folk we stood 
Ready to seal our counsel with our bloocL 

Past all belief they loved us for all this, 

And if it would have added to our bliss 
That they should die, this surely they had done ; 
So smoothly slipped the years past one by one, 
And we had lived and died as happy there 
As any men the labouring earth may bear. 

But for the poison of that wickedness 
That led us on God’s edicts to redress. 

At first indeed death seemed so far away, 

So sweet in our new home was every day, 

That we forgot death like the most of men 
Who cannot count the threescore years and ten ; 
Yet we grew fearful as the time drew on, 

And needs must think of all we might have won* 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 75 

Yea, by so much the happier that we were 
By just so much increased on us our fear 
And those old times of our past misery 
Seemed not so evil as the days went by 
Faster and faster with the year’s increase, 

For loss of youth to us was loss of peace 

Two gates unto the road of life there are, 

And to the happy youth both seem afar, 

Both seem afar, so fax the past one seems. 

The gate of birth, made dim with many dreams, 
Bright with remembered hopes, beset with flowers ; 

So far it seems he cannot count the hours 
That to this midway path have led him on 
Where every joy of life now seemeth won — 

So far, he thinks not of the other gate, 

Within whose shade the ghosts of dead hopes wait 
To call upon him as he draws anear, 

Despoiled, alone, and dull with many a fear, 
u Where is thy work ? how little thou hast done. 
Where are thy friends, why art thou so alone ?” 

How shall he weigh his life ? slow goes the time 
The while the fresh dew-sprinkled hill we climb, 
Thinking of what shall be the other side, 

Slow pass perchance the minutes we abide 
On the gained summit, blinking at the sun j 
But when the downward journey is begun 
No more our feet may loiter, past our ears 
Shrieks the harsh wind scarce noted midst our fears, 



76 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

And battling with the hostile things we meet 
Till, ere we know it, our weak shrinking feet 
Have brought us to the end and all is done. 

And so with us it was, when youth twice won 
Now for the second time had passed away, 

And we unwitting were grown old and grey, 

And one by one, the death of some dear friend, 
Some cherished hope, brought to a troublous end 
Our joyous life; as in a dawn of June 
The lover, dreaming of the brown bird's tune 
And longing lips unto his own brought near. 

Wakes up the crashing thunder-peal to hear. 

So, sirs, when this world’s pleasures came to nought, 
Not upon God we set our wayward thought, 

But on the folly our own hearts had made ; 

Once more the stories of the past we weighed 
With what we hitherto had found, once more 
We longed to be by some unknown far shore, 

Once more our life seemed trivial, poor, and vain, 
Till we our lost fool's paradise might gain, 

Yea, we were like the felon doomed to die, 

Who when unto the sword he draws a-nigh 
Struggles and cries, though erewhile in h is cell 
He heard the priest of heaven and pardon tell. 
Weeping and half contented to be slain. 

Was I the first who thought of this again ? 
Perchance I was, but howsoever that be 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 


Long time I thought of these things certainly 
Ere I durst stir my fellows to the quest, 

Though secretly myself, with little rest 
For tidings of our lovely land I sought. 

Should prisoners from another folk be brought 
Unto our town, I questioned them of this ; 

I asked the wandering merchants of a bliss 
They dreamed not of, in chaffering for their goods ; 
The hunter in the far-off lonely woods, 

The fisher in the rivers nigh the sea, 

Must tell their wild strange stories unto me. 

Within the temples books of records lay 
Such as I told of, thereon day by day 
I pored, and got long stories from the priests 
Of many-handed gods with heads of beasts, 

And such-like dreariness j and still, midst all 
Sometimes a glimmering light would seem to fall 
Upon my ignorance, and less content 
As time went on I grew, and ever went 
About my daily life distractedly, 

Until at last I felt that I must die 
Or to my fellows tell what in me was. 

So on a day I came to Nicholas 
And trembling ’gan to tell of this and that, 

And as I spoke with downcast eyes I sat 
Fearing to see some scorn within his eyes, 

Or horror at unhappy memories ; 

But now, when mine eyes could no longer keep 
The tears from falling, he too, nigh to weep, 



78 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Spoke out, Cf 0 Rolf, why hast thou come to me, 
Who thinking I was happy, now must see 
That only with the ending of our breath, 

Or by that fair escape from fear and death 
Can we forget the hope that erewhile led 
Our little band to woe and drearihead ? 

But now are we grown old, Rolf, and to-day 
Life is a little thing to cast away, 

Nor can we suffer many years of it 
If all goes wrong, so no more will I sit, 

Praying for all the things that cannot be : 

Tell thou our fellows what thou tellest me. 

Nor fear that I will leave you in your need/ 7 

Well, sirs, with all the rest I had such speed 
That men enough of us resolved to go 
The very bitterness of death to know 
Or else to conquer him ; some idle tale 
With our kind hosts would plentcously avail, 

For of our quest we durst not tell them aught, 

Since something more than doubt was in our thought . 
Though unconfessed, that we should fail at last, 

Nor had we quite foigot our perils past 

Alas ! can weak men hide such thoughts as these ? 
I think the summer wind that bows the trees 
Through which the dreamer wandereth muttering 
Will bear abroad some knowledge of the thing 
That so consumes him ; howsoe'er that be, 

We, bom to drink the dregs of misery, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 79 

Found in the end that some one knew our aim. 

For while we weighed the chances of the game 
That we must play, nor yet knew what to shun. 

Or what to do, there came a certain one, 

A young man strange within the place, to me, 

Who, swearing me at first to secrecy, 

Began to tell me of the hoped-for land. 

The trap I saw not, with a shaking hand 
And beating heart, unto the notes of years 
I turned, long parchments blotted with my tears, 

And tremulously read them out aloud ; 

But still, because the hurrying thoughts would crowd 
My whirling brain, scarce heard the words I read. 

Yet in the end it seemed that what he said 
Tallied with that, heaped up so painfully. 

Now listen ! this being done, he said to me, 

“ O godlike Eastern man, believest thou 
That I who look so young and ruddy now 
Am very old? because in sooth I come 
To seek thee and to lead thee to our home 
With all thy fellows. But if thou dost not, 

Come now with me, for nigh unto this spot 
My brother, left behind, an ancient man 
Now dwelleth, but as grey-haired, weak and wan 
As I am fresh ; of me he doth not know, 

So surely shall our speech together show. 

The truth of this my message.” “ Yea,” said I, 

“ I doubt thee not, yet would I certainly 
Hear the old man talk if he liveth yet. 



80 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

That I a dearer tale of this may set 

Before my fellows ; come then, lead me there.” 

Thus easily I fell into the snare ; 

For as along the well-known streets we went, 

At old hoar man there met us, weak and bent 
Who staying us, the while with age he shook. 

My lusty fellow by the shoulder took, 

And said, “ Oh, stranger canst thou be the son, 

Or but the younger double of such an one, 

Who dwelt once in the weaver's street hereby?” 

But the young man looked on him lovingly, 

And said, “ O certes, thou art now grown old 
That thou thy younger brother canst behold 
And call him stranger.” “Yea, yea, old enow,” 
The other said, “ what fables talkest thou ? 

My brother has but three years less than I, 

Nor dealeth time with men so marvellously 
That he should seem like twenty, I fourscore ; 
Thou art my nephew, let the jest pass o’er.” 

“Nay,” said he, “but it is not good to talk 
Here in the crowded street, so let us walk 
Unto thine habitation ; dost thou mind, 

When we were boys, how once we chanced to find 
That crock of copper money hid away 
Up in the loft, and how on that same day 
We bought this toy and that, thou a short sword 
And I a brazen boat” 

But at that word 

The old man wildly on him ’gan to state 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 81 

And said no more, the while we three did fare 
Unto his house, but there we being alone, 

Many undoubted signs the younger one 
Gave to his brother, saying withal, that he 
Had gained the land of all felicity, 

Where, after trials too long then to tell. 

The slough of grisly eld from off him fell, 

And left him strong, and fair, and young again ; 
Neither from that time had he suffered pain 
Greater or less, or feared at all to die : 

And though, he said, he knew not certainly 
If he should live for ever, this he knew 
His days should not be full of pain and few 
As most men’s lives were. Now when asked why he 
Had left his home, a deadly land to see, 

He said that people’s chiefs had sent him there. 
Moved by report that tall men, white and fair. 

Like to the Gods, had come across the sea, 

Of whom old seers had told that they should be 
Lords of that land, therefore his charge was this, 

To lead us forth to that abode of bliss, 

But secretly, since for the other folk 

They were as beasts to toil beneath the yoke. 

u But,” said he, “ brother, thou shalt go with me, 

If now at last no doubt be left in thee 
Of who I am.” 

At that, to end it all 

The weak old man upon his neck did Sail, 

Rejoicing for his lot with many tears : 


a 



82 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

But I, rejoicing too, yet felt vague fears 
Within my heart, for now almost too nigh 
We seemed to that long-sought felicity. 

What should I do though ? What could it avail 
Unto these men, to make a feigned tale ? 

Besides in all no faltering could I find, 

Nor did they go beyond, or fall behind, 

What in such cases such-like men would do, 
Therefore I needs must think their story true. 

So now unto my fellows did 1 go 
And all things in due order straight did show, 

And had the man who told the tale at hand ; 

Of whom some made great question of the land. 
And where it was, and how he found it first ; 

And still he answered boldly to the worst 
Of all their questions : then from out the place 
He went, and we were left there face to face. 

And joy it was to see the dark cheeks, tanned 
By many a summer of that fervent land, 

Flush up with joy, and see the grey eyes gleam 
Through the dull film of years, as that sweet dream 
Flickered before them, now grown real and true. 

But when the certainty of all we knew, 

Deeming for sure our quest would not be vain, 

We got us ready for the sea again. 

But to the city's folk we told no more 
Than that we needs must make for some far shore, 
Whence we would come -again to them, and bring 
For them and us full many a wished-for thing 



84 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


How the time past from hopeful day to day ? 

Suffice it that the wind was fair and good, 

And we most joyful, as still north we stood ; 

Until when we a month at sea had been, 

And for six days no land at all had seen, 

We sighted it once more, wheieon our guide 
Shouted, “ O fellows, lay all fear aside, 

This is the land whereof I spake to you.” 

But when the happy tidings all men knew, 

Trembling and pale we watched the land grow great, 
And when above the waves the noontide heat 
Had raised a vapour ’iwixt us and the land 
That afternoon, we saw a liigh ness stand 
Out in the sea, and nigher when we came, 

And all the sky with sunset was a-flame, 

’Neath the dark hill we saw a city lie. 

Washed by the waves, girt round with ramparts high. 

A little nigher yet, and then our guide 
Bade us to anchor, lowering from our side 
The sailless keel wherein he erst had come, 

Through many risks, to bring us to his home. 

But when our eager hands this thing had done, 

He and his brother gat therein alone. 

But first he said, “Abide here till the mom, 

And when ye hear the sound of harp and horru 
And varied music, run out every oar, 

Up anchor, and make boldly for the shore. 

O happy men 1 well-nigh do I regret 
That I am not as you, to whom as yet 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS . 85 

That moment past all moments is unknown, 

When first unending life to you is shown. 

But now I go, that all in readiness 

May be, your souls with this delight to bless.” 

He waved farewell to us and went, but we, 

As the night grew, beheld across the sea 
Lights moving on the quays, and now and then 
We heard the chanting of the outland men. 

How can I tell of that strange troublous night, 
Troublous and strange, though ’neath the moonshine 
white, 

Peace seemed upon the sea, the glimmering town, 
The shadows of the tree-besprinkled down, 

The moveless dewy folds of our loose sail? 

But how could these for peace to us avail ? 

Weary with longing, blind with great amaze, 

We struggled now with past and future days; 

And not in vain our former joy we thought, 

Since thirty years our wandering feet had brought 
To this at last — and yet, what will you have ? 

Can man be made content ? We wished to save 
The bygone years ; our hope, our painted toy, 

We feared to miss, drowned in that sea of joy. 

Old faces still reproached us : M We are gone, 

And ye are entering into bliss alone ; 

And can ye now forget ? Year passes year, 

And still ye live on joyous, free from fear; 

But where are we? where is the memory 
Of us, to whom ye once were drawn so nigh? 



86 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Forgetting and alone ye enter in ; 

Remembering all, alone we wail our sin, 

And cannot touch you.” — Ah, the blessed pain I 
When heaven just gained was scarcely all a gain. 
How could we weigh that boundless treasure then, 
Or count the sorrows of the sons of men ? 

— Ah, woe is me to think upon that night I 

Day came, and with the dawning of the light 
We were astir, and from our deck espied 
The people clustering by the water-side, 

As if to meet us j then across the sea 
We heard great horns strike up triumphantly, 

And then scarce knowing what we did, we weighed 
And running out the oars for shore we made, 

With banners fluttering out from yard and roast 

We reached the well-built marble quays at last, 
Crowded with folk, and in the front of these 
There stood our guide, decked out with braveries, 
Holding his feeble brother by the hand, 

Then speechless, trembling, did we now take land, 
Leaving all woes behind, but when our feet 
The happy soil of that blest land did meet, 

Fast fell our tears, as on a July day 

The thunder-shower falls pattering on the way, 

And certes some one we desired to bless, 

But scarce knew whom midst all our thankfulness. 

Now the crowd opened, and an ordered band 
Of youths and damsels, flowering boughs in hand, 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. Bf 

Came forth to meet us, just as long ago, 

When first we won some rest from pain and woe. 
Except that now eld chained not anyone, 

No man was wrinkled but ourselves alone, 

But smooth and beautiful, bright-eyed and glad, 

Were all we saw, in fair thin raiment clad 
Fit for the sunny place. 

But now our friend, 

Our guide, who brought us to this glorious end, 

Led us amidst that band, who ’gan to sing 
Some hymn of welcome, midst whose carolling 
Faint-hearted men we must have been indeed 
To doubt that all was won ; nor did we heed 
That, when we well were gotten from the quay, 

Armed men went past us, by the very way 
That we had come, nor thought of their intent, 

For armour unto us was ornament, 

And had been now, for many peaceful years, 

Since bow and axe had dried the people’s tears. 

Let all that pass — with song and minstrelsy 
Through many streets they led us, fair to see, 

For nowhere did we meet maimed, poor, or old, 

But all were young and clad in silk and gold. 

Like a king’s court the common ways did seem 
On that fair mom of our accomplished dream. 

Far did we go, through market-place and square, 
Fast fane and palace, till a temple fair 
We came to, set aback midst towering trees, 

But raised above the tallest of all these. . 



S8 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


So there we entered through a brazen gate, 

And all the thronging folk without did wait, 

Except the golden-clad melodious band. 

But when within the precinct we did stand, 

Another rampart girdled round the fane, 

And that being past another one again, 

And small space was betvvixt them, all these three 
Of white stones laid in wondrous masonry 
Were builded, but the fourth we now passed through 
Was half of white and half of ruddy hue ; 

Nor did we reach the temple through this one, 

For now a fifth wall came, of dark red stone 
With golden coping and wide doors of gold ; 

And this being past, our eyes could then behold 
The marvellous temple, foursquare, rising high 
In stage on stage up toward the summer sky, 

Like the unfinished tower that Nimrod built 
Before the concord of the world was spilt. 

So now we came into the lowest hall, 

A mighty way across from wall to wall, 

Where carven pillars held a gold roof up, 

And silver walls fine as an Indian cup, 

With figures monstrous as a dream were wrought, 
And under foot the floor beyond all thought 
Was wonderful, for like the tumbling sea 
Beset with monsters did it seem to be ; 

But in the midst a pool of ruddy gold 
Caught in its waves a glittering fountain cold, 

And through the bright shower of its silver spray 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 8g 

Dimly we saw the high-raised dais, gay 
With wondrous hangings, for high up and small 
The windows were within the dreamlike hall; 

Betwixt the pillars wandered damsels fair 
Crooning low songs, or filling all the air 
With incense wafted to strange images 
That made us tremble, since we saw in these 
The devils unto whom we now must cry 
Ere we begin our new felicity : 

Nathless no altars did we see but one 
Which dimly from before the dais shone 
Built of green stone, with horns of copper bright. 

Now when we entered from the outer light 
And all the scents of the fresh day were past, 

With its sweet breezes, a dull shade seemed cast 
Over our joy ; what then ? not if we would 
Could we turn back — and surely all was good. 

But now they brought us vestments rich and fair. 
And bade us our own raiment put off there, 

Which straight we did, and with a hollow sound 
Like mournful bells our armour smote the ground, 
And damsels took the weapons from our hands 
That might have gleamed with death in other lands, 
And won us praise ; at last when all was done, - 
And brighter than the Kaiser each man shone, 

Us unarmed helpless men the music led 
Up to the dais, and there our old guide said, 

“ Rest, happy men, the time will not be long 
Ere they will bring with incense, dance, and song 



9 ° 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


The sacred cup, your life and happiness, 

And many a time this fair hour shall ye bless." 

Alas, sirs ! words are weak to tell of it, 

I seemed to see a smile of mockery flit 
Across his face as from our thrones he turned, 

And in my heart a sudden fear there burned, 

The last, I said, for ever and a day ; 

But even then with harsh and ominous bray 
A trumpet through the monstrous pillar-s rung. 

And to our feet with sudden fear wc sprung — 

Too late, too late 1 for through all doors did stream 
Armed men, that filled the place with clash and gleam, 
And when the dull sound of their moving feet 
Was still, a fearful sight our eyes did meet, 

A fearful sight to us — old men and grey 
Betwixt the bands of soldiers took their way, 

And at their head in wondeiful attire, 

Holding within his hand a pot of fire, 

Moved the false brother of the traitrous guide, 

Who with bowed head walked ever by his side ; 

But as a-nigh the elders ’gan to draw, 

We, almost turned to stone by what we saw, 

Heard the old man say to the younger one, 

“ Speak to them that thou knowest, 0 fair Son P 

Then the wretch said, “ 0 ye, who sought to find 
Unending life against the law of kind, 

Within this land, fear ye not now too much, 

For no man's hand your bodies here shall touch. 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 91 

But rather with all reverence folk shall tend 
Your daily lives, until at last they end 
By slow decay : and ye shall pardon us 
The trap whereby beings made so glorious 
As ye are made, we drew unto this place. 

Rest ye content then ! for although your race 
Comes from the Gods, yet are ye conquered here, 

As we would conquer them, if we knew where 
They dwell from day to day, and with what arms 
We, overcoming them, might win such charms 
That we might make the world what ye desire. 

“ Rest then at ease, and if ye e’er shall tire 
Of this abode, remember at the worst 
Life flitteth, whether it be blessed or cursed. 

But will ye tire? ye are our gods on earth 
Whiles that ye live, nor shall your lives lack mirth, 
For song, fair women, and heart-cheering wine 
The chain of solemn days shall here entwine 
With odorous flowers ; ah, surely ye are come, 

When all is said, unto an envied home.” 

Like an old dream, dreamed in another dream, 

I hear his voice now, see the hopeless gleam, 
Through the dark place of that thick wood of spears 
That fountain’s splash rings yet within mine ears 
I thought the fountain of eternal youth—- 
Yet I can scarce remember in good truth 
What then I felt : I should have felt as he, 

Who, waking after some festivity 



Q2 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Sees a dim land, and things unspeakable, 

And comes to know at last that it is hell — 

I cannot tell you, nor can tell you w hy 
Driven by what hope, I cried my battle-ciy 
And rushed upon him ; this I know indeed 
My naked hands were good to me at need, 

That sent the traitor to his due reward, 

Ere I was dragged off by the hurrying guard, 

Who spite of all used neither sword nor spear, 

Nay as it seemed, touched us with awe and fear. 
Though at the last grown all too weak to strive 
They brought us to the dais scarce alive, 

And changed our tattered robes again, and there 
Bound did we sit, each in his golden chair, 
Beholding many mummeries that they wrought 
About the altar ; till at last they brought. 

Crowned with fair flowers, and dad in robes of gold. 
The folk that from the wood we won of old — 

Why make long words ? before our very eyes 
Our friends they slew, a fitting sacrifice 
To us their new gained gods, who sought to find 
Within that land, a people just and kind 
That could not die, or take away the breath 
From living men. 

What thing but that same death 
Had we left now to hope for? death must come 
And find us somewhere an enduring home. 

Will grief kill men, as some folk think it will ? 

Then are we of all men most hard to kilL 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 


93 


The time went past, the dreary days went by 
In dull unvarying round of misery, 

Nor can I tell if it went fast or slow, 

What would it profit you the time to know 
That we spent there ; all I can say to you 
Is, that no hope our prison wall shone through, 

That ever we were guarded carefully, 

While day and dark and dark and day went by 
Like such a dream, as in the early night 
The sleeper wakes from in such sore affright, 

Such panting horror, that to sleep again 
He will not turn, to meet such shameful pain. 

Lo such were we, but as we hoped before 
Where no hope was, so now, when all seemed o’er 
But sorrow for our lives so cast away, 

Again the bright sun brought about the day. 

At last the temple’s dull monotony 
Was broke by noise of armed men hurrying by 
Within the precinct, and we seemed to hear 
Shouts from without of anger and of fear, 

And noises as of battle ; and red blaze 
The night sky showed ; this lasted through two days. 
But on the third our guards were whispering 
Pale-faced, as though they feared some coming thing 
And when the din increased about noontide* 

No longer there with us would they abide, 

But left us free j judge then if our hearts beat, 

When any pain or death itself was sweet 



94 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


To hideous life within that wicked place, 

Where every day brought on its own disgrace. 

Pew words betwixt us passed, we knew indeed 
Where our old armour once so good at need 
Hung up as relics nigh the altar-stead, 

Thither we hurried, and from heel to head 
Soon were we armed, and our old spears and sworcb 
Clashing 'gainst steel and stone, spoke hopeful words 
To us, the children of a warrior race. 

But round unto the hubbub did we face 
And through the precinct strove to make our way 
Set dose together ; in besmirched array 
Some met us, and some wounded very sore, 

And some who wounded men to harbour bore ; 

But these too busy with their pain or woe 
To note us much, unchallenged let us go : 

Then here and there we passed some shrinking maid 
In a dark corner trembling and afraid, 

But eager for the news about the fight 
Through trodden gardens then we came in sight 
Of the third rampart that begirt the fane, 

Which now the foeraen seemed at point to gain, 

For o’er the wall the ladders ’gan to show, 

And huge confusion was there down below 
’Twixt wall and wall ; but as the gate we passed 
A man from out the crowd came hurrying fast, 

But, drawing nigh us, stopped short suddenly, 

And cried, “ O, masters, help us or we die I 
This impious people ’gainst their ancient lord# 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 95 

Have turned, and in their madness drawn their swords, 
Yea, and they now prevail, and fearing not 
The dreadful gods still grows their wrath more hot. 
Wherefore to bring you here was my intent, 

But the kind gods themselves your hands have sent 

To save us all, and this fair holy house 

With your strange arms, and hearts most valorous.” 

No word we said, for even as he spoke 
A frightful clamour from the wall outbroke. 

As the thin line of soldiers thereupon 
Crushed back, and broken, left the rampart won, 

And leapt and tumbled therefrom as they could, 

While in their place tire conquering foemen stood : 
Then the weak, wavering, huddled crowd below 
Their weight upon the inner wall ’gan throw, 

And at the narrow gates by hundreds died; 

For not long did the enemy abide 
On the gained rampart, but by every way 
Got to the ground and 'gan all round to slay, 

Till great and grim the slaughter grew to be. 

But we well pleased our tyrants' end to see 
Still firm against the inner wall did stand, 

While round us surged the press on either hand 
Nor did we fear, for what was left of life 
For us to fear for ? so at last the strife 
Drawn inward, in that place did much abater 
And we began to move unto the gate 
Betwixt the dead and living, and these last 
Ever with fearful glances by us passed 



THE EARTHLY FARAD TSK 


96 

Nor hindered aught ; but mindful of the lore 
Our fathers gained on many a bloody shore, 

We, when unto the street we made our way, 

Moved as in fight nor broke our chi.se array, 

Though no man harmed us of the troubled crowd 
That thronged the streets with shouts and curses loud 
But rather when our clashing aims they heard 
Their hubbub lulled, and they as men afeard 
Drew back before us. 

Well, as nigh wc drew 
Unto die sea, the men showed sparse and few, 
Though frightened women standing in the street 
Before their doors we did not fail to meet, 

And passed by folk who at their doors laid down 
Men wounded m the fight ; so through the town 
We reached the unguarded water-gate at last, 

And there, nigh weeping, saw the green waves cast 
Against the quays, whereby five tail ships lay : 

For in that devil’s house, right many a day 
Had passed with all i is dull obscenity 
Uncounted by us while we longed to die, 

Amd while of all men we were out of sight, 

Except those priests, the people as they might 
Made ships like ours; in whose new handiwork 
Few mariners and fearful now did lurk, 

And these soon fled before us, therefore we 
Stayed not to think, but running hastily 
Down the lone quay, seized on the nighest ship, 

Nor yet till we had let the hawser slip 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 97 

Dared we be glad, and then indeed once more, 
Though we no longer hoped for our fair shore, 

Our past disgrace, worse than the very hell, [well, 
Though hope was dead, made things seem more than 
For if we died that night, yet were we free. 

Ah 1 with what joy we sniffed the fresh salt sea 
After the musky odours of that place ; 

With what delight each felt upon his face 
The careless wind, our master and our slave, 

As through the green seas fast from shore we drave, 
Scarce witting where we went 

But now when we 
Beheld that city, far across the sea, 

A thing gone past, nor any more could hear 
The mingled shouts of victory and of fear, 

From out the midst thereof shot up a fire 
In a long, wavering, murky, smoke-capped spire 
That still with every minute wider grew, 

So that the ending of the place we knew 
Where we had passed such days of misery, 

And still more glad ttumed round unto the sea. 

My tale grows near its ending, for we stood 
Southward to our kind folk e’en as we could, 

But made slow way, for ever heavily 
Our ship sailed, and she often needs must lie 
At anchor in some bay, the while with fear 
Ourselves, we followed up the fearful deer, 

Or filled our water-vessels, for indeed, 

3 



9 8 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Of meat and drink were we in bitter need, 

As well might be, for scarcely could we choose 
What ship from off that harbour to cast loose. 

Midst this there died the captain, Nicholas, 

Whom, though he brought us even to this pass, 

I loved the most of all men ; even now 
When that seems long past, I can scarce tell how 
I bear to live, since he could live no more. 

Certes he took our failure very sore, 

And often do I think he fain had died, 

But yet for very love must needs abide 
A little while, and yet a while again, 

As though to share the utmost of our pain, 

And miss the ray of comfort and sweet rest 
Wherewith ye end our long disastrous quest — 

— A drearier place than ever heretofore 

The world seemed, as from that far nameless shore 

We turned and left him ’neath the trees to bide; 

For midst our rest worn out at last he died. 

And such seemed like to hap to us as well, 

If any harder thing to us befell 
Than was our common life; and still we talked 
How our old friends would meet men foiled, and balked 
Of all the things that were to make them glad ; 

Ah, sirs ! no sight of them henceforth we had ; 

A wind arose, which blowing furiously 
Drove us out helpless to the open sea; 

Eight days it blew, and when it fell, we lay 
Leaky, dismasted, a most helpless prey 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. 99 

To winds and waves, and with but little food ; 

Then with haid toil a feeble sail and rude 
We rigged up somehow, and nigh hopelessly, 
Expecting death, we staggered o’er the sea 
For ten days more, but when all food and drink 
Were gone for three days, and we needs must think 
That in mid ocean we were doomed to die, 

One mom again did land before us lie : 

And we rejoiced, as much at least as he, 

Who tossing on his bed deliriously, 

Tortured with pain, hears the physician say 
That he shall have one quiet painless day 
Before he dies — What more ? we soon did stand 
In this your peaceful and delicious land 
Amongst the simple kindly country folk, 

But when I heard the language that they spoke, 

From out my heart a joyous cry there burst, 

So sore for friendly words was I athirst, 

And I must fall a-weeping, to have come 
To such a place that seemed a blissful home, 

After the tossing from rough sea to sea; 

So weak at last, so beaten down were we. 

What shall I say in these kind people’s praise 
Who treated us like brothers for ten days, 

Till with their tending we grew strong again, 

And then withal in country cart and wain 
Brought us unto this city where we are ; 

May God be good to them for all their care. 

And now, sirs, all our wanderings have ye heard, 



IOO 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


And all our story to the utmost word ; 

And here hath ending all our foolish quest, 

Not at the worst if hardly at the best, 

Since ye axe good — Sirs, we are old and grey 
Before our time ; in what coin shall we pay 
For this your goodness ; take it not amiss 
That we, poor souls, must pay you back for this 
As good men pay back God Who, raised above 
The heavens and earth, yet needeth earthly love. 

The Elder of the City. 

Oh. friends, content you ! this is much indeed, 

And we are paid, thus gamering for our need 
Your blessings only, bringing in their train 
God's blessings as the south wind brings the rain. 
And for the rest, no little thing shall be 
(Since ye through all yet keep your memory) 

The gentle music of the bygone years, 

Long past to us with all their hopes and fears. 

Think, if the gods, who mayhap love us well, 

Sent to our gates some ancient chronicle 
Of that sweet unforgotten land long left, 

Of all the lands wherefrom we now are reft — 

— Think, with what joyous hearts, what reverence, 
What songs, what sweet flowers we should bring it 
thence, 

What images would guard it, what a shrine 
Above its well-loved black and white should shine ! 
How should it pay our labour day by day 



PROLOGUE— THE WANDERERS. io« 


To look upon the fair place where it lay ; 

With what rejoicings even should we take 
Each well-writ copy that the scribes might make, 
And bear them forth to hear the people’s shout, 
E’en as good rulers’ children are borne out 
To take the people’s blessing on their birth, 
When all the city falls to joy and mirth. 

Such, sirs, are ye, our living chronicle, 

And scarce can we be grieved at what befell 
Your lives in that too hopeless quest of yours, 
Since it shall bring us wealth of happy hours 
Whiles that we live, and to our sons, delight, 
And their sons’ sons. 

But now, sirs, let us go, 
That we your new abodes with us may show, 

And tell you what your life henceforth may be, 
But poor, alas, to that ye hoped to see. 



102 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


r j£'HINK, listener , that I had the luck to stands 
Awhile ago within a flowery land. 

Fair beyond words; that thence I brought away 
Some blossoms that before my footsteps lay, 

Not plucked by me, mt over-fresh or bright; 

Yet, since they minded me of that delight. 

Within the pages of this book I laid 
Their tender petals, there in peace to fade. 

Dry are they now, and void of all their scent 
And lovely colour, yet what once was meant 
By these dull stains, some men may yet descry 
As dead upon the quivering leaves they lie. 

Behold them here, and mock me if you will. 
But yet believe no scorn of men can kill 
My love of that fair land wherefrom they came. 
Where midst the grass their petals once did flame. 

Moreover, since that land as ye should know. 
Bears not alone the gems for summer’s show. 

Or gold and pearls for fresh green-coated spring. 
Or rich adornment for the flickering wing 
Of fleeting autumn, but hath little fear 
For the white conqueror of the fruitful year, 

So in these pages month by month I show 
Some portion of the flowers that erst did blow 
In lovely meadows of the varying land, 

Wherein erewhile I had the luck to stand. 



103 


MARCH. 

S LAYER of the winter, art thou here again? 

O welcome, thou that bring’ st the summer nigh * 
The bitter wind makes not thy victory vain, 

Nor will we mock thee for thy faint blue sky. 
Welcome, O March ! whose kindly days and dry 
Make April ready for the throstle’s song, 

Thou first redresser of the winter’s wrong I 

Yea, welcome March ! and though I die ere June, 
Yet for the hope of life I give thee praise, 

Striving to swell the burden of the tune 
That even now I hear thy brown birds raise, 
Unmindful of the past or coming days ; 

Who sing : e 0 joy 1 a new year is begun : 

What happiness to look upon the sun !’ 

Ah, what begetteth all this storm of bliss 
But Death himself, who crying solemnly, 

E’en from the heart of sweet Forgetfulness, 

Bids us ‘Rejoice, lest pleasureless ye die. 

Within a little time must ye go by. 

Stretch forth your open hands, and while ye live 
Take all the gifts that Death and Life may give. 3 



104 


7 HE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


B EHOLD once more within a quiet land 

The remnant of that once aspiring band. 
With all hopes fallen away, but such as light 
The sons of men to that unfailing night, 

That death they needs must look on face to face. 

Time passed, and ever fell the days apace 
From off the new-strung chaplet of their life ; 

Yet though the time with no bright deeds was rife, 
Though no fulfilled desire now made them glad, 
They were not quite unhappy, rest they had, 

And with their hope their fear had passed away ; 
New things and strange they saw from day to day 
Honoured they were, and had no lack of things 
For which men crouch before the feet of kings, 
And, stripped of honour, yet may fail to have. 

Therefore their latter journey to the grave 
Was like those days of later autumn-tide, 

When he who in some town may chance to bide 
Opens the window for the balmy air, 

And seeing the golden hazy sky so fair, 

And from some city garden hearing still 
The wheeling rooks the air with music fill, 

Sweet hopeful music, thinketh, Is this spring, 
Surely the year can scarce be perishing? 

But then he leaves the clamour of the town, 

And sees the withered scanty leaves fall down, 



MARCH. 


i°5 

The half-ploughed field, the flowerless garden-^lo^ 
The dark full stream by summer long forgot, 

The tangled hedges where, relaxed and dead, 

The twining plants their withered berries shed, 

And feels therewith the treachery of the sun, 

And knows the pleasant time is well-nigh done. 

In such St Luke’s short summer lived these men, 
Nearing the goal of threescore years and ten; 

The elders of the town their comrades were, 

And they to them were waxen now as dear 
As ancient men to ancient men can be ; 

Grave matters of belief and polity 
They spoke of oft, but not alone of these; 

For in their times of idleness and ease 
They told of poets’ vain imaginings, 

And memories vague of half-forgotten things, 

Not true nor false, but sweet to think upon. 

For nigh the time when first that land they won. 
When new-born March made fresh the hopeful air, 
The wanderers sat within a chamber fair, 

Guests of that city’s rulers, when the day 
Far from the sunny noon had fallen away; 

The sky grew dark, and on the window-pane 
They heard the beating of the sudden rain. 

Then, all being satisfied with plenteous feast, 

There spoke an ancient man, the land’s chief priest. 
Who said, “ Dear guests, the year begins to-day, 

And fain are we, before it pass away, 



io6 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


To hear some teles of that now altered world, 
Wherefrom our fathers in old time were hurled 
By the hard hands of fate and destiny. 

Nor would ye hear perchance unwillingly 
How we have dealt with stories of the land 
Wherein the tombs of our forefathers stand : 
Wherefore henceforth two solemn feasts shall be 
In every month, at which some history 
Shall crown our joyance ; and this day, indeed, 

I have a story ready for our need, 

If ye will hear it, though perchance it is 
That many things therein are writ amiss, 

This part forgotten, that part grown too great, 

For these things, too, are in the hands of fate.” 

They cried aloud for joy to hear him speak, 

And as again the sinking sun did break 
Through the dark clouds and blazed adown the hall, 
His dear thin voice upon their ears did fall, 

Telling a tale of times long passed away, 

When men might cross a kingdom in a day, 

And kings remembered they should one day die. 
And all folk dwelt in great simplicity. 



ATALANTA’S RACE. 


ARGUMENT. 

Atalanta, daughter of King Schceneus, not willing to lose her 
virgin’s estate, made it a law to all suitors that they should 
run a race with her in the public place, and if they failed to 
overcome her should die unrevenged ; and thus many brave 
men perished. At last came Milanion, the son of Amphi- 
damas, who, outrunning her with the help of Venus, gained 
the virgin and wedded her. 

T HROUGH thick Arcadian woods a hunter went, 
Following the beasts up, on a fresh spring day. 
But since his hom-tipped bow but seldom bent. 

Now at the noontide nought had happed to slay, 
Within a vale he called his hounds away, 

Hearkening the echoes of his lone voice cling 
About the cliffs and through the beech-trees ring. 

But when they ended, still awhile he stood, 

And but the sweet familiar thrush could hear, 

And all the day-long noises of the wood, 

And o’er the dry leaves of the vanished year 
His hounds’ feet pattering as they drew anear, 

And heavy breathing from their heads low hung, 

To see the mighty cornel bow unstrung. 



ro8 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Then smiling did he turn to leave the place, 

But with his first step some new fleeting thought 
A shadow cast across his sun-burnt face ; 

I think the golden net that April brought 
From some warm world his wavering soul had caught; 
For, sunk in vague sweet longing, did he go 
Betwixt the trees with doubtful steps and slow. 

Yet howsoever slow he went, at last 
The trees grew sparser, and the wood was done; 
Whereon one farewell, backward look he cast, 

Then, turning round to see what place was won, 

With shaded eyes looked underneath the sun, 

And o’er green meads and new-turned furrows brown 
Beheld the gleaming of King Schceneus’ town. 

So thitherward he turned, and on each side 
The folk were busy on the teeming land, 

And man and maid from the brown furrows cried, 

Or midst the newly-blossomed vines did stand, 

And as the rustic weapon pressed the hand 
Thought of the nodding of the well-filled ear, 

Or how the knife the heavy bunch should shear. 

Merry it was : about him sung the birds, 

The spring flowers bloomed along the firm dry road, 
The sleek-skinned mothers of the sharp-homed herds 
Now for the barefoot milking-maidens lowed; 

While from the freshness of his blue abode, 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


109 


Glad his death-bearing arrows to forget, 

The broad sun blazed, nor scattered plagues as yet 

Through such fair things unto the gates he came, 
And found them open, as though peace were there; 
Wherethrough, unquestioned of his race or name, 
He entered, and along the streets J gan fare, 

Which at the first of folk were well-nigh bare; 

But pressing on, and going more hastily, 

Men hurrying too he ’gan at last to see. 

Following the last of these, he still pressed on, 
Until an open space he came unto, 

Where wreaths of fame had oft been lost and won, 
For feats of strength folk there were wont to do. 
And now our hunter looked for something new, 
Because the whole wide space was bare, and stilled 
The high seats were, with eager people filled. 

There with the others to a seat he gat, 

Whence he beheld a broidered canopy, 

’Neath which in fair array King Schoeneus sat 
Upon his throne with councillors thereby; 

And underneath his well-wrought seat and high, 

He saw a golden image of the sun, 

A silver image of the Fleet-foot One. 

A brazen altar stood beneath their feet 
Whereon a thin flame flickered in the wind 



no THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Nigh this a herald clad in raiment meet 
Made ready even now his horn to wind. 

By whom a huge man held a sword, entwined 
With yellow flowers ; these stood a little space 
From off the altar, nigh the starting place. 

And there two runners did the sign abide 
Foot set to foot, — a young man slim and fair, 
Crisp-haired, well knit, with firm limbs often tried 
In places where no man his strength may spare ; 
Dainty his thin coat was, and on his hair 
A golden circlet of renown he wore, 

And in his hand an olive garland bore. 

But on this day with whom shall he contend ? 
A maid stood by him like Diana clad 
When in the woods she lists her bow to bend, 
Too fair for one to look on and be glad, 

Who scarcely yet has thirty summers had, 

If he must still behold her from afar ; 

Too fair to let the world live free from war. 

She seemed all earthly matters to forget; 

Of all tormenting lines her face was dear, 

Her wide grey eyes upon the goal were set 
Calm and unmoved as though no soul were near, 
But her foe trembled as a man in fear, 

Nor from her loveliness one moment turned 
His anxious face with fierce desire that burned. 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


in 


Now through the hush there broke the trumpet's clang 
Just as the setting sun made eventide. 

Then from light feet a spurt of dust there sprang, 

And swiftly were they running side by side; 

But silent did the thronging folk abide 
Until the turning-post was reached at last, 

And round about it still abreast they passed. 

But when the people saw how dose they ran, 

When halfway to the starting-point they were, 

A cry of joy broke forth, whereat the man 
Headed the white-foot runner, and drew near 
Unto the very end of all his fear; 

And scarce his straining feet the ground could feel. 
And bliss unhoped for o'er his heart ’gan steaL 

But midst the loud victorious shouts he heard 
Her footsteps drawing nearer, and the sound 
Of fluttering raiment, and thereat afeard 
His flushed and eager face he turned around, 

And even then he felt her past him bound 
Fleet as the wind, but scarcely saw her there 
Till on the goal she laid her fingers fair. 

There stood she breathing like a little child 
Amid some warlike clamour laid asleep, 

For no victorious joy her red Hps smiled, 

Her cheek its wonted freshness did but keep; 

No glance lit up her clear grey eyes and deep, 



X 1 2 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Though some divine thought softened all her face 
As once more rang the trumpet through the place. 

But her late foe stopped short amidst his course, 
One moment gazed upon her piteously, 

Then with a groan his lingering feet did force 
To leave the spot whence he her eyes could see ; 
And, changed like one who knows his time must be 
But short and bitter, without any word 
He knelt before the bearer of the sword ; 

Then high rose up the gleaming deadly blade, 
Bared of its flowers, and through the crowded place 
Was silence now, and midst of it the maid 
Went by the poor wretch at a gentle pace, 

And he to hers upturned his sad white face ; 

Nor did his eyes behold another sight 
Ere on his soul there fell eternal night 


S O was the pageant ended, and all folk 
Talking of this and that familiar thing 
In little groups from that sad concourse broke. 
For now the shrill bats were upon the wing, 
And soon dark night would slay the evening, 
And in dark gardens sang the nightingale 
Her little-heeded, oft-repeated tale. 



ATALANTA'S RACE, 


1 13 

And with the last of all the hunter went, 

Who, wondering at the strange sight he had seen 
Prayed an old man to tell him what it meant, 

Both why the vanquished man so slain had been, 

And if the maiden were an earthly queen, 

Or rather what much more she seemed to be, 

No sharer in the world’s mortality. 

“ Stranger,” said he, “ I pray she soon may die 
Whose lovely youth has slain so many an one ! 

King Schoeneus’ daughter is she verily. 

Who when her eyes first looked upon the sun 
Was fain to end her life but new begun, 

For he had vowed to leave but men alone 
Sprung from his loins when he from earth was gone. 

“ Therefore he bade one leave her in the wood, 

And let wild things deal with her as they might, 

But this being done, some cruel god thought good 
To save her beauty in the world’s despite : 

Folk say that her, so delicate and white 
As now she is, a rough root-grubbing bear 
Amidst her shapeless cubs at first did rear. 

64 In course of time the woodfolk slew her nurse, 
And to their rude abode the youngling brought, 

And reared her up to be a kingdom’s curse, 

Who grown a woman, of no kingdom thought, 

But armed and swift, ’mid beasts destruction wrought, 


1 



1 14 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE . 

Nor spared two shaggy centaur kings to slay 
To whom her body seemed an easy prey. 

“ So to this city, led by fate, she came 
Whom known by signs, whereof I cannot tell, 

King Schceneus for his child at last did claim, 

Nor otherwhere since that day doth she dwell 
Sending too many a noble soul to hell — 

What ! thine eyes glisten ! what then, thinkest thou 
Her s hinin g head unto the yoke to bow ? 

“ Listen, my son, and love some other maid 
For she the saffron gown will never wear, 

And on no flower-strewn couch shall she be laid, 
Nor shall her voice make glad a lover's ear : 

Yet if of Death thou hast not any fear, 

Yea, rather, if thou lovest him utterly, 

Thou still may'st woo her ere thou com’st to die, 

“ Like him that on this day thou sawest lie dead ; 
For, fearing as I deem the sea-born one. 

The maid has vowed e'en such a man to wed 
As in the course her swift feet can outrun, 

But whoso fails herein, his days are done : 

He came the nighest that was slain to-day, 

Although with him I deem she did but play. 

“ Behold, such mercy Atalanta gives 
To those that long to win her loveliness; 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


IX 5 


Be wise I be sure that many a maid there lives 
Gentler than she, of beauty little less, 

Whose swimming eyes thy loving words shall bless, 
When in some garden, knee set dose to knee, 

Thou sing’st the song that lore may teach to thee.” 

So to the hunter spake that andent man, 

And left him for his own home presently : 

But he turned round, and through the moonlight wan 
Reached the thick wood, and there ’twixt tree and tree 
Distraught he passed the long night feverishly, 

’Twixt sleep and waking, and at dawn arose 
To wage hot war against his speechless foes. 

There to the hart’s flank seemed his shaft to grow, 
As panting down the broad green glades he flew, 
There by his horn the Dryads well might know 
His thrust against the bear’s heart had been true, 

And there Adonis* bane his javelin slew, 

But still in vain through rough and smooth he went, 
For none the more his restlessness was spent 

So wandering, he to Argive dties came, 

And in the lists with valiant men he stood, 

And by great deeds he won him praise and fame, 

And heaps of wealth for little-valued blood ; 

But none of all these things, or life, seemed good 
Unto his heart, where still unsatisfied 
A ravenous longing warred with fear and pride. 



1 16 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Therefore it happed when but a month had gone 
Since he had left King Schoeneus’ city old, 

In hunting-gear again, again alone 
The forest-bordered meads did he behold, 

Where still mid thoughts of August’s quivering gold 
Folk hoed the wheat, and clipped the vine in trust 
Of faint October’s purple-foaming must 

And once again he passed the peaceful gate, 
While to his beating heart his lips did lie, 

That owning not victorious love and fate, 

Said, half aloud, “ And here too must I try, 

To win of alien men the mastery, 

And gather for my head fresh meed of fame 
And cast new glory on my father’s name.” 

In spite of that, how beat his heart, when first 
Folk said to him, “ And art thou come to see 
That which still makes our city’s name accurst 
Among all mothers for its cruelty ? 

Then know indeed that fate is good to thee 
Because to-morrow a new luckless one 
Against the whitefoot maid is pledged to run.” 

So on the morrow with no curious eyes 
As once he did, that piteous sight he saw, 

Nor did that wonder in his heart arise 

As toward the goal the conquering maid ’gan draw. 

Nor did he gaze upon her eyes with awe, 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


Too full the pain of longing filled his heart 
For fear or wonder there to have a part 

but O, how long the night was ere it went ! 
How long it was before the dawn begun 
Showed to the wakening birds the sun’s intent 
That not in darkness should the world be done ! 
And then, and then, how long before the sun 
Bade silently the toilers of the earth 
Get forth to fruitless cares or empty mirth ! 

And long it seemed that in the market-place 
He stood and saw the chaffering folk go by, 

Ere from the ivory throne King Schoeneus 5 face 
Looked down upon the murmur royally, 

But then came trembling that the time was nigh 
When he midst pitying looks his love must claim, 
And jeering voices must salute his name. 

But as the throng he pierced to gain the throne, 
His alien face distraught and anxious told 
What hopeless errand he was bound upon, 

And, each to each, folk whispered to behold 
His godlike limbs ; nay, and one woman old 
As he went by must pluck him by the sleeve 
And pray him yet that wretched love to leave. 

For sidling up she said, “ Canst thou live twice, 
Fair son? canst thou have joyful youth again. 



1 18 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

That thus thou goest to the sacrifice 
Thyself the victim ? nay then, all in vain 
Thy mother bore her longing and her pain, 

And one more maiden on the earth must dwell 
Hopeless of joy, nor fearing death and heli. 

“ O, fool, thou knowest not the compact then 
That with the threeformed goddess she has made 
To keep her from the loving lips of men, 

And in no saffron gown to be arrayed, 

And therewithal with glory to be paid, 

And love of her the moonlit river sees 
White ’gainst the shadow of the formless trees. 

“ Come back, and I myself will pray for thee 
Unto the sea-bom framer of delights, 

To give thee her who on the earth may be 
The fairest stirrer up to death and fights, 

To quench with hopeful days and joyous nights 
The flame that doth thy youthful heart consume : 
Come back, nor give thy beauty to the tomb.” 

How should he listen to her earnest speech ? 
Words, such as he not once or twice had said 
Unto himself, whose meaning scarce could reach 
The firm abode of that sad hardihead — 

He turned about, and through the marketstead 
Swiftly he passed, until before the throne 
In the cleared space he stood at last alone. 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


119 

Then said the King, “ Stranger, what dost thou here? 
Have any of my folk done ill to thee ? 

Or art thou of the forest men in fear ? 

Or ait thou of the sad fraternity 
Who still will strive my daughter’s mates to be, 
Staking their lives to win to earthly bliss 
The lonely maid, the friend of Artemis ?” 

“ 0 King,” he said, “ thou sayest the word indeed , 
Nor will I quit the strife till I have won 
My sweet delight, or death to end my need. 

And know that I am called Milanion, 

Of King Amphidamas the well-loved son : 

So fear not that to thy old name, O King, 

Much loss or shame my victory will bring.” 

“ Nay, Prince,” said Schoeneus, “welcome to this land 
Thou wert indeed, if thou wert here to try 
Thy strength ’gainst some one mighty of his hand ; 
Nor would we grudge thee well-won mastery. 

But now, why wilt thou come to me to die, 

And at my door lay down thy luckless head, 

Swelling the band of the unhappy dead, 

“ Whose curses even now my heart doth fear? 

Lo, I am old, and know what life can be, 

And what a bitter thing is death aneax. 

O Son ! be wise, and hearken unto me, 

And if no other can be dear to thee, 



1 2?o THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

At least as now, yet is the world full wide, 

And bliss in seeming hopeless hearts may hide : 

“ But if thou losest life, then all is lost” 

“ Nay, King,” Milamon said, “ thy words are vain. 
Doubt not that I have counted well the cost. 

But say, on what day wilt thou that I gain 
Fulfilled delight, or death to end my pain ? 

Eight glad were I if it could be to-day, 

And all my doubts at rest for ever lay.” 

“ Nay,” said King Schceneus, “ thus it shall not be, 
But rather shalt thou let a month go by, 

And weary with thy prayers for victory 

What god thou know’st the kindest and most nigh. 

So doing, still perchance thou shalt not die : 

And with my goodwill wouldst thou have the maid 
For of the equal gods I grow afraid. 

“ And until then, O Prince, be thou my guest, 

And all these troublous things awhile forget” 

Nay,” said he, “ couldst thou give my soul good rest 
And on mine head a sleepy garland set, 

Then had I ’scaped the meshes of the net, 

Nor shouldst thou hear from me another word ; 

But now, make sharp thy fearful heading sword. 


u Yet will I do what son of man may do, 
And promise all the gods may most desire. 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


121 


That to myself I may at least be true ; 

And on that day my heart and limbs so tire* 

With utmost strain and measureless desire, 

That, at the worst, I may but fall asleep 

When in the sunlight round that sword shall sweep.” 

He went therewith, nor anywhere would bide, 

But unto Argos restlessly did wend ; 

And there, as one who lays all hope aside, 

Because the leech has said his life must end, 

Silent farewell he bade to foe and friend. 

And took his way unto the restless sea, 

For there he deemed his rest and help might be. 


U PON the shore of Argolis there stands 

A temple to the goddess that he sought^ 

That, turned unto the lion-bearing lands, 

Fenced from the east, of cold winds hath no thought, 
Though to no homestead there the sheaves are brought, 
No groaning press torments the close-clipped murk, 
Lonely the fane stands, far from all men’s work. 

Pass through a close, set thick with myrtle-trees, 
Through the brass doors that guard the holy place. 
And entering, hear the washing of the seas 



122 


THE EARTHL V PARADISE. 


That twice a-day rise high above the base, 

And with the south-west urging them, embrace 
The marble feet of her that standeth there 
That shrink not, naked though they be and fair. 

Small is the fane through which the seawind sings 
About Queen Venus’ well-wrought image white, 

But hung around are many precious things, 

The gifts of those who, longing for delight, 

Have hung them there within the goddess’ sight, 
And in return have taken at her hands 
The living treasures of the Grecian lands. 

And thither now has come Milanion, 

And showed unto the priests’ wide open eyes 
Gifts fairer than all those that there have shone, 

Silk cloths, inwrought with Indian fantasies, 

And bowls inscribed with sayings of the wise 
Above the deeds of foolish living things, 

And mirrors fit to be the gifts of kings. 

And now before the Sea-born One he stands, 

By the sweet veiling smoke made dim and soft, 

And while the incense trickles from his hands, 

And while the odorous smoke-wreaths hang aloft, 
Thus doth he pray to her : “ 0 Thou, who oft 
Hast holpen man and maid in their distress, 

Despise me not for this my wretchedness ! 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


123 


“ O goddess, among us who dwell below, 

Kings and great men, great for a little while, 

Have pity on the lowly heads that bow, 

Nor hate the hearts that love them without guile ; 
Wilt thou be worse than these, and is thy smile 
A vain device of him who set thee here, 

An empty dream of some artificer? 

“ 0, great one, some men love, and are ashamed ; 
Some men are weary of the bonds of love ; 

Yea, and by some men lightly art thou blamed, 

That from thy toils their lives they cannot move, 
And ’mid the ranks of men their manhood prove. 
Alas ! O goddess, if thou slayest me 
What new immortal can I serve but thee ? 

“ Think then, will it bring honour to thy head 
If folk say, c Everything aside he cast 
And to all fame and honour was he dead, 

And to his one hope now is dead at last, 

Since all unholpen he is gone and past : 

Ah, the gods love not man, for certainly, 

He to his helper did not cease to ay.’ 

“ Nay, but thou wilt help ; they who died before 
Not single-hearted as I deem ca m e here, 

Therefore unthanked they laid their gifts before 
Thy stainless feet, still shivering with their fear, 

Lest in their eyes their true thought might appear, 



124 


7 HE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Who sought to be the lords of that fair town, 
Dreaded of men and winners of renown. 

tc O Queen, thou knowest I pray not for this s 
O set us down together in some place 
Where not a voice can break our heaven of bliss, 
Where nought but rocks and I can see her face, 
Softening beneath the marvel of thy grace, 

Where not a foot our vanished steps can track — 
The golden age, the golden age come back ! 

“ O fairest, hear me now who do thy will. 
Plead for thy rebel that she be not slain, 

But live and love and be thy servant still ; 

Ah, give her joy and take away my pain, 

And thus two long-enduring servants gain. 

An easy thing this is to do for me, 

What need of my vain words to weary thee I 

“ But none the less, this place will I not leave 
Until I needs must go my death to meet, 

Or at thy hands some happy sign receive 
That in great joy we twain may one day greet 
Thy presence here and kiss thy silver feet, 

Such as we deem thee, fair beyond all words. 
Victorious o'er our servants and our lords.” 

Then from the altar back a space he drew, 

But from the Queen turned not his face away, 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


T2 5 

But ’gainst a pillar leaned, until the blue 
That arched the sky, at ending of the day, 

Was turned to ruddy gold and changing grey, 

And clear, but low, the nigh-ebbed windless sea 
In the still evening murmured ceaselessly. 

And there he stood when all the sun was down, 
Nor had he moved, when the dim golden light, 

Like the far lustre of a godlike town, 

Had left the world to seeming hopeless night, 

Nor would he move the more when wan moonlight 
Streamed through the pillars for a little while, 

And lighted up the white Queen’s changeless smile. 

Nought noted he the shallow flowing sea 
As step by step it set the wrack a-swim, 

The yellow torchlight nothing noted he 
Wherein with fluttering gown and half-bared limb 
The temple damsels sung their midnight hymn, 

And nought the doubled stillness of the fane 
When they were gone and all was hushed again. 

But when the waves nad touched the marble base, 
And steps the fish swim over twice a-day, 

The dawn beheld him sunken in his place 
Upon the floor; and sleeping there he lay. 

Not heeding aught the little jets of spray 
The roughened sea brought nigh, across him cast, 

For as one dead all thought from him had passed. 



126 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet long before the sun had showed his head, 
Long ere the varied hangings on the wall 
Had gained once more their blue and green and red, 
He rose as one some well-known sign doth call 
When war upon the city’s gates doth fall, 

And scarce like one fresh risen out of sleep, 

He *gan again his broken watch to keep. 

Then he turned round j not for the sea-gull’s cry 
That wheeled above the temple in his flight, 

Not for the fresh south wind that lovingly 
Breathed on the new-born day and dying night, 

But some strange hope ’twixt fear and great delight 
Drew round his face, now flushed, now pale and wan, 
And still constrained his eyes the sea to scan. 

Now a faint light lit up the southern sky, 

Not sun or moon, for all the world was grey, 

But this a bright cloud seemed, that drew anigh. 
Lighting the dull waves that beneath it lay 
As toward the temple still it took its way, 

And still grew greater, till Milanion 

Saw nought for dazzling light that round him shone. 

But as he staggered with his arms outspread, 
Delicious unnamed odours breathed around. 

For languid happiness he bowed his head, 

And with wet eyes sank down upon the ground, 

Nor wished for aught, nor any dream he found 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


J21 


To give him reason for that happiness, 

Or make him ask more knowledge of his bliss. 

At last his eyes were cleared, and he could see 
Through happy tears the goddess face to face 
With that faint image of Divinity, 

Whose well-wrought smile and dainty changeless grace 
Until that mom so gladdened all the place ; 

Then he, unwitting cried aloud her name 
And covered up his eyes for fear and shame. 

But through the stillness he her voice could hear 
Piercing his heart with joy scarce bearable, 

That said, “ Milanion, wherefore dost thou fear, 

I am not hard to those who love me well ; 

List to what I a second time will tell, 

And thou mayest hear perchance, and live to save 
The cruel maiden from a loveless grave. 

“ See, by my feet three golden apples lie — 

Such fruit among the heavy roses falls, 

Such fruit my watchful damsels carefully 
Store up within the best loved of my walls, 

Ancient Damascus, where the lover calls 
Above my unseen head, and faint and light 
The rose-leaves flutter round me in the night 

“ And note, that these are not alone most fair 
With heavenly gold, but longing strange they bring 



128 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Unto the hearts of men, who will not care 
Beholding these, for any once-loved thing 
Till round the shining sides their fingers ding. 

And thou shalt see thy well-girt swiftfoot maid 
By sight of these amidst her glory stayed 

“ For bearing these within a scrip with thee. 
When first she heads thee from the starting-place 
Cast down the first one for her eyes to see, 

And when she turns aside make on apace, 

And if again she heads thee in the race 
Spare not the other two to cast aside 
If she not long enough behind will bide. 

“ Farewell, and when has come the happy time 
That she Diana’s raiment must unbind 
And all the world seems blessed with Saturn’s clime 
And thou with eager arms about her twined 
Beholdest first her grey eyes growing kind, 

Surely, O trembler, thou shalt scarcely then 
Forget the Helper of unhappy men.” 

Milanion raised his head at this last word 
For now so soft and kind she seemed to be 
No longer of her Godhead was he feared j 
Too late he looked, for nothing could he see 
But the white image glimmering doubtfully 
In the departing twilight cold and grey, 

And those three apples on the steps that lay. 



A2ALANTA 'S RA CE. 


T2Q 

These then he caught up quivering with delight, 

Yet fearful lest it all might be a dream, 

And though aweary with the watchful night, 

And sleepless nights of longing, still did deem 
He could not sleep ; but yet the first sunbeam 
That smote the fane acioss the heaving deep 
Shone on him laid in calm untroubled sleep. 

But little ere the noontide did he rise, 

And why he felt so happy scarce could tell 
Until the gleaming apples met his eyes. 

Then leaving the fair place where this befeil 
Oft he looked back as one who loved it well, 

Then homeward to the haunts of men ’gan wend 
To bring all things unto a happy end. 


N OW has the lingering month at last gone by, 
Again are all folk round the running place, 
Nor other seems the dismal pageantry 
Than heretofore, but that another face 
Looks o’er the smooth course ready for the race, 

For now, beheld of all, Milanion 

Stands on the spot he twice has looked upon. 

But yet — what change is this that holds the maid ? 
Does she indeed see in his glittering eye 



130 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


More than disdain of the sharp shearing blade. 

Some happy hope of help and victory? 

The others seemed to say, u We come to die, 

Look down upon us for a little while, 

That dead, we may bethink us of thy smile.” 

But he — what look of mastery was this 
He cast on her ? why were his lips so red ? 

Why was his face so flushed with happiness? 

So looks not one who deems himself but dead. 

E’en if to death he bows a willing head ; 

So rather looks a god well pleased to find 
Some earthly damsel fashioned to his mind. 

Why must she drop her lids before his gaze. 

And even as she casts adown her eyes 
Redden to note his eager glance of praise, 

And wish that she were clad in other guise ? 

Why must the memory to her heart arise 
Of things unnoticed when they first were heard, 

Some lover's song, some answering maiden’s word ? 

What makes these longings, vague, without a name, 
And this vain pity never felt before, 

This sudden languor, this contempt of fame, 

This tender sorrow for the time past o’er, 

These doubts that grow each minute more and more ? 
Why does she tremble as the time grows near, 

And weak defeat and woeful victory fear? 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


13 * 

Now while she seemed to hear her beating heart, 
Above their heads the trumpet blast rang out 
And forth they sprang; and she must play her part 
Then flew her white feet, knowing not a doubt, 
Though slackening once, she turned her head about, 
But then she cried aloud and faster fled 
Than e’er before, and all men deemed him dead. 

But with no sound he raised aloft his hand, 

And thence what seemed a ray of light there flew 
And past the maid rolled on along the sand ; 

Then trembling she her feet together drew 
And in her heart a strong desire there grew 
To have the toy ; some god she thought had given 
That gift to her, to make of earth a heaven. 

Then from the course with eager steps she ran, 
And in her odorous bosom laid the gold. 

But when she turned again, the great-limbed man, 
Now well ahead she failed not to behold, 

And mindful of her glory waxing cold, 

Sprang up and followed him in hot pursuit, 

Though with one hand she touched the golden fruit 

Note too, the bow that she was wont to bear 
She laid aside to grasp the glittering prize, 

And o’er her shoulder from the quiver fair 
Three arrows fell and lay before her eyes 
Unnoticed, as amidst the people’s cries 



132 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


She sprang to head the strong Milanion, 

Who now the turning-post had well-nigh won. 

But as he set his mighty hand on it 
White fingers underneath his own were laid, 

And white limbs from his dazzled eyes did flit, 

Then he the second fruit cast by the maid, 

She ran awhile, and then as one afraid 

Wavered and stopped, and turned and made no stay. 

Until the globe with its bright fellow lay. 

Then, as a troubled glance she cast around 
Now far ahead the Argive could she see, 

And in her garment’s hem one hand she wound 
To keep the double prize, and strenuously 
Sped o’er the course, and little doubt had she 
To win the day, though now but scanty space 
Was left betwixt him and the winning place. 

Short was the way unto such winged feet, 

Quickly she gained upon him till at last 
He turned about her eager eyes to meet 
And from his hand the third fair apple cast 
She wavered not, but turned and ran so fast 
After the prize that should her bliss fulfil, 

That in her hand it lay ere it was still. 

Nor did she rest, but turned about to win 
Once more, an unblest woeful victory — 



ATALANTA'S RACE. 


And yet — and yet — why does her breath begin 
To fail her, and her feet drag heavily ? 

Why fails she now to see if far or nigh 
The goal is? why do her grey eyes grow dim? 
Why do these tremors run through every limb ? 

She spreads her arms abroad some stay to find 
Else must she fall, indeed, and findeth this, 

A strong man’s arms about her body twined. 

Nor may she shudder now to feel his kiss, 

So wrapped she is in new unbroken bliss : 

Made happy that the foe the prize hath won, 

She weeps glad tears for all her glory done. 


S HATTER the trumpet, hew adown the posts 
Upon the brazen altar break the sword, 
And scatter incense to appease the ghosts 
Of those who died here by their own award. 

Bring forth the image of the mighty Lord, 

And her who unseen o’er the runners hung, 

And did a deed for ever to be sung. 

Here are the gathered »folk, make no delay, 
Open ELing Schceneus’ well-filled treasury, 

Bring out the gifts long hid from light of day. 

The golden bowls o’erwrought with imagery, 



*34 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Gold chains, and unguents brought from over sea, 
The saffron gown the old Phoenician brought, 
Within the temple of the Goddess wrought 

0 ye, 0 damsels, who shall never see 
Her, that Love’s servant bringeth’now to you, 
Returning from another victory, 

In some cool bower do all that now is due ! 

Since she in token of her service new 
Shall give to Venus offerings rich enow. 

Her maiden zone, her arrows, and her bow. 



MARCH. 


»35 


S O when his last word’s echo died away. 

The growing wind at end of that wild day 
Alone they heard, for silence bound them all; 

Yea, on their hearts a weight had seemed to fall, 

As unto the scarce-hoped felicity 

The tale grew round — the end of life so nigh, 

The aim so little, and the joy so vain — 

For as a child’s unmeasured joy brings pain 
Unto a grown man holding grief at bay, 

So the old fervent story of that day 
Brought pain half-sweet, to these : till now the fire 
Upon the hearth sent up a flickering spire 
Of ruddy flame, as fell the burned-through logs, 

And, waked by sudden silence, grey old dogs, 

The friends of this or that man, rose and fawned 
On hands they knew ; withal once more there dawned 
The light of common day on those old hearts, 

And all were ready now to play their parts, 

And take what feeble joy might yet remain 
In place of all they once had hoped to gain. 



136 THE EARTIIL Y PARADISE. 


N OW on the second day that these did meet 

March was a-dying through soft days and sweet, 
Too hopeful for the wild days yet to be ; 

But in the hall that ancient company, 

Not lacking younger folk that day at least, 

Softened by spring were gathered at the feast, 

And as the time drew on, throughout the hall 

A horn was sounded, giving note to all 

That they at last the looked-for tale should hear. 

Then spake a Wanderer, “ O kind hosts and dear, 
Hearken a little unto such a tale 
As folk with us will tell in every vale 
About the yule-tide fire, when as the snow 
Deep in the passes, letteth men to go 
From place to place : now there few great folk be, 
Although we upland men have memory 
Of ills kings did us ; yet as now indeed 
Few have much wealth, few are in utter need 
Like the wise ants a kingless, happy folk 
We long have been, not galled by any yoke, 

But the white leaguer of the winter tide 
Whereby all men at home are bound to bide. 

— Alas, my folly ! how I talk of it, 

As though from this place where to-day we sit 
The way thereto were short — Ah, would to God 
Upon the snow-freed herbage now I trod ! 

But pardon, sirs \ the time goes swiftly by, 

Hearken a tale of conquering destiny.” 



*37 


THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 

ARGUMENT. 

It was foretold to a great king, that he who should reign after 
him should be low-born and poor ; which thing came to pass 
in the end, for all that the king could do. 

A KING there was in days of old 

Who ruled wide lands, nor lacked for gold, 
Nor honour, nor much longed-for praise, 

And his days were called happy days, 

So peaceable his kingdoms were, 

While others wrapt in war and fear 
Fell ever unto worse and worse. 

Therefore his city was the nurse 
Of all that men then had of lore, 

And none were driven from his door 
That seemed well skilled in anything; 

So of the sages was he king ; 

And from this learned man and that, 

Little by little, lore he gat, 

And many a lordless, troubled land 
Fell scarce loth to his dreaded hand 



138 THE EARTHLY PARADISE 

Midst this it chanced that, on a day, 
Clad in his glittering gold array, 

He held a royal festival ; 

And nigh him in his glorious hall 
Beheld his sages most and least, 

Sitting much honoured at the least. 

But mid the faces so well known, 

Of men he well might call his own, 

He saw a little wizened man 

With face grown rather grey than wan 

From lapse of years, beardless was he, 

And bald as is the winter tree ; 

But his two deep-set, glittering eyes 
Gleamed at the sight of mysteries 
None knew but he ; few words he said, 
And unto those small heed was paid ; 

But the king, young, yet old in guile, 

Failed not to note a flickering smile 
Upon his face, as now and then 
He turned him from the learned men 
Toward the king’s seat, so thought to know 
What new thing he might have to show 
And presently, the meat being done, 

He bade them bring him to his throne, 
And when before the throne he stood, 

He said, “ We deem thy coming good ; 
What is thine art, canst thou in rhyme 
Tell stories of the ancient time ? 

Or dost thou chronicle old wars ? 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING, 


Or know’st thou of the change of stars ? 
Or seek’st thou the transmuting stone? 
Or canst thou make the shattered bone 
Grow whole, and dying men arise 
And live as long as thou the wise ? 

Or what gift dost thou bring me here, 
Where nought but men of lore are dear 
To me and mine?” 

“ O King,” said he, 
“ But few things know I certainly, 
Though I have toiled for many a day 
Along the hard and doubtful way 
That bringeth wise men to the grave : 
And now for all the years I gave, 

To know all things that man can learn, 
A few months learned life I earn, 

Nor feel much liker to a god 
Than when beside my sheep I trod 
Upon the thymy, wind-swept down. 

Yet am I come unto thy town 
To tell thee somewhat that I learned 
As on the stars I gazed, and yearned 
To cast this weary body off, 

With all its chains of mock and scoff 
And creeping death — for as I read 
The sure decrees with joy and dread. 
Somewhat 1 saw writ down of thee, 

And who shall have the sovereignty 
When thou art gone.” 



140 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

“ Nay,” said the King, 

“ Speak quick and tell me of the thing.” 

“ Sire,” said the sage, “ thine ancient line 
Thou holdest as a thing divine, 

So long and undisturbed it is, 

But now shall there be end to this, 

For surely in my glittering text 
I read that he who shall sit next, 

On this thine ancient throne and high, 

Shall be no better bom than I 
Whose grandsire none remembereth, 

Nor where my father first drew breath.” 

il Yea,” said the King, “ and this may be; 
Yet, O Sage, ere I credit thee, 

Some token certes must thou show, 

Or tell me what I think to know, 

Alone, among all folk alive; 

Then surely great gifts will I give 
To thee, and make thee head of all 
Who watch the planets rise and fall” 

“ Bid these stand backward from thy throne/ 
The sage said, “ then to thee alone 
Long hidden matters will I tell ; 

And then, if thou believest, well — 

And if thou dost not — well also ; 

No gift I ask, but leave to go, 

For strange to me is this thy state, 

And for thyself thou well ma/st hate 
My crabbed age and misery.” 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 14* 

“ Well,” said the King, “ let this thing be ; 

And ye, my masters, stand aback ! 

For of the fresh air have I lack, 

And in my pleasance would I walk 
To hearken this grave elder’s talk 
And gain new lore.” 

Therewith he rose 
And led the way unto a close, 

Shaded with grey-leaved olive-trees ; 

And when they were amidst of these 
He turned about and said, “ Speak, friend, 

And of thy folly make an end, 

And take this golden chain therefore.” 

“Rightly thou namest my weak lore,” 

The Sage said, “ therefore to the end 
Be wise, and what the fates may send 
Take thou, nor struggle in the net 
Wherein thine helpless feet are set ! 

— Hearken ! a year is well-nigh done 
Since, at the hottest ot the sun, 

Stood Antony beneath this tree, 

And took a jewelled cup of thee, 

And drank swift death in guise of wine : 

Since he, most trusted of all thine, 

At last too full of knowledge grew, 

And chiefly, he of all men knew 
How the Earl Marshal Hugh had died 
Since he had drawn him on to ride 
Into a bushment of his foes, 



I 4 2 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


To die amidst the rain of blows,” 
u Thou knowest that by me he died,” 
The King said, “ how if now I cried, 
Help I the magician slayeth me? 

Swiftly should twenty sword-blades be 
Clashing within thy ribs, and thou 
Nearer to death than even now.” 

“ Not thus, 0 King, I fear to die,” 

The Sage said; “ Death shall pass me by 
Many a year yet, because perchance, 

I fear not aught his clattering dance, 

And have enough of weary days. 

— But thou — farewell, and win the praise 

Of sages, by thy hearkening 

With heed to this most certain thing. 

Fear not because this tale I know, 

For to my grey tower back I go 
High raised above the heathy hills 
Where the great erne the swift hare kills. 
Or stoops upon the new-yeaned lamb ; 
There almost as a god I am 
Unto few folk, who hear thy name 
Indeed, but know nought of thy fame, 
Nay, scarce if thou be man or beast.” 

So saying, back unto the feast 
He turned, and went adown the hall, 

Not heeding any gibe or call ; 

And left the palace and the town 
With face turned toward his windy down. 



THE MAJST BORN TO BE KING. 143 

Back to the hall, too, the King went, 

With eyes upon the pavement bent 
In pensive thought, delighting not 
In riches and his kingly lot ; 

But thinking how his days began 
And of the lonely souls of man. 

But time past, and midst this and that 
The wise man’s message he forgat ; 

And as a king he lived his life, 

And took to him a noble wife 
Of the kings’ daughters, rich and fair. 

And they being wed for nigh a year, 

And she now growing great with child, 

It happed unto the forest wild 
This king with many folk must ride 
At ending of the summer-tide ; 

There boar and hart they brought to bay, 

And had right noble prize that day ; 

But when the noon was now long past 
And the thick woods grew overcast, 

They roused the mightiest hart of alL 
Then loudly ’gan the King to call 
Unto his huntsmen, not to leave 
That mighty beast for dusk nor eve 
Till they had won him ; with which word 
His horn he blew, and forth he spurred. 

Taking no thought of most or least. 

But only of that royal beast 



144 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


And over rough and smooth he rode. 

Nor yet for anything abode, 

Till dark night swallowing up the day 
With blindness his swift course must stay. 
Nor was there with him any one 
So far his fair steed had outrun 
The best of all his hunting-folk. 

So, glancing at the stars that broke 
’Twixt the thick branches here and there, 
Backward he turned, and peered with care 
Into the darkness, but saw nought, 

Nor heard his folk, and therewith thought 
His bed must be the brake leaves brown. 
Then in a while he lighted down, 

And felt about a little space, 

If he might find a softer place ; 

But as he groped from tree to tree 
Some glimmering light he seemed to see 
Twixt the dark stems, and thither turned, 

If yet perchance some wood-fire burned 
Within a peasant’s hut, where he 
Might find, amidst their misery, 

Rough food, or shelter at the least 

So, leading on his wearied beast, 

Blindly he crept from tree to tree, 

Till slowly grew that light to be 
The thing he looked for, and he found 
A hut on a cleared space of ground. 

From whose half-opened door there streamed 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 

The light that erst far off had gleamed 
Then of that shelter was he fain, 

But just as he made shift to gain 
The open space in front of it, 

A shadow o'er the grass did flit, 

And on the wretched threshold stood 
A big man, with a bar of wood 
In his right hand, who seemed as though 
He got him ready for a blow ; 

But ere he spoke the King cried, “ Friend 
May God good hap upon thee send. 

If thou wilt give me rest this night, 

And food according to thy might.” 

“ Nay,” said the carle, “ my wife lieth 
In labour, and is nigh her death : 

Nor canst thou enter here at all, 

But nearby is my asses' stall, 

Who on this night bide in the town ; 

There, if thou wilt, mayst thou lie down. 

And sleep until the dawn of day, 

And I will bring thee what I may 
Of food and drink.” 

Then said the King, 

“ Thanked be thou ; neither for nothing 
Shalt thou this good deed do to me.” 

“ Nay,” said the carle, " let these things be, 
Surely I think before the mom, 

To be too weary and forlorn 
For gold much heart in me to put” 


M5 


L 



14.6 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


With that he turned, and from the hut 
Brought out a lantern, and rye-bread, 

And wine, and showed the King a shed, 
Strewed with a litter of dry brake : 

Withal he muttered, for his sake, 

Unto Our Lady some rude prayer, 

And turned about and left him there. 

So when the rye-bread, nowise fine, 

The King had munched, and with green wine 
Had quenched his thirst, his horse he tied 
Unto a post, and there beside 
He fell asleep upon the brake. 

But in an hour did he awake, 

Astonied with an unnamed fear, 

For words were ringing in his ear 
Like the last echo of a scream, 

“ Take ! take ! ” but of the vanished dream 
No image was there left to him. 

Then, trembling sore in every limb, 

Did he arise, and drew his sword, 

And passed forth on the forest sward. 

And cautiously about he crept ; 

But nought at all he heard, except 
Some gioaning of the woodman's wife, 

And forest sounds well known, but rife 
With terror to the lonely souL 

Then he lay down again, to roll 
His limbs within his huntsman's cloak ; 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 147 


And slept again, and once more woke 
To tremble with that unknown fear, 

And other echoing words to hear — 

“ Give up / give up /” nor anything 

Showed more why these strange words should ring 

About him. Then he sat upright, 

Bewildered, gazing through the night, 

Until his weary eyes, grown dim, 

Showed not the starlit tree-trunks slim 
Against the black wood, grey and plain ; 

And into sleep he sank again. 

And woke not soon : but sleeping dreamed 
That he awoke, nor other seemed 
The place he woke in but that shed, 

And there beside his bracken bed 
He seemed to see the ancient sage 
Shrivelled yet more with untold age, 

Who bending down his head to him 
Said, with a mocking smile and grim, — 

“ Take, or give up ; what matters it ? 

This child new-born shall surely sit 
Upon thy seat when thou art gone, 

And dwelling ’twixt straight walls of stone ' 

Again the King woke at that word 
And sat up, panting and afeard, 

And staring out into the night, 

Where yet the woods thought not of light ; 

And fain he was to cast off sleep, 

Such visions from his eyes to keep. 



148 THE EARTH! Y PARADISE. 


Heavy hi s head grew none the less, 

’Twixt Svildering thoughts and weariness. 
And soon he fell asleep once more, 

Nor dreamed, nor woke again, before 
The sun shone through the forest trees ; 
And, shivering in the morning breeze, 

He blinked with just-awakened eyes. 

And pondering on those mysteries, 

Unto the woodmans hovel went 

Him he found kneeling down, and bent 
In moody grief above a bed, 

Whereon his wife lay, stark and dead, 
Whose soul near mom had passed away ; 
And ’twixt the dead and living lay 
A new-born man-child, fair and great. 

So in the door the King did wait 
To watch the man, who had no heed 
Of this or that, so sore did bleed 
The new-made wound within his heart 
But as the King gazed, for his part 
He did but see his threatened foe, 

And ever hard his heart did grow 
With deadly hate and wilfulness : 

And sight of that poor man’s distress 
Made it the harder, as of nought 
But that unbroken line he thought 
Of which he was the last : withal 
His scornful troubled eyes did fall 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 14$ 

Upon that nest of poverty, 

Where nought of joy he seemed to see. 

On straw the poor dead woman lay r 
Ihe door alone let in the day, 

Showing the trodden earthen floor, 

A board on trestles weak and poor, 

Three stumps of tree for stool or chair, 

A half-glazed pipkin, nothing fair, 

A bowl of porridge by the wife, 

Untouched by lips that lacked for life, 

A platter and a bowl of wood ; 

And in the further comer stood 
A bow cut from the wych-elm tree, 

A holly club, and arrows three 

111 pointed, heavy, spliced with thread. 

Ah I soothly, well remembered 
Was that unblissful wretched home, 

Those four bare walls, in days to come , 

And often in the coming years 
He called to mind the pattering tears 
That, on the rent old sackcloth cast 
About the body, fell full fas^ 

’Twixt half-meant prayers and curses wild, 

And that weak wailing of the child, 

His threatened dreaded enemy, 

The mighty king that was to be. 

But as he gazed unsoftened there, 

With hate begot of scorn and care, 



1 50 THE FARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Loudly he heard a great hom blow, 

And his own hunting call did know, 

And soon began the shouts to hear 
Of his own people drawing near. 

Then lifting up his hom, he blew 
A long shrill point, but as he threw 
His head aback, beheld his folk, 

Who from the close-set thicket broke 
And o’er the cleared space swiftly passed, 
With shouts £h°t he was found at last 
Then turned the carle his doleful face, 
And slowly rising in his place, 

Drew thwart his eyes his fingers strong, 
And on that gay-dressed glittering throng 
Gazed stupidly, as still he heard 
The name of King ; but said no word. 

But his guest spoke, “ Sirs, well be ye ! 
This luckless woodman, whom ye see, 
Gave me good harbour through the night 
And such poor victual as he might ; 
Therefore shall he have more than gold 
For his reward ; since dead and cold 
His helpmate lies who last night died. 

See now the youngling by her side ; 

Him will I take and rear him so 
That he shall no more lie alow 
In straw, or from the beech-tree dine. 

But rather use white linen fine 
And silver plate ; and with the sword 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 


Shall learn to serve some King or Lord 
How say’st thou, good man ? ” 

“ Sire,” he said. 

Weeping, but shamefaced, — “Since here dead 
She lies, that erst kept house for me. 

E’en as thou wiliest let it be ; 

Though I had hoped to have a son 
To help me get the day’s work done. 

And now, indeed, forth must he go 
If unto manhood he should grow, 

And lonely I must wander forth. 

To whom east, west, and south, and north 

Are all alike : forgive it me 

If little thanks I give to thee 

Who scarce can thank great God in heaven 

For what is left of what was given.” 

Small heed unto him the King gave. 

But trembling in his haste to have 
The body of his enemy, 

Said to an old squire, “ Bring to me 
The babe, and give the good man this 
Wherewith to gain a little bliss, 

In place of all his troubles gone, 

Nor need he now be long alone ” 

The carle’s rough face, at clink of gold> 

Lit up, though still did he behold 
The wasted body lying there ; 

But stooping, a rough box, foursquare, 

Made of old wood and lined with hay 



152 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Wherein the helpless infant lay, 

He raised, and gave it to the squire 
Who on the floor cast down his hire, 

Nor sooth dared murmur aught the while. 
But turning smiled a grim hard smile 
To see the carle his pieces count 
Still weeping : so did all men mount 
And turning round into the wood 
Forgat him and his drearihood, 

And soon were far off from the hut 

Then coming out, the door he shut 
Behind him, and adown a glade, 

Towards a rude hermitage he made 
To fetch the priest unto his need, 

To bury her and say her bede — 

So when all things that he might do 
Were done aright, heavy with woe, 

He left the woodland hut behind 
To take such chance as he might find 
In other lands, forgetting all 
That in that forest did befall. 

But through the wild wood rode the King, 
Moody and thinking on the thing, 

And weighted yet by hovenng fear , 

Till now, when they had drawn anear 
The open country, and could see 
The road run on from close to lea, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 153 

And lastly by a wooden bridge 
A long way from that heathy ridge 
Cross over a deep lowland stream — 

Then in his eyes there came a gleam, 

And his hand fell upon his sword, 

And turning round to squire and lord 
He said, “ Ride, sirs, the way is clear, 

Nor of my people have I fear, 

Nor do my foes range over wide ; 

And for myself fain would I ride 

Right slowly homewards through the fields 

Noting what this and that one yields ; 

While by my squire who bears the child 
Lightly my way shall be beguiled. 

For some nurse now he needs must have 
This tender life of his to save ; 

And doubtless by the stream there is 
Some house where he may dwell in bliss, 

Till he grow old enough to learn 
How gold and gloiy he may earn ; 

And grow, perchance, to be a lord.” 

With downcast eyes he spoke that word ; 

But forth they galloped speedily, 

And he drew rein and stood to see 
Their green coats lessening as they went 
This man unto the other bent, 

Until mid dust and haze at last 
Into a wavering mass they passed ; 

Then ’twixt the hedgerows vanished quite 



*54 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


Just told of by the dust-cloud white 
Rolled upwards ’twixt the elm-trunks slim. 

Then turned the King about to him 
Who held the child, noting again 
The thing wherein he first had lain. 

And on one side of it could see 

A lion painted hastily 

In red upon a ground of white, 

As though of old it had been dight 
For some lord’s rough-wrought palisade , 
But naked ’mid the hay was laid 
The child, and had no mark or sign. 

Then said the King, “ My ancient line 
Thou and thy sires through good and ill 
Have served, and unto thee my will 
Is law enough from day to day ; 

Ride nigh me hearkening what I say.” 

He shook his rein and side by side 
Down through the meadows did they ride. 
And opening all his heart, the King 
Told to the old man everything 
Both of the sage, and of his dream ; 

Withal drawn nigh unto the stream, 

He said, “ Yet this shall never be 
For surely as thou lovest me, 

Adown this water shall he float 
With this rough box for ark and boat. 
Then if mine old line he must spill 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING 155 

There let God save him if He will, 

While I in no case shed his blood.” 

“ Yea,” said the squire, “ thy words are good, 

For the whole sin shall lie on me, 

Who greater things would do for thee 
If need there were ; yet note, I pray, 

It may be he will ’scape this day 

And live ; and what wouldst thou do then 

If thou shouldst meet him amongst men ? 

I counsel thee to let him go 

Since sure to nought thy will shall grow.” 

“Yea, yea,” the King said, “let all be 
That may be, if I once but see 
This ark whirl in the eddies swift 
Or tangled in the autumn drift 
And wrong side up but with that word 
Their horse-hoofs on the plank he heard, 

And swift across the bridge he rode, 

And nigh the end of it abode, 

Then turned to watch the old squire stop. 

And leaning o’er the bridge-rail drop 
The luckless child ; he heard withal 
A muttered word and splashing fall 
And from the wakened child a cry, 

And saw the cradle hurrying by, 

Whirled round and sinking, but as yet 
Holding the child, nor overset. 

Now somewhat, soothly at the sight 
Did the King doubt if he outright 



1 56 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE 

Had rid him of his feeble foe, 

But frowning did he turn to go 
CJnto his home, nor knew indeed 
How better he might help his need \ 

And as unto his house he rode 
Full little care for all he showed, 

But bade stark Samuel the squire 
Unto his bridle-hand ride nigher, 

And talk to him of careless things, 

As unto such will talk great kings. 

But when unto his palace gate 
He came at last, thereby did wait 
The chamberlain with eager eyes 
Above his lips grown grave with lies. 

In haste to tell him that the queen, 

While in the wild-wood he had been, 

Had borne a daughter unto him 
Strong, fair of face, and straight of limb. 
So well at ease and glad thereat 
His troubled dream he nigh forgat, 

His troubled waking, and the ride 
Unto the fateful river-side ; 

Or thought of all as little things 
Unmeet to trouble souls of kings. 

So passed the days, so passed the years 
In such-like hopes, and such-like fears. 
And such-like deeds in field and hall 
As unto royal men befall, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 157 

And fourteen years have passed away 
Since on the huddled brake he lay 
And dreamed that dream, remembered now 
Once and again, when slow and slow 
The minutes of some sleepless night 
Crawl toward the dawning of the light 

Remembered not on this sweet mom 
When to the ringing of the horn, 

Jingle of bits and mingled shout 
Toward that same stream he rideth out 
To see his grey-winged falcons fly. 

So long he rode he drew anigh 
A mill upon the river’s brim, 

That seemed a goodly place to him, 

For o’er the oily smooth millhead 
There hung the apples growing red, 

And many an ancient apple-tree 
Within the orchard could he see, 

While the smooth millwalls white and black 
Shook to the great wheel’s measured clack. 

And grumble of the gear within; 

While o’er the roof that dulled that din 
The doves sat crooning half the day. 

And round the half-cut stack of hay 
The sparrows fluttered twittering. 

There smiling stayed the joyous king, 

And since the autumn noon was hot 
Thought good anigh the pleasant spot 



158 THE EAR THL Y PARADISE. 


To dine that day, and therewith sent 
To tell the miller his intent : 

Who held the stirrup of the King, 
Bareheaded, joyful at the thing, 

While from his horse he lit adown, 

Then led him o’er an elm-beam brown, 

New cut in February tide 

That crossed the stream from side to side, 

So underneath the apple-trees 

The King sat careless, well at ease 

And ate and drank right merrily. 

To whom the miller drew anigh 
Among the courtiers, bringing there 
Such as he could of country fare, 

Green yellowing plums from off his wall, 
Wasp-bitten pears, the first to fall 
From off the wavering spire-like tree, 
Junkets, and cream and fresh honey. 

Smiling the King regarded him, 

For he was round-paunched, short of limb, 
Red-faced, with long, lank flaxen hair ; 

But with him was a boy, right fair, 
Grey-eyed, and yellow-haired, most like 
Unto some Michael who doth strike 
The dragon on a minster wall, 

So sweet-eyed was he, and withal 
So fearless of ah things he seemed. 

But when he saw him the Fling deemed 
He scarce could be the miller’s kin, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 159 

And laughing said, “ Hast thou within 
Thy dusty mill the dame who bore 
This stripling in the days of yore, 

For fain were I to see her now, 

If she be liker him than thou?” 

“ Sire,” said the miller, “ that may be 
And thou my dame shalt surely see ; 

But for the stripling, neither I 
Begat him, nor my wife did lie 
In labour when the lad was bom, 

But as an outcast and forlorn 
We found him fourteen years to-day, 

So quick the time has worn away.” 

Then the King, hearkening what he said. 

A vanished day remembered, 

And troubled grew his face thereat ; 

But while he thought of this and that 
The man turned from him and was gone 
And by him stood the lad alone ; 

At whom he gazed, and as their eyes 
Met, a great horror ’gan arise 
Within his heart, and back he shrank 
And shuddering a deep draught he drank, 

Scarce knowing if his royal wine 
He touched, or juice of some hedge-vine. 

But as his eyes he lifted up 
From off his jewelled golden cup, 

Once more the miller drew anigh, 



160 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

By whom his wife went timidly 
Bearing some burden in her hand ; 

So when before him she did stand 
And he beheld her worn and old, 

And black-haired, then that hair of gold, 

Grey eyes, firm lips, and round cleft chin, 
Brought stronger memory of his sin. 

But the carle spake, “ Dame, tell the King 
How this befell, a little thing 
The thoughts of such great folk to hold, 
Speak out, and fear not to be bold.” 

“My tale,” she said, “is short enow, 

For this day fourteen years ago 
Along this river-side I rode 
From market to our poor abode, 

Where dwelt we far from other men, 

Since thinner was the country then 
Than now it is ; so as I went 
And wearied o’er my panniers bent. 

From out the stream a feeble cry 
I heard, and therewith presently, 

From off my mule’s back could I see 
This boy who standeth here by thee, 

A naked, new-born infant, laid 
In a rough ark that had been stayed 
By a thick tangled bed of weed ; 

So pitying the youngling’s need, 

Dismounting, did I wade for him 

Waist deep, whose ark now scarce did swim . 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 161 

And he, with cold, and misery, 

And hunger, was at point to die. 

“ Withal, I bare him to the mill 
And cherished him, and had good will 
To bring the babe up as mine own ; 

Since childless were we and alone, 

And no one came to father it. 

So oft have I rejoiced to sit 
Beside the fire and watch him play. 

And now, behold him ! — but some day 
I look to lose him, for, indeed, 

I deem he comes of royal seed, 

Unmeet for us : and now, my lord, 

Hast thou heard every foolish word 
About my son — this boy — whose name 
Is Michael soothly, since he came 
To us this day nigh Michaelmas. 

— See, sire, the ark wherein he was 1 
Which I have kept.” 

Therewith she drew 
A doth away ; but the King knew, 

Long ere she moved, what he should see. 

Nor looked, but seeming carelessly 
Leaned on the board and hid his eyes. 

But at the last did he arise 
And saw the painted lion red, 

Not faded, well remembered; 

Withal he thought, “ And who of these 
Were with me then amongst the trees 

H 



1 62 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 


To see this box f but presently 
He thought again that none but he 
And the grey squire, old Samuel, 

That painting could have noted well. 
Since Samuel his cloak had cast 
About it, and therewith had past 
Throughout the forest on that day, 

And not till all were well away 
Had drawn it off before the King. 

But changed and downcast at the thing 
He left the lovely autumn place, 

Still haunted by the new-found face 
Of his old foe, and back he rode 
Unto his ancient rich abode 
Forcing but dismal merriment 
As midst his smiling lords he went ; 

Who yet failed not to note his mood, 

So changed : and some men of the wood 
Remembered them, but said not aught 
V^ea, trembled lest their hidden thought 
Some bird should learn, and cany it 

The morrow come, the King did sit 
Alone, to talk with Samuel, 

Who yet lived, gathering wage for hell. 
He from the presence in a while 
Came forth, and with his ugly smile 
He muttered, “ Well betide me, then, 

St Peter ! they are lucky men 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 163 


Who serve no kings, since they indeed 
May damn themselves each for his need. 
And will not he outlive this day 
Whom the deep water could not slay. 

Ere yet his lips had tasted food ? ” 

With that a horse, both strong and good. 

He gat of the King’s equerry, 

And toward the mill rode speedily. 

There Michael by the mill-tail lay, 
Watching the swift stream snatch away 
His float from midst the careless dace ; 

But thinking of the thin, dark face, 

That yesterday all men he saw 
Gaze at with seeming love and awe ; 

Nor had he, wondering at the lords, 

Lost one word of the housewife’s words ; 
And still he noted that the King 
Beheld him as a wondrous thing, 

Strange to find there : so in his heart 
He thought to play some royal part 
In this wild play of life, and made 
Stories, wherein great words he said, 

And did great deeds in desperate fight 
But midst these thoughts there came in sight 
He who had carried him of yore, 

From out the woodman’s broken door, 
Dressed like a king’s man, with fine gold 
Touching his hard brown hands and old, 



164 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


So was his sleeve embroidered ; 

A plumed hat had he on his head, 

And by his side a cutting sword 
Fit for the girdle of a lord 5 
And round his neck a knife he bore, 
The hilt whereof was figured o’er 
With green leaves on a golden ground, 
Whose stem a silver scroll enwound ; 
Charged with these letters, writ in black. 
Strike 1 for ?io dead man cometk back ! 

The boy gazed at him earnestly, 

With beating heart, as he drew nigh. 

And when at last he drew his rein 
Beside him, thought that not in vain 
His dream might be. But Samuel 
Below his breath said ; “ Surely well 
Shalt thou fulfil thy destiny ; 

And, spite of all, thou wilt not die 
Till thou hast won the arched crown ? " 
But with that word he lighted down, 
And said aloud, “ Lad, tell to me 
Where the good miller I may see, 

For from the King I come to-day, 

And have a word of his to say , 

I think, indeed, concerning thee ; 

For surely thou his lad must be. v 

Then Michael leapt up, nor took heed 
Of how the nibbling dace might feed 
Upon the loose ends of his bait ; 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 


“ Fair sir,” he said, “ my sire doth wait 
Until men bring his mare from grass, 

For to the good town will he pass, 

Since he has need of household gear ; 
Follow, my lord, the place is here.” 

Withal, the good steed being made fast, 
Unto the other side they passed, 

And by the door the miller found, 

Who bowed before him to the ground, 

And asked what he would have him do — 
Then from his bosom Samuel drew 
A scroll, and said, “Good friend, read here, 
And do my bidding without fear 
Of doing ill.” 

“ Sir,” said the man, 

“ But little lettered skill I can ; 

Let my dame come, for she can read 
Well-written letters at good need.” 

“ Nay, friend,” he said, “ suffice it thee 
This seal at the scroll’s end to see, 

My Lord the King’s ; and hear my word, 
That I come hither from my lord 
Thy foundling lad to have away 
To serve the King from this same day.’ 

Downcast the miller looked thereat, 

And twisting round his dusty hat, 

Said, “Well, my lord, so must it be, 

Nor is he aught akin to me, 

Nor seems so : none the less would I 



1 66 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Have left him, when I came to die, 

All things I have, with this my mill. 

Wherein he hath no ’prentice skill, 

Young as he is : and surely here 
Might he have Jived, with little fear, 

A life of plenty and of bliss — 

Near by, too, a fair maid there is, 

I looked should be good wife to him.” 

Meanwhile young Michaers head J gan swim 
With thoughts of noble life and praise ; 

And he forgat the happy days 
Wherein the happy dreams he dreamed 
That now so near fulfilment seemed \ 

And, looking through the open mill, 

Stared at the grey and windy hill 
And saw it not, but some fair place 
Made strange with many a changing face, 

And all his life that was to be. 

But Samuel, laughing scornfully, 

Said, “ O good soul, thou thinkest then 
This is a life for well-born men, 

As deems our lord this youngling is — 

Tell me, good lad, where lies thy bliss?” 

But Michael turned shamefaced and red, 
Waked from his dream, and stammering said, 

“ Fair sir, my life is sweet and good, 

And John, the ranger of the wood, 

Saith that I draw so good a bow, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 167 


That I shall have full skill enow 
Ere many months have passed me by 
To join the muster, and to try 
To win the bag of florins white, 

That folk, on Bamaby the bright, 

Shoot for within the market town. 

Sir, please you to look up and down 
The weedy reaches of our stream, 

And note the bubbles of the bream, 

And see the great chub take the fly, 

And watch the long pike basking lie 
Outside the shadow of the weed. 

Withal there come unto our need 
Woodcock and snipe when swallows go ; 

And now the water-hen flies low 
With feet that well-nigh touch the reeds, 

And plovers cry about the meads, 

And the stares chatter ; certes, sir, 

It is a fair place all the year.” 

Eyeing him grimly, Samuel said, 

“Thou show’st churl's breeding, by my head. 
In foul despite of thy fair face ! 

Take heart, for to a better place 
Thou goest now. — Miller, farewell, 

Nor need’st thou to the neighbours tell 
The noble fortunes of the lad ; 

For, certes, he shall not be glad 
To know them in a year or twain. 

Yet shall thy finding not be vain, 



i 68 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

And thou mayst bless it \ for behold 
This bag wherein is store of gold ; 

Take it and let thy hinds go play, 

And grind no com for many a day, 

Foi it would buy thy mill and thee.” 

He turned to go, but pensively 
Stood Michael, for his broken dream 
Doubtful and far awav did seem 
Amidst the squire's rough mockeries , 

And tears were gathering in his eyes. 

But the kind miller's rough farewell 

Rang in his ears ; and Samuel 

Stamped with his foot and plucked his sleeve , 

So therewithal he turned to leave 

His old abode, the quiet place, 

Trembling, with wet and tearful face. 

But even as he turned there came 
From out the house the simple dame 
And cast rough arms about the lad, 

Saying, “For that I have been glad 
By means of thee this many a day, 

My mourning heart this hour doth pay. 

But, fair son, may’st thou live in bliss, 

And die in peace ; remembering this, 

When thou art come to high estate, 

That in our house, early and late, 

The happy house that shall be sad. 

Thou hadst the best of all we had 
And love unfeigned from us twain. 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 169 

Whose hearts thou madest young again, 

Hearts that the quicker old shall grow 
Now thou art gone.” 

“ Good dame, enow,” 

Quoth Samuel, “ the day grows late, 

And sure the King for meat shall wait 
Until he see this new-found lord.” 

He strode away upon that word ; 

And half ashamed, and half afeard, 

Yet eager as his dream he neared, 

Shyly the lad went after him. 

They crossed the stream and by its brim 
Both mounted the great warhorse grey, 

And without word they rode away. 

But as along the river's edge 
They went, and brown birds in the sedge 
Twittered their sweet and formless tune 
In the fair autumn afternoon, 

And reach by reach the well-known stream 
They passed, again the hopeful dream 
Of one too young to think death near, 

Who scarce had learned the name of fear 
Remorseful memories put to flight ; 

Lovely the whole world showed and bright 
Nor did the harsh voice rouse again 
The thought of mockery or of pain, 

For other thoughts held Samuel. 

So, riding silently and well, 



170 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 


They reached at last the dusty road 
That led unto the King’s abode. 

But Samuel turned away his face 
Therefrom, and at a steady pace 
The great horse thundered o’er the bridge, 
And made on toward the heathy ridge, 
Wherefrom they rode that other day. 

But Michael, noting well the way, 

Why thus they went, fell wondering, 

And said aloud, “ Dwells then the King, 

Fair sir, as now within the wood?” 

“ Young fool, where that it seems him good 
He dwelleth,” quoth old Samuel, 

“And now it pleaseth him to dwell 
With the black monks across the wood.” 

Withal he muttered in his hood, 

“ Curst be the King, and thee also, 

Who thrust me out such deeds to do, 

When I should bide at home to pray, 

Who draw so nigh my ending day.” 

So saying forth his horse he spurred 
And to himself said yet this word, 

“ Yea, yea, and of all days forlorn 
God curse the day when I was bom.” 

Therewith he groaned ; yet saying thus 
His case seemed hard and piteous, 

When he remembered how of old 
Another tale he might have told. 

So as each thought his own thoughts still, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. iji 

The horse began to breast the hill. 

And still they went on higher ground, 

Until as Michael turned him round 
He saw the sunny country-side 
Spread out before him far and wide, 

Golden amidst its waning green, 

Joyous with varied life unseen. 

Meanwhile from side to side of them 
The trees began their way to hem. 

As still he gazed from tree to tree, 

And when he turned back presently 
He saw before him like a wall 
Uncounted tree-trunks dim and tall. 

Then with their melancholy sound 
The odorous spruce-woods met around 
Those wayfarers, and when he turned 
Once more, far off the sunlight burned 
In star-like spots, while from o’erhead. 

Dim twilight through the boughs was shed 
Not there as yet had Michael been, 

Nor had he left the meadows green 
Dotted about with spreading trees, 

And fresh with sun and rain and breeze, 

For those mirk woods, and now his eyes 
Gazed round about for mysteries. 

Since many an old wife’s tale he knew 3 
Huge woodcutters in raiment blue. 

The remnant of a mighty race. 

The ancient masters of the place, 



172 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


And hammering trolls he looked to see* 
And dancers of the faerie, 

Who, as the ancient stories told. 

In front were lovely to behold, 

But empty shells seen from behind. 

So on they rode until the wind 
Had died out, stifled by the trees, 

And Michael ’mid those images 
Of strange things made alive by fear. 

Grew drowsy in the forest drear; 

Nor noted how the time went past 
Until they nigh had reached at last 
The borders of the spruce-tree wood ; 

And with a tingling of the blood 
Samuel bethought him of the day 
When turned about the other way 
He carried him he rode with now. 

For the firs ended on the brow 
Of a rough gravelly hill, and there 
Lay a small valley nowise fair 
Beneath them, clear at first of all 
But brake, till amid rushes tall 
Down in the bottom alders grew 
Crabbed and rough ; and winding through 
The clayey mounds a brook there was 
Oozy and foul, half choked with grass. 

There now the Squire awhile drew rein. 
And noted how the ground again 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 173 

Rose up upon the other side, 

And saw a green glade opening wide 
’Twixt oaks and hollies, and he knew 
Full well what place it led unto , 

Withal he heard the bittern’s boom, 

And though without the fir-wood’s gloom 
They now were come, yet red and low 
The sun above the trees did show, 

And in despite of har dihead, 

The old squire had a mortal dread 

Of lying in the wood alone 

When that was done that should be done. 

Now Michael, wakened by the wind, 

Clutched tighter at the belt behind, 

And with wide eyes was staring round, 

When Samuel said, “ Get to the ground, 

My horse shall e’en sink deep enow, 

Without thy body, in this slough ; 

And haste thee, or we both shall lie 
Beneath the trees, and be as dry 
As autumn dew can make us. Haste ! 

The time is short for thee to waste.” 

Then from the horse the boy did glide, 

And slowly down the valley side 
They went, and Michael, wakened now, 

Sang such rude songs as he might know. 

Grown fresh and joyous of his life ; 

While Samuel, clutching at the knife 
About his necl; that hung, again 



174 THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


Down in the bottom tightened rein, 

And turning, in a hoarse voice spake, 

“ My girths are loosening, come and take 
The straps and draw them tighter, lad.” 

Then Michael stayed his carol glad, 
And noting little in his mirth 
The other’s voice, unto the girth 
Without a word straight set his hand : 

But as with bent head he did stand, 
Straining to tighten what v/as tight, 

In Samuel’s hand the steel flashed bright. 
And fell, deep smitten in his side, 

Then, leaping back, the poor lad cned, 
As if for help, and staggering fell, 

With wide eyes fixed on Samuel ; 

Who none the less grown deadly pale, 

Lit down, lest that should not avail 
To slay him, and beside him knelt. 

And since his eyes were closed now, feh 
His heart that beat yet : therewithal 
His hand upon the knife did falL 
But, ere his fingers clutched it well, 

Far off he seemed to hear a bell, 

And trembling knelt upright again, 

And listening, listened not in vain, 

For dear he heard a tinkling sound. 

Then to his horse from off the ground 
He leapt, nor reasoned with his dread 
But thought the angel of the dead 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 175 

Was drawing nigh the slayer to slay, 

Ere scarce the soul had passed away. 

One dreadful moment yet he heard 
That bell, then like a madman spurred 
His noble horse ; that maddened too, 

The dose-set fir-wood galloped through, 

Not stayed by any stock or stone, 

Until the furious race being done, 

Anigh the bridge he fell down dead ; 

And Samuel, mazed with guilt and dread. 

Wandered afoot throughout the night, 

But came, at dawning of the light, 

Half-dead unto the palace gate. 

There till the opening did he wait ; 

Then, by the icing’s own signet-ring, 

He gained the chamber of the King, 

And painfully what he had done 
He told, and how the thing had gone. 

And said withal : “Yet is he dead, 

And surely that which made my dread 
Shall give thee joy : for doubt not aught 
That bell the angels to him brought, 

That he in Abraham’s breast might lie — 

So ends, O King, the prophecy.” 

Nathless the King scowled, ill content 
And said, “ I deemed that I had sent 
A man of war to do my will, 

Who lacked for neither force nor skill, 

And thou com’st with a -woman's face, 



176 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


Bewildered with thy desperate race. 

And made an idiot with thy fear, 

Nor bring’st me any token here !” 

Therewith he rose and gat away, 

But brooding on it through that day, 
Thought that all things went not so ill 
As first he deemed, and that he still 
Might leave his old line flourishing. 
Therewith both gold and many a thing 
Unto old Samuel he gave, 

But failed thereby his life to save ; 

Who, not so old in years as sin, 

Died ere the winter, and within 
The minstei choir was laid asleep, 

With carven saints his head to keep. 

And so the days and years went by, 

And still in great felicity 

The King dwelt, wanting only this — 

A son wherewith to share his bliss, 

And reign when he was dead and gone 
Nor had he daughter, save that one 
Bom on the night when Michael first, 
Forlorn, alone, and doubly cursed, 

Felt on him this world’s bitter air. 

This daughter, midst fair maids most fair ; 
Was not yet wed, though at this time. 

Being come unto her maiden’s prime, 

She looked upon her eighteenth May 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 17 

Midst this her mother passed away. 

Not much lamented of the King, 

Who had the thought of marrying 
Some dame more fertile, and who sent 
A wily man with this intent 
To spy the countries out and find 
Some great king’s daughter, wise and kind 
And fresh, and fair, in face and limb, 

In all things a fit mate for him. 

So in short time it came to pass 
Again the King well wedded was, 

And hoped once more to have a son. 

And when this fair dame he had won. 

A year in peace he dwelt with her, 

Until the time was drawing near 
When first his eyes beheld that foe 
Dead as he deemed these years ago. 

Now at that time, as custom was, 

His daughter was about to pass 
Unto a distant house of his, 

Built by some king for worldly bliss 
In ancient days : there, far removed 
From courts or towns, his dame beloved 
The dead king had been wont to see 
Play mid the summer greenery, 

Or like Erigone of old 

Stand in the vineyards girt with gold, 

To queen it o’er the vintagers, 

Half worshipping that face of hers. 

r? 



1 78 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


Long years agone these folk were passed, 

Their crimes forgotten, or else cast 

Into the glowing crucible 

Of time, that tempers all things well, 

That maketh pleasure out of pain, 

And out of ruin golden gain ; 

Nathless, unshaken still, there stood 
The towers and ramparts red as blood ; 
Wherein their lives had passed away ; 

And still the lovely gardens lay 
About them, changed, but smiling still, 

As in past time, on good or ilL 
Thither the Princess Cecily 
Must go awhile in peace to be; 

For now, midst care, and doubt, and toil. 
Proud words drawn back, and half-healed broil 
The King had found one meet to wed 
His daughter, of great goodlihead, 

Wealth, and unbroken royalty. 

And now he said to her, when she 
Was setting out for that fair place, 

“ O daughter, thou shalt see my face 
Before a month is fully gone, 

Nor wilt thou see me then alone; 

For that man shall be with me then, 

"Whom I have chosen from all men 
To hold the treasure of my life. 

Full sore he longs to see his wife, 

Nor needst thou fear him for thy part, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 179 

Who holdeth many a woman’s heart 
As the net holds the silvery fish. 

Farewell — and all that thou mayst wish 
I pray God grant thee.” 

Therewithal 

He kissed her, and from out the hall 
She passed, not shamefaced, or afraid 
Of what might happen ; though, indeed, 

Her heart of no man’s heart had need 
To make her happy as she thought 

Ever the new sun daily brought 
Fresh joy of life to her bedside, 

The world before her open wide 
Was spread, a place for joy and bliss. 

Her lips had trembled with no kiss, 

Wherewith love slayeth fear and shame ; 

Her grey eyes conscious of no blame, 

Beheld unmoved the eyes of men ; 

Her hearing grew no dimmer when 
Some unused footstep she might hear ; 

And unto no man was she dear, 

But as some goddess might have been 
When Greek men worshipped many a queen 

Now with her armed folk forth she rode 
Unto that ancient fair abode, 

And while the lark sung o’er the com. 

Love gilded not the waning mom ; 



180 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

And when the sun rose high above, 

High thoughts she thought, but not of love : 
And when that sun the world did leave, 

He left no love to light the eve. 

The moon no melancholy brought, 

The dawn no vain, remorseful thought 
But all untroubled her sweet face 
Passed ’neath the gate of that old place 
And there her bridegroom she abode. 

But scarce was she upon the road 
Ere news unto the King was brought 
That Peter, the old Abbot, sought 
To see him, having newly come 
From the wild place that was his home 
Across the forest ; so the King 
Bade him to enter, well willing 
To hear what he might have to say ; 

Who, entering the great hall straightway. 
Had with him an old, reverend man, 

The Sub-prior, father Adrian, 

And five monks more, and therewithal 
Ten of his folk, stout men and tall, 

Who bore armed staves and coats of fence. 

So, when he came to audience, 

He prayed the King of this or that, 
Whereof my tale-teller forgat, 

And graciously the King heard all, 

And said at last, “ Well, what may fail. 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 1S1 


Thou go’st not hence, fair lord, to-day ; 
Unless in vain a king must pray, 

Thou and thy monks shall eat with me; 
While feast thine axe-men merrily.” 

Withal, he eyed the Abbot’s folk 
In careless mood, then once more spoke, 
“ Tall men thou feedest, by the rood ! 
Lord Abbot, come they from the wood ? 
Dwell many more such thereabout ? 

Fain were I such should swell the shout 
When I am armed, and rank meets rank.” 

But as he spoke his loud voice sank 
Wavering, nor heard he aught at all 
Of the faint noises of the hall, 

Or what the monk in answer said : 

For, looking from a steel-clad head, 

Those eyes again did he behold, 

That erst from ’neath the locks of gold 
Kindly and bold, but soft with awe, 
Beneath the apple-boughs he saw. 

But when thereof he surely knew 
Pale to the very lips he grew. 

Till gathering heart within a while 
With the faint semblance of a smile, 

He seemed to note the Abbot’s words 
That he heard not ; then from the lords 
He turned, and facing Michael said, 

“ Raise up the steel cap from thine head, 
That I may see if thou look’st bold ; 



1 82 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Methinks, I know thy face of old, 

Whence com* st thou ? ” 

Michael lifted straight 
From off his brow the steel cap’s weight, 

And showed the bright locks curling round 
His fresh and ruddy face, sun-browned, 

And in a voice clear as a bell, 

Told all his story, till he fell 
Sore wounded in that dismal vale, 

And said withal, “ My lord, the tale 
Of what came after, none knoweth 
Better than he, who, from ill death 
Saved me that tide, and made me man, 

My lord, the sub-prior Adrian.” 

“Speak on then, father,” quoth the King, 
Making as he was hearkening. 

“My lord,” said Adrian, “I, who then 
Was but a server of poor men, 

Outside our Abbey walls, one day 
Was called by one in poor array, 

A charcoal-burner’s lad, who said 
That soon his father would be dead, 

And that of all things he would have 
His rights, that he his soul might save. 

I made no tarrying at that word, 

But took between mine hands the Lord* 

And bade the boy bear forth the bell ; 

For though few folk there were to tell 
Who passed that way, natliless, I trow 



THE MAH BORN TO BE KING, 183 

The beasts were glad that news to know. 

11 Well, by the pinewood’s skirts we went 
While through its twilight the bell sent 
A heavenly tinkling ; but the lad 
’Gan telling me of fears he had 
Of elves who dwell within the wood. 

I chid him thereat, as was good, 

Bidding him note Whom in mine hands 
I held, The Ransom of all Lands. 

But as the firwood’s dim twilight 
Waxed into day, and fair and bright 
The evening sun showed through the trees, 

Our ears fanned by the evening breeze, 

The galloping of horse-hoofs heard, 

Wherewith my page hung back afeard 
Of elves and such-like ; but I said, 

‘Wilt thou thy father should be dead 
Ere we can reach him ? Oh my son, 

Fear not that aught can stay This One.’ 

“ Therewith I smote my mule, and he 
Ran forward with me hastily 
As fearing to be left behind. 

Well, as we went, what should we find 
Down by the stream, but this my son, 

Who seemed as though his days were done; 

For in his side a knife there stood 
Wherefrom ran out a stream of blood, 

Soaking the grass and water-mint ; 

Then, I dismounting, we by dint 



184 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


Of all our strength, the poor youth laid 
Upon my mule, and down a glade 
Of oaks and hollies then we passed, 

And reached the w’oodman’s home at last ; 
A poor hut, built of wattled wood, 

And by its crooked gable stood 
A ruinous shed, unroofed and old, 

That beasts of burden once did hold. 

— Thyself, my lord, mayst know it well, 
Since thereabout the wild swine dwell ; 
And hart, and hind, and roe are there — 
So the lad's wounds I staunched with care 
Forthwith, and then the man I shrived, 
Who none the less got well and lived 
For many a day : then back I went 
And the next day our leech I sent 
With drugs to tend upon the lad. 

Who soon was as he ne'er had had 
A hurt at all : and he being well 
We took him in our house to dwell, 

And taught him letters, and, indeed, 

Before long, Latin could he read 
As well as I ; but hath no will 
To turn unto religion still. 

Yet is he good and doth no wrong ; 

And being thereto both hale and strong, 
My lord, the Abbot, sayeth of him, 

4 He shall serve God with heart and limb, 
Not heart and voice.' Therefore, my lord. 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 185 

Thou seest him armed with spear and sword 
For their defence who feed him still, 

Teach him, and guard his soul from ill. 

Ho, Michael ! hast thou there with thee 
The fair-wrought knife I first did see 
Deep in thy side ? — there, show it now 
Unto the King, that he may know 
Our tale is not a thing of nought.” 

Withal the King, with eyes distraught, 

Amidst his anxious face and pale, 

Sat leaning forward through this tale, 

Scarce noting here and there a word. 

But all being told, at last he heard 

His own voice changed, and harsh, and low, 

That said, “ Fair lord, I fain would know, 

Since this your man-at-arms seems true, 

What thing will he be worth to you ; 

For better had he wear my rose 
Than loiter in your Abbey-close, 

Poring o’er books no man can read.” 

“O sire I” the monk said, “if thy need 
Be great of such men, let him go ; 

My men-at-arms need make no show 
Of fairness, nor should ladies miss, 

E’en as thou sa/st, such men as this.” 

Laughing he spoke ; the King the while, 

His pale face puckering to a smile ; 

Then, as in some confused dream, 

In Michael's hand he saw the gleam 



1 86 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Of that same steel remembered well. 

The gift he gave to Samuel ; 

Drawn from his father’s ancient chest 
To do that mom his own behest 
And as he now beheld its sheen, 

The twining stem of gold and green, 

The white scroll with the letters black,— 
Strike I for no dead ?nan cometh back ! 

He hardened yet his heart once more. 

And grown unhappy as before, 

Wien last he had that face in sight, 

Now for the third time come to light, 

Once more was treacherous, fierce, and fell 

Now was the Abbot feasted well 
With all his folk, then went away, 

But Michael clad in rich array 
Became the King’s man, and was thought 
By all most happy to be brought 
Unto such hopeful fair estate. 

For ten days yet the King did wait, 
Which past, for Michael did he send. 

And he being come, said to him, “Friend 
Take now this letter from my hand 
And go unto our southern land ; 

My captain Hugh shall go with thee 
For one day’s journey, then shall he 
Tell thee which way thou hast to ride : 

The third day thence about noontide 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 187 


If thou dost well, thou shouldst be dose 
Unto my Castle of the Rose 
Where dwells my daughter; needs it is 
That no man living should see this 
Until that thou within my wall 
Hast given it to the seneschal ; 

Be wise and wary then, that thou 
Mayst think of this that happeneth now 
As birthday to thine high estate.” 

So said he, knowing not that fate 
Was dealing otherwise than he. 

But Michael going, presently 
Met Hugh, a big man rough and black, 
And who of nought but words had lack, 
With him he mounted, and set forth 
And daylong rode on from the north. 

Now if the King had hope that Hugh 
Some deed like Samuel’s might do 
I know not, certes nought he said 
To that hard heart and narrow head. 

Who knew no wiles but wiles of war. 

And was as true as such men are ; 

Yet had there been a tale to tell 
If Michael had not held him well, 

And backward still the wrath had turned 
Wherewith his heart not seldom burned 
At scornful words his fellow said. 

At last they reached cross-ways that led 
One west, one southward still, whereat 



1 88 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Hugh, taking off his feathered hat, 

Bowed low in scorn, and said, “ Fair sir, 

Unto die westward must I spur, 

While you go southward, soon to get, 

I doubt not, an earl’s coronet ; 

Farewell, my lord, and yet beware 

Thou dost not at my lady stare 

Too hard, lest thou shouldst plumb the moat. 

Or have a halter lound thy throat” 

But Michael to his scoff said nought, 

But upon high things set his thought 
As his departing hooves he heard. 

And still betwixt the hedgerows spurred, 

And when the twilight was o’erpast 
At a small inn drew rein at last, 

And slept diat night as such folk can ; 

And while next mom the thrushes ran 
Their first course through the autumn dew 
The gossamers did he dash through. 

And on his way rode steadily 
The live-long day, nor yet was he 
Alone, as well might be that day 
Since a fair town was in his way, 

Stout hinds he passed, and yeomen good, 
And friars of the heavy hood, 

And white-coifed housewives mounted high 
Above their maunds, while merrily 
The well-shod damsel trudged along 
Beside them, sending forth a song 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 


189 


As little taught as is a bird’s j 

And good men, good wives, priests 3 and herds, 

And merry maids failed not to send 

Good wishes for his journey’s end 

Athwart him as still on he sped, 

Free from all evil thoughts or dread. 

Withal again the day went by, 

And in that city’s hostelry 
He slept, and by the dawn of day 
Next mom again was on his way, 

And leaving the scarce wakened street 
The newly risen sun did greet 
With cheerful heart. His way wound on 
Still up and up till he had won 
Up to a great hill’s chalky brow, 

Whence looking back he saw below 

The town spread out, church, square, and street 

And baily, crawling up the feet 

Of the long yew-besprinkled hill ; 

And in the flagrant air and still, 

Seeming to gain new life from it, 

The doves from roof to roof did flit : 

The early fires sent up their smoke 
That seemed to him to tell of folk 
New wakened unto great delignt : 

For he upon that morning bright, 

So joyous felt, so free from pain, 

He seemed as he were bom again 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


[go 

Into some new immortal state 
That knew no envy, fear, or hate. 

Now the road turned to his left hand 
And led him through a table-land, 

Windy and barren of all grain ; 

But where a hollow specked the plain 
The yew-trees hugged the sides of it, 

And mid them did the woodlark flit 
Or sang well sheltered from the wind. 

And all about the sheep did find 
Sweet grass, the while the shepherd’s song 
Rang clear as Michael sped along. 

Long time he rode, till suddenly, 

When now the sun was broad and high, 
From out a hollow where the yew 
Still guarded patches of the dew, 

He rode and saw that he had won 
That highland’s edge, and gazed upon 
A valley that beneath the haze 
Of that most fair of autumn days, 

Showed glorious ; fair with golden sheaves. 
Rich with the darkened autumn-leaves, 

Gay with the water-meadows green, 

The bright blue streams that lay between, 
The miles of beauty stretched away 
From that bleak hill-side bare and grey. 
Till white cliffs over slopes of vine, 

Drew ’gainst the sky a broken line. 

And ’twixt the vineyards and the stream 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING, 191 

Michael saw gilded spirelets gleam : 

For, hedged with many a flowery dose, 

There lay the Castle of the Rose, 

His hurried journey’s aim and end. 

Then downward he began to wend, 

And ’twixt the flowery hedges sweet 
He heard the hook smite down the wheat. 

And murmur of the unseen folk ; 

But when he reached the stream that broke 
The golden plain, but leisurely 
He passed the bridge, for he could see 
The masters of that ripening realm, 

Cast down beneath an ancient elm 
Upon a little strip of grass, 

From hand to hand die pitcher pass. 

While on the turf beside them lay 
The ashen-handled sickles grey, 

The matters of their cheer between : 

Slices of white cheese, specked with green. 

And greenstriped onions and ryebread. 

And summer apples faintly red, 

Even beneath the crimson skin ; 

And yellow grapes, well ripe and thin, 

Plucked from the cottage gable-end. 

And certes Michael felt their friend 
Hearing tneir voices, nor forgot 
His boyhood and the pleasant spot 



iQ2 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Beside the well-remembered stream ; 

And friendly did this water seem 
As through its white-flowered weeds it ran 
Bearing good things to beast and man. 

Yea, as the parapet he passed, 

And they a greeting toward him cast, 

Once more he felt a boy again ; 

As though beneath the harvest wain 
Ke was asleep, by that old stream, 

And all these things were but a dream— 
The King, the Squire, the hurrying ride 
Unto the lonely quagmire side ; 

The sudden pain, the deadly swoon. 

The feverish life from noon to noon : 

The tending of the kind old man. 

The black and white Dominican, 

The hour before the Abbot’s throne. 

The poring o'er old books alone, 

In summer morns , the King again. 

The envious greetings of strange men. 

This mighty horse and rich array, 

This journey on an unknown way. 

Surely he thought to wake from it 
And once more by the waggon sit, 

Blinking upon the sunny mill. 

But not for either good or ill 
Shall he see one of all those days ; 

On through the quivering noontide haze 
He rode, and now on either hand 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 

Heavy with fruit the trees did stand \ 

Nor had he ridden long, ere he 
The red towers of the house could see 
Grey on the wind-beat southern side : 

And soon the gates thrown open wide 
He saw, the long-fixed drawbridge down, 

The moat, with lilies overgrown, 

Midst which the gold-scaled fishes lay : 

Such peace was there for many a day. 

And deep within the archway’s shade 
The warder on his cloak was laid, 

Dozing, one hand upon a harp. 

And nigh him a great golden carp 
Lay stiff with all his troubles done, 

Drawn from the moat ere yet the sun 
Was high, and nigh him was his bane. 

An angling rod of Indian cane. 

Now hearmg Michael’s horse-hooves smite 
The causeway, shading from the light 
His eyes, as one scarce yet awake. 

He made a shift his spear to take, 

And, eyeing Michael’s badge the while, 

Rose up, and with a lazy smile, 

Said, " Ho ! fair sir, abide, abide, 

And show why hitherward ye ride 
Unto my lady’s royal home.” 

Said Michael, " From the King I come, 

As by my badge ye well may see ; 

And letters have I here with me 


*93 


0 



194 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


To give my lord the Seneschal” 

“Yea,” said the man, “ but in the hall 
He feasteth now ; what haste is there, 
Certes full quickly cometh care ; 

And sure I am he will not read 
Thy letters, or to aught give heed 
Till he has played out all the play, 

And every guest has gone away ; 

So thou, O damoiseau, must wait ; 

Tie up thine horse anigh the gate, 

And sit with me, and thou shalt hear 
The Kaiser lieth on his bier . 

Thou laughest — hast thou never heard 
Of this same valorous Red Beard, 

And how he died ? Well, I can sing 
Of many another dainty thing, 

Thou wilt not a long while forget, 

The budget is not empty yet. 

— Peter ! I think thou mockest me, 

But thou art young and fair perdie, 

I wish thee luck — well, thou mayest go 
And feel the afternoon wind blow 
Within Dame Bertha’s pleasance here , 
She who was held so lief and dear, 

All this was built but for her sake, 

Who made the hearts of men to ache ; 
And dying full of years and shame 
Yet left an unforgotten name — 

God rest her soul!” 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING . 195 

Michael the while 
Hearkened his talking with a smile, 

Then said, “ O friend, I think to hear 
Both i The King heth on his bier ’ 

And many another song of thee, 

Ere I depart ; but now show me 
The pleasance of the ancient queen, 

For these red towers above the green 
Seem like the gates of Paradise, 

That surely somewhere through them lies.” 

Then said the warder, “ That may be 
If thou know’st what may come to thee — 

When past the drawbridge thou hast gone, 

Upon the left three steps of stone 
Lead to a path beneath the wall 
Of the great court, that folk now call 
The falconer’s path, nor canst thou miss 
Going thereby, to find the bliss 
Thou look’st for, since the path ends there, 

And through a wicket gilded fair 
The garden lies where thou wouldst be : 

Nor will I fail to come to thee 
Whene’er my Lord the Seneschal 
hall pass well fed from out the halL” 

Then Michael, thanking him, passed on, 

And soon the gilded wicket won, 

And went into that pleasance sweet. 

And wandered there with wary feet 
And open mouth, as though he deemed 



1 96 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


That in some lovely dream he dreamed, 
And feared to wake to common day, 

So fair was all ; and e’en decay 
Brought there but pensive loveliness, 
Where autumn those old walls did bless 
With wealth of fruit, and through the grass 
Unscared the spring-bom thrush did pass. 
Who yet knew nought of winter-tide. 

So wandering, to a fountain’s side 
He came, and o’er the basin hung, 
Watching the fishes, as he sung 
Some song remembered from of old, 

Ere yet the miller won that gold. 

But soon made drowsy with his ride, 

And the warm hazy autumn-tide, 

And many a musical sweet sound, 

He cast him down upon the ground, 

And watched the glittering water leap, 

Still singing low, nor thought to sleep. 

But scarce three minutes had gone by 
Before, as if in mockery, 

The starling chattered o’er his head, 

And nothing he remembered, 

Nor dreamed of aught that he had seen, 

Meanwhile unto that garden green 
Had come the Princess, and with her 
A maiden that she held right dear, 

Who knew the inmost of her mind. 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 197 

Those twain, as the warm scented wind 
Played with their raiment or their hair, 

Had late been running here and there. 

Chasing each other merrily, 

As maids do, thinking no one by ; 

But now, well wearied therewithal, 

Had let their gathered garments fall 
About their feet, and slowly went : 

And through the leaves a murmur sent, 

As of two happy doves that sing 
The soft returning of the spring. 

But of the two the Princess spoke 
The less, but into laughter broke 
Not seldom, and would redden oft, 

As on her lips her fingers soft 
She laid, as still the other maid, 

Half grave, half smiling, follies said. 

So in their walk they drew anigh 
That fountain in the midst, whereby 
Lay Michael sleeping, dreaming nought 
Of such fair things so nigh him brought ; 

They, when the fountain shaft was past, 

Beheld him on the ground down-cast, 

And stopped at first, until the maid 
Stepped lightly forward to the shade, 

And when she had gazed there awhile 
Came running back again, a smile 
Parting her lips, and her bright eyes 
Afire with many fantasies ; 



*9* THE earthly paradise . 

And ere the Lady Cecily 
Could speak a word, <e Hush I hush !” said she 
Did I not say that he would come 
To woo thee in thy peaceful home 
Before thy father brought him here ? 

Come, and behold him, have no fear ! 

The great bell would not wake him now, 

Right in his ears.” 

“ Nay, what dost thou?” 
The Princess said ; “ Let us go hence ; 

Thou know’st I give obedience 
To what my father bids ; but I 
A maid full fain would live and die, 

Since I am bom to be a queen.” 

“Yea, yea, for such as thou hast seen, 

That may be well,” the other said. 

“ But come now, come ; for by my head 
This one must be from Paradise ; 

Come swiftly then, if thou art wise 
Ere aught can snatch him back again.” 

She caught her hand, and not in vain 
She prayed ; for now some kindly thought 
To Cecily's brow fair colour brought, 

And quickly ’gan her heart to beat 
As love drew near those eyes to greet, 

Who knew him not till that sweet hour. 

So over the fair, pink-edged flower, 

Softly she stepped ; but when she came 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 


Anigh the sleeper, lovely shame 
Cast a soft mist before her eyes 
Full filled of many fantasies. 

But when she saw him lying there 
She smiled to see her mate so fair ; 

And in her heart did Love begin 
To tell his tale, nor thought she sin 
To gaze on him that was her own, 

Not doubting he was come alone 
To woo her, whom midst arms and gold 
She deemed she should at first behold ; 
And with that thought love grew again 
Until departing was a pam, 

Though fear grew with that growing love, 
And with her lingering footsteps strove 
As from the place she turned to go, 

Sighing and murmuring words but low. 

But as her raiment’s hem she raised, 

And for her merry fellow gazed 
Shamefaced and changed, she met her eyes 
Turned grave and sad with ill surprise ; 
Who while the Princess mazed did stand 
Had drawn from Michael’s loosened band 
The King’s scroll, which she held out now 
To Cecily, and whispered low, 

<c Read, and do quickly what thou wilt, 

Sad, sad ! such fair life to be spilt : 

Come further first.” 


With that they stepped 



200 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 


A pace or two from where he slept, 

And then she read, 

“ Lord Seneschal, \ 

On thee and thine may all good fall ; 
Greeting hereby the King sendeth, 

And biddeih thee to put to death 
His enemy who beareth this; 

And as thou lovest life and bliss , 

And all thy goods thou boldest dear , 

Set thou his head upon a spear 
A good half furlong from the gate. 

Our coming hitherward to wait — 

So perish the Kings enemies /” 

She read, and scarcely had her eyes 
Seen clear her father’s name and seal, 
Ere all love’s power her heart did feel, 
That drew her back in spite of shame, 
To him who was not e’en a name 
To her a little hour agone. 

Panting she said, “ Wait thou alone 
Beside him, watch him carefully 
And let him sleep if none draw nigh 
If of himself he waketh, then 
Hide him until I come again, 

When thou hast told him of the snare — 
If thou betrayest me beware ! 

For death shall be the least of all 
The ills that on thine head shall fall — 
What say I, thou art dear to me, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. aoi 


And doubly dear now shalt thou be, 

Thou shalt have power and majesty, 

And be more queen in all than I — 

Few words are best, be wise, be wise I” 

Withal she turned about her eyes 
Once more, and swiftly as a man 
Betwixt the garden trees she ran, 

Until, her own bower reached at last, 

She made good haste, and quickly passed 
Unto her secret treasury. 

There, hurrying since the time was nigh 
For folk to come from meat, she took 
From ’twixt the leaves of a great book 
A royal scroll, signed, sealed, but blank, 
Then, with a hand that never shrank 
Or trembled, she the scroll did fill 
With these words, writ with clerkly skill, - 
“ Unto the Seneschal \ Sir Rafe , 

Who holdeth our fair castle safe, 

Greeting and health l O well-beloved. 
Know that at this time we are moved 
To wed our daughter, so we send 
Him who bears this, our perfect friend \ 

To be her bridegroom ; so do thou 
Ask nought of him, since welt we know 
His race and great nobility. 

And how he is most fit to be 
Our son ; therefore make no delay, 



202 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Bui wed the twain upon the day 
Thou readest this : and see that all 
Take oath to him , whatier shall fait 
To do his bidding as our heir ; 

So doing still be lief and dear 
As I have held thee yet to be? 

She cast the pen down hastily 
At that last letter, for she heard 
How even now the people stirred 
Within the hall : nor dared she think 
What bitter potion she must drink 
If now she failed, so falsely bold 
That life or death did she enfold 
Within its cover, making shift 
To seal it with her father’s gift, 

A signet of cornelian. 

Then swiftly down the stairs she ran 
And reached the garden ; but her fears 
Brought shouts and thunder to her ears. 
That were but lazy words of men 
Full-fed, far off ; nay, even when 
Her limbs caught up her flying gown 
The noise seemed loud enough to drown 
The twitter of the autumn birds, 

And her own muttered breathless words 
That to her heart seemed loud indeed. 

Yet therewithal she made good speed 
And reached the fountain seen of none 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 


203 


Where yet abode her friend alone, 

Watching the sleeper, who just now 
Turned in his sleep and muttered low. 
Therewith fair Agnes saying nought 
From out her hand the letter caught ; 

And while she leaned against the stone 
Stole up to Michael’s side alone, 

And with a cool, unshrinking hand 
Thrust the new scroll deep in his band, 

And turned about unto her friend ; 

Who having come unto the end 
Of all her courage, trembled there 
With face upturned for fresher air, 

And parted lips grown grey and pale, 

And limbs that now began to fail, 

And hands wherefrom all strength had gone. 
Scarce fresher than the blue-veined stone 
That quivering still she strove to clutch. 

But when she felt her lady’s touch, 

Feebly she said, “ Go ! let me die 
And end this sudden misery* 

That in such wise has wrapped my life, 

I am too weak for such a strife, 

So sick I am with shame and fear ; 

Would thou hadst never brought me here ! r 

But Agnes took her hand and said, 

“ Nay, queen, and must we three be dead 
Because thou fearest ? all is safe 
If boldly thou wilt face Sir Rafe.” 



204 1 HE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

So saying, did she draw her hence, 

Past tree and bower, and high pleached fence 
Unto the garden's further end, 

And left her there and back did wend. 

And from the house made haste to get 
A gilded maund wherein she set 
A flask of ancient island wine, 

Ripe fruits and wheaten manchets fine, 

And many such a delicate 
As goddesses in old time ate, 

Ere Helen was a Trojan queen ; 

So passing through the garden green 
She cast her eager eyes again 
Upon the spot where he had lain, 

But found it empty, so sped on 
Till she at last the place had won 
Where Cecily lay faint, weak and white 
Within that fair bower of delight. 

Her straight she made to eat and drink, 
And said, “ See now thou dost not shrink 
From this thy deed ; let love slay fear 
Now, when thy life shall grow so dear, 

Each minute should seem loss to thee 

If thou for thy felicity 

Couldst stay to count them ; for I say. 

This day shall be thy happy day.” 

Therewith she smiled to see the wine 
Embraced by her fair fingers fine ; 

And her sweet face grow bright again 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING:, 205 

With sudden pleasure after pain. 

Again she spoke, “ What is this word 
That dreaming, I perchance, have heard, 

But certainly remember well ; 

That some old soothsayer did tell 
Strange things unto my lord, the King, 

That on thy hand the spousal ring 
No Kaiser's son, no King should set, 

But one a peasant did beget — 

What sayst thou ?” 

But the Queen flushed red ; 

“ Such fables I have heard,” she said ,* 

“And thou — is it a scathe to me, 

The bride of such a man to be?” 

“ Nay,” said she, “ God will have him King ; 
How shall we do a- better thing 
With this or that one than He can ; 

God’s friend must be a goodly man.” 

But with that word she heard the sound 
Of folk who through the mazes wound 
Bearing the message ; then she said, 

“ Be strong, pluck up thine hardihead, 

Speak little, so shall all be well, 

For now our own tale will they tell.” 

And even as she spoke they came 
And all the green place was aflame 
With golden raiment of the lords ; 

While Cecily, noting not their words. 



206 the earthly paradise . 

Rose up to go ; and for her part 
By this had fate so steeled her heart, 

Scarce otherwise she seemed, than when 
She passed before the eyes of men 
At tourney or high festival. 

But when they now had reached the hall. 

And up its very steps they went, 

Her head a little down she bent ; 

Nor raised it till the dais was gained 
For fear that love some monster feigned 
To be a god, and she should be 
Smit by her own bolt wretchedly. 

But at the rustling, crowded dais 
She gathered heart her eyes to raise, 

And there beheld her love, indeed, 

Clad in her father’s serving weed, 

But proud, and flushed, and calm withal. 

Fearless of aught that might befal, 

Nor too astonied, for he thought, — 

“ From point to point my life is brought 
Through wonders till it comes to this ; 

And trouble cometh after bliss, 

And I will bear all as I may, 

And ever as day passeth day, 

My life will hammer from the twain, 

Forging a long enduring chain.” 

But midst these thoughts their young eyes met, 
And every word did he forget 
Wherewith men name unhappiness 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 207 

As read again those words did bless 
With double blessings his glad ears. 

And if she trembled with her fears, 

And if with doubt, and love, and shame, 

The rosy colour went and came 

In her sweet cheeks and smooth bright brow, 

Little did folk think of it now, 

But as of maiden modesty, 

Shamefaced to see the bridegroom nigh. 

And now when Rafe the Seneschal 
Had read the message down the hall. 

And turned to her, quite calm again, 

Her face had grown, and with no pain 
She raised her serious eyes to his 
Grown soft and pensive with his bliss, 

And said, 

“ Prince, thou art welcome here, 

Where all my father loves is dear, 

And full trust do I put in thee, 

For that so great nobility 
He knoweth in thee ; be as kind 
As I would be to thee, and find 
A happy life from day to day, 

Till all our days are past away.” 

What more than found the bystanders 
He found within this speech of hers, 

I know not ; some faint quivering 
In the last words ; some little thing 
That checked the cold words* even flow. 



208 the earthl y paradise . 

But yet they set his heart aglow. 

And he in turn said eagerly : — 

“ Surely I count it nought to die 
For him who brought me unto this ; 

For thee, who givest me this bliss \ 

Yea, even dost me such a grace 
To look with kind eyes in my face, 

And send sweet music to my ears.” 

But at his words she, mazed with tears. 
Seemed faint, and failing quickly, when 
Above the low hum of the men 
Uprose the sweet bells , sudden clang, 

As men unto the chapel rang ; 

While just outside the singing folk 
Into most heavenly carols broke. 

And going softly up the hall 
Boys bore aloft the verges tall 
Before the Bishop’s gold-clad head. 

Then forth his bride young Michael led. 
And nought to him seemed good or bad 
Except the lovely hand he had ; 

But she the while was murmuring low, 
u If he could know, if he could know. 

What love, what love, his love should be I ** 

But while mid mirth and minstrelsy 
The ancient Castle of the Rose 
Such pageant to the autumn shows 
The King sits ill at ease at home, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 

For in these days the tidings come 
That he who m his line should wed, 

Lies in his own town stark and dead, 

Slain in a tumult of the street. 

Brooding on this he deemed it meet, 

Since nigh the day was come, when she 
Her bridegroom’s visage looked to see. 

To hold the settled day with her. 

And bid her at the least to wear 
Dull mourning guise for gold and white. 

So on another morning bright, 

When the whole promised month was pasL 
He drew anigh the place at last 
Where Michael’s dead head, looking down 
Upon the highway with a irown, 

He doubted not at last to see. 

So ’twixt the fruitful greenery 

He rode, scarce touched by care the while, 

Humming a roundel with a smile. 

Withal, ere yet he drew anigh. 

He heard their watch-horn sound from high, 
Nor wondered, for their wont was so, 

And well his banner they might know 
Amidst the stubble lands afar : 

But now a distant point of war 
He seemed to hear, and bade draw rein, 

But listening cried, “ Push on again J 
They do but send forth minstrelsy 
Because my daughter thinks to see 


209 


p 



10 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE 


The man who lieth on his bier.” 

So on they passed, till sharp and clear 
They heard the pipe and shrill fife sound; 

And restlessly the King glanced round 
To see what he had striven for, 

The crushing of that Sage’s lore, 

The last confusion of that fate. 

But drawn still nigher to the gate 
They turned a sharp bend of the road, 

And saw the pageant that abode 
The solemn coming of the King. 

For first on each side, maids did sing, 

Dressed in gold raiment ; then there came 
The minstrels in their coats of flame ; 

And then the many-coloured lords, 

The knights’ spears, and the swordmen’s swords. 
Backed by the glittering wood of bills. 

So now, presaging many ills, 

The King drew rein, yet none the less 
He shrank not from his hardiness, 

But though^ “Well, at the worst I die, 

And yet perchance long life may lie 
Before me — I will hold my peace; 

The dumb man’s borders still increase.'’ 

But as he strengthened thus his heart 
He saw the crowd before him part, 

And down the long melodious lane, 

Hand locked in hand there passed the twain, 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. 211 


As fair as any earth has found, 

Clad as longs’ children are, and crowned. 
Behind them went the chiefest lords, 

And two old knights with sheathhd swords 
The banners of the kingdom bore. 

But now the King had pondered sore, 

By when they reached him, though, indeed, 
The time was short unto his need, 

Betwixt his heart’s first startled pang 
And those old banner-bearers’ clang 
Anigh his saddle-bow : but he 
Across their heads scowled heavily, 

Not saying aught awhile : at last, 

Ere any glance at them he cast, 

He said, “ Whence come ye? what are ye? 
What play is this ye play to me?” 

None answered, — Cecily, faint and white. 
The rather Michael’s hand clutched tight. 
And seemed to speak, but not one word 
The nearest to her could have heard. 

Then the King spoke again, — “Sir Rafe, 
Meseems this youngling came here safe 
A week agone ? ” 

“Yea, sir,” he said; 

“ Therefore the twain I straight did wed, 
E’en as thy letters bound me to.” 

“And thus thou diddest well to do,” 

The King said. “ Tell me on what day 
Her maiden life she put away.” 



2 1 2 THE EAR THE Y PARADISE. 

“ Sire, the eleventh day this is 
Since that they gained their earthly bliss 
Quoth old Sir Rafe. The King said nought* 
But with his head bowed down in thought, 
Stood a long while ; but at the last 
Upward a smiling face he cast, 

And cried aloud above the folk, 

“ Shout for the joining of the yoke 
Betwixt these twain ! And thou, fair lord, 
Who dost so well my eveiy word, 

Nor makest doubt of anything, 

Wear thou the collar of thy King ; 

And a duke’s banner, cut foursquare, 
Henceforth shall men before thee bear 
In tourney and in stricken field. 

“ But this mine heir shall bear my shield. 
Carry my banner, wear my crown, 

Bide equal with me through my town. 

Sit on the same step of the throne \ 

In nothing will I reign alone ; 

Nor be ye with him miscontent. 

For that with little ornament 
Of gold and folk to you he came ; 

For he is of an ancient name 
That needeth not the clink of gold — 

The ancientest the world doth hold ; 

For in the fertile Asian land, 

Where great Damascus now doth stand, 

Ages agone his line was bom. 



THE MAN BORN TO BE KING 213 

Ere yet men knew the gift of com , 

And there, anigh to Paradise, 

His ancestors grew stout and wise ; 

And certes he from Asia bore 
No little of their piercing lore. 

“ Look then to have great happiness, 

For every wrong shall he redress.” 

Then did the people's shouting drown 
His clatter as he leapt adown ; 

And taking in each hand a hand 
Of the two lovers, now did stand 
Betwixt them on the flower-strewn way, 

And to himself meanwhile 'gan say, — 

“ How many an hour might I have been 
Right meny in the gardens green ; 

How many a glorious day had I 
Made happy with some victory ; 

What noble deeds I might have done, 

What bright renown my deeds have won ; 

What blessings would have made me glad ; 

What little burdens had I had ; 

What calmness in the hope of praise ; 

What joy of well-accomplished days, 

If I had let these things alone ; 

Nor sought to sit upon my throne 
Like God between the cherubim. 

But now — but now, my days wax dim, 



214 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And all this fairness have I tost 
Unto the winds, and all have lost 
For nought, for nought ! yet will I strive 
My little end of life to live ; 

Nor will I look behind me more, 

Nor forward to the doubtful shore.” 

With that he made the sign to turn. 

And straight the autumn air did bum 
With many a point of steel and gold ; 

And through the trees the carol rolled 
Once more, until the autumn thrush 
Far off’gan twittering on his bush, 

Made mindful of the long-lived spring. 

So mid sweet song and tabouring, 

And shouts amid the apple-grove, 

And soft caressing of his love, 

Began the new King Michael’s reign. 

Nor will the poor folk see again 
A king like him on any throne, 

Or such good deeds to all men done : 

For then, as saith the chronicle. 

It was the time, as all men tefl, 

When scarce a man would stop to gaze 
At gold crowns hung above the wavs. 



MARCH. 


215 


H E ended; and midst those who heard were some 
Who, midst his tale, half dreamed they were 
at home, 

Round the great fire upon the winter night ; 

And, with the memory of the fresh delight 
Wherewith they first had heard that story told, 
Forgetting not they were grown weak and old, 

Yet felt as if they had at least grown grey 
Within the land left for so many a day. 

He, with the gestures they were wont to see, 

So told his tale, so strange with eld was he, 

Just so he stammered, and in just such wise 
He sighed, beginning fresh, as their young eyes, 

Their ears, in happy days passed long ago, 

Had ever noted other old men do, 

When they, full filled with their quick-coming joys. 
Would gaze on old folk as on carven toys. 

But he being silent, silently awhile 
They mused on these things, masking with a smile 
The vain regrets that in their hearts arose, 

The while with eager talk the young folk chose 
The parts that pleased them ; but their elder hosts 
Falling to talk, yet noted well the ghosts 
Of old desires within their wasted eyes, 

Till one by one the fresh-stirred memories, 

So bitter-sweet, flickered and died away ; 

And as old men may do, whose hopes giew grey 
Before their beards, they made a little mirth 
Until the great moon rose upon the earth. 



2l6 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


APRIL. 

O FAIR midspring, besting so oft and oft 
How can I praise thy loveliness enow ? 

Thy sun that bums not, and thy breezes soft 
That o'er the blossoms of the orchard blow, 

The thousand things that ’neath the young leaves grow, 
The hopes and chances of the growing year, 

Winter forgotten long, and summer near. 

When Summer brings the lily and the rose, 

She brings us fear ; her very death she brings 
Hid in her anxious heart, the forge of woes ; 

And, dull with fear, no more the mavis sings. 

But thou ! thou diest not, but thy fresh life clings 
About the fainting autumn’s sweet decay, 

When in the earth the hopeful seed they lay. 

Ah ! life of all the year, why yet do I 
Amid thy snowy blossoms' fragrant drift, 

Still long for that which never draweth nigh, 

Striving my pleasure from my pain to sift, 

Some weight from off my fluttering mirth to lift? 

— Now, when far bells axe ringing, “ Come again, 
Come back, past years ! why will ye pass in vain ?” 



APRIL. 


217 


A ND now the watery April sun lit up 

Upon the fair board golden ewer and cup. 
And over the bright silken tapestry 
The fresh young boughs were gladdening every eye, 
And round the board old faces you might see 
Amidst the blossoms and their greenery. 

So when the flutes were silent, and the birds, 
Rejoicing in their flood of unknown words, 

Were heard again, a silken-fastened book 
A certain elder from his raiment took, 

And said, “ O friends, few words are best to-day, 
And no new thing I bring you ; yet ye may 
Be pleased to hear an ancient tale again, 

That, told so long ago, doth yet remain 
Fresh e’en ’mongst us, far from the Argive land : 
Which tale this book, writ wholly by mine hand, 
Holds gathered up as I have heard it told. 

“ Surely I fear me, midst the ancient gold 
Base metal ye will light on here and there, 

Though I have noted everything with care, 

And with good will have set down nothing new 
Nor holds the land another book for you 
That has the tale in full with nought beside, 

So unto me let your good word betide ; 

Though, take it as ye may, no small delight 
I had, herein tins well-loved tale to write.” 



2l8 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 

ARGUMENT. 

Acrisius, king of Argos, being warned by an oracle that the 
son of his daughter Danae should slay him, shut her up in a 
brazen tower built for that end beside the sea : there, though 
no man could come nigh her, she nevertheless bore a son to 
Jove, and she and her new-born son, set adrift on the sea, 
came to the island of Seriphos. Thence her son, grown to 
manhood, set out to win the Gorgon’s Head, and accom- 
plished that end by the help of Minerva ; and afterwards 
lescued Andromeda, daughter of Cepheus, from a terrible 
doom, and wedded her. Coming back to Seriphos he took 
his mother thence, and made for Argos, but by stress of 
weather came to Thessaly, and there, at Larissa, accom- 
plished the prophecy, by unwittingly slaying Acrisius. In 
the end he founded the city of Mycenae, and died there. 

N OW of the King Acrisius shall ye hear, 

Who, thinking he could free his life from fear, 
Did that which brought but death on him at last 
In Argos did he reign in days long past, 

And had one daughter, fair as man could see, 

Called in the ancient stories Danae ; 

But as her fairness day by day grew more, 

Unto his ears came wandering words of lore, 

Which bade him wot that either soon or late 



THE DOOM OF KING A CXlSH/ 8 . 2 1 9 

He should be taken in the toils of fate, 

And by the fruit of his own daughter’s womb 
Be slain at last, and set within his tomb ; 

And therefore heavy sorrow on him fell, 

That she whom he was bound to love so well 
Must henceforth be his deadliest dread and woe. 

Long time he pondered what were best to do; 

And whiles he thought that he would send her forth 
To wed some king far in the snowy north, 

And whiles that by great gifts of goods and gold 
Some lying prophet might be bought and sold 
To swear his daughter he must sacrifice, 

If he would yet find favour in the eyes 
Of the dread gods who govern everything ; 

And sometimes seemed it better to the King, 

That he might ’scape the shedding of her blood 
By leaving her in some far lonely wood, 

Wherein the Dryads might the maiden find, 

Or beasts might slay her, following but their kind. 

So passed his anxious days, until at last, 

When many a plot through his vexed brain had passed. 
He lacked the heart his flesh and blood to slay. 

Yet neither would he she should go away 
From out his sight, or be at large at all; 

Therefore his wisest craftsmen did he call, 

And bade them make for him a tower foursquare, 

Such as no man had yet seen anywhere, 

For therein neither stone or timber was, 

But all was fashioned of mere molten brass. 



2 20 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Now thither oft would maiden Danae stray, 

And watch its strange walls growing day by day, 
Because, poor soul ! she knew not anything 
Of these forebodings of the fearful King, 

Nor how he meted out for her this doom, 

Therein to dwell as in a living tomb. 

But on a day, she, coming there alone, 

Found it all finished and the workmen gone, 

And no one nigh, so through the open door 
She entered, and went up from floor to floor, 

And through its chambers wandered without dread 
And, entering one, she found therein a bed, 

Dight daintily, as though to serve a queen ; 

And all the walls adorned with hangings green, 
Tables and benches in good order set, 

And all things new, by no one used as yet 
With that she murmured, “ When again I see 
My father, will I bid him tell to me 
Who shall live here and die here, for, no doubt, 
Whoever enters here shall ne’er go out : 

Therefore the walls are made so high and great, 
Therefore the bolts are measureless of weight, 

The windows small, barred, turned unto the sea, 
That none from land may tell who here may be. 
No doubt some man the King my father fears 
Above all other, here shall pass his years. 

Alas, poor soul ! scarce shall he see the sun, 

Or care to know when the hot day is done. 

Or ever see sweet flowers again, or grass, 



THR DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 221 


Or take much note of how the seasons pass. 

Truly we folk who dwell in rest and ease 
But lightly think of such abodes as these ; 

And I, who live wrapped round about with bliss. 
Shall go from hence and soon forget all this . 

For in my garden many a sweet flower blooms, 
Wide open are the doors of all my rooms, 

And lightly folk come in and lightly go ; 

And I have known as yet but childish woe.” 

Therewith she turned about to leave the place. 
But as unto the door she set her face 
A bitter wailing from outside she heard, 

And somewhat therewithal she waxed afeard, 

And stopped awhile ; yet listening, she but thought. 
14 This is the man who to his doom is brought 
By weeping friends, who come to see the last 
Of that dear face they know shall soon be past 
From them for ever.” Then she *gan to go 
Adown the brazen stairs with footsteps slow. 

But quick the shrieks and wailing drew anear, 

Till in her ears it sounded sharp and clear, 

And then she said, “ Alas ! and must I see 
These weeping faces diawn with agony? 

Would I had not come here to-day !” Withal 
She started, as upon her ear did fall 
The sound of shutting of the outer door, 

And people coming up from floor to floor; 

And paler then she grew, but moved to meet 
The woful sounds and slow-ascending feet, 



222 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Shrinking with pity for that wretched one 
Whose life of joy upon that day was done. 

Thus down the stairs with saddened heart she passed 
And to a lower chamber came at last ; 

But as she went beneath the archway wide 
The door was opened from the other side, 

And in poured many maidens, whom she knew 
For her own fair companions, leal and true ; 

And after them two men-at-arms there came, 

With knitted brows and eyes downcast for shame. 

But when those damsels saw her standing there, 
Anew they wept, and tore their unbound hair ; 

But midst their wailing, still no word they said. 

Until she spoke oppressed with sickening dread : 

“ O tell me what has happened to me then ! 

For is my father slain of oudand men ? 

Or have the gods sent death upon the land ? 

Or is it mine own death that they command ? 

Alas, alas 1 but slay me quick, I pray, 

Nor let me linger on from day to day, 

Maddened with fear like this, that sickens me, 

And makes me seem the half-dead thing ye see.” 

Then, like a man constrained, a soldier said 
These cruel words unto the wretched maid : 

Lady, lose hope and fear now once for all ; 

Here must thou dwell betwixt brass wall and wall 
Until the gods send gentle death to thee ; 

And these as erst thine handmaidens shall be : 

And if thou askest why the thing is so, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 223 

Thus the King wills it, for a while ago 
An oracle foretold that thou shouldst live 
To have a son, who bitter death should give 
Unto thy father ; so, to save this shame 
From falling on the glorious Argive name, 

He deemed it well that thou shouldst live indeed. 

But yet apart from man thy life shouldst lead 
So in this place thy days must pass away, 

And we who are thy guards, from day to day 
Will bring thee everything that thou mayst need. 

But pardon us, constrained to do this deed 
By the Fling's will, and oaths that we have sworn 
Ere to this life of sorrow thou wert bom.” 

Therewith they turned and went, and soon the sound 
Of shutting doors smote like a deadly wound 
Into her heart ; and yet no word she spoke, 

But fell as one beneath a deadly stroke. 

Then they who there her fellows were to be 
Bore up her body, groaning heavily, 

Unto the chamber whither fate had led 
Her feet that morn ; and there upon the bed 
They laid her body, and then sat around. 

With heavy heads and hair that swept the ground, 

To weep the passing of those happy days 
When many an one their happy lot would praise. 

But now and then, when bitterly would sting 
The loss of some nigh-reached and longed-for thing, 
Into a wail their weeping would arise. 



224 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then in a while did Danae ope her eyes, 

And to her aching forehead raised her hand ; 

But when she saw that wan, dishevelled band. 

She soon remembered this was no ill dream, 

But that all things were e’en as they did seem, 

Then she arose, but soon upon the bed 
Sank down again, and hid her troubled head, 

And moaned and moaned, and when a damsel came 
And touched her hand, and called her by her name 
She knew her not, but turned her head away : 

Nor did she know when dark night followed day. 

So passed by many a day in mourning sore, 

And weariness oppressed her evermore 
In that unhappy prison-house of brass ; 

And yet a little the first sting did pass 

That smote her, and she ate and drank and slept, 

And fair and bright her body Venus kept, 

Yea, such a grace the sea-born goddess fair 
Did to her, that the ripples of her hair 
Grew brighter, and the colour in her face 
And lovely lips waned not in that sad place ; 

And daily grew her limbs in goodlihead ; 

Till as she lay upon the golden bed, 

You would have thought the Queen herself had come 
To meet some love far from her golden home. 

And once it happed at the first hour of day 
In golden mom upon her bed she lay, 

Newly awakened to her daily woe, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 


And heard the rough sea beat the rocks below, 
The wheeling sea-gull screaming on the wing, 
Sea-swallows swift, and many a happy thing, 

Till bitterly the tears ran down her cheek, 

And stretching forth her arms and fingers weak, 
Twixt moans these piteous helpless words she said 
“ O Queen Diana, make me now thy maid, 

And take me from this place and set me down 
By the boar-haunted hills, that oak-woods crown, 
Amid thy crowd of trim-girt maidens fair. 

“ And shall I not be safe from men-folk there, 
Thou cruel King, when she is guarding me, 

The mighty maid from whom the shepherds flee, 
When in the gathering dusk ’twixt day and night, 
The dead leaves tell them of her footsteps light, 
Because they mind how dear Actaeon bought 
The lovely sight for which he never sought, 

Diana naked in the water wan. 

“ Yea, what fear should I have of any man 
When through the woods I, wandering merrily, 
With girt-up gown, sharp sword upon the thigh, 
Full quiver on the back, stout bow in hand, 

Should tread with firm feet many a grassy land, 
And grow strong-limbed in following up the deer, 
And meet the lions’ eyes with little fear? 

“ Alas I no doubt she hears not ; many a maid 
She has already, of no beast afraid, 

Crisp-haired, with arms made meet for archery, 
Whose limbs unclad no man shall ever see ; 


Q 



226 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Though the birds see them, and the seeding grass 
Harsh and unloving over them may pass, 

When carelessly through rough and smooth they run, 
And bough and briar catches many an one. 

“ Alas ! why on these free maids is my thought, 
When to such misery my life is brought? 

I, who so long a happy maid have been, 

The daughter of a great King and a Queen ; 

And why these fresh things do I think upon, 

Who now shall see but little of the sun ? 

“ Here every day shall have the same sad tale, 

My weary damsels with their faces pale, 

The dashing of the sea on this black rock, 

The piping wind through cranny and through lock, 
The sea-bird’s cry, like mine grown hoarse and shrill, 
The far-off sound of horn upon the hill, 

The merry tune about the shepherd’s home, 

And all the things whereto I ne’er may come. 

“ O ye who rule below, I pray this boon, 

I may not live here long, but perish soon, 

Forgotten, but at peace, and feeling nought ; 

For even now it comes across my thought 
That here my wretched body dwells alone, 

And that my soul with all my hope is gone. 

“ Father, thy blood upon thine own head be 
If any solace Venus send to me 
Within this wretched place which thou hast made, 

Of thine own flesh and blood too much afraid.” 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 223 

Truly Diana heard not, for that tide 
Upon the green grass by a river side, 

Wherein she had just bathed her body sweet, 

She stooped to tie the sandals to her feet, 

Her linen gown upon the herbage lay, 

And round her was there standing many a may 
Making her ready for the morning chase. 

But so it happed that Venus by the place 
Was passing, just arisen from the sea, 

And heard the maid complaining bitterly, 

So to the window-bars she drew anigh, 

And thence unseen, she saw the maiden lie, 

As on the grass herself she might have lain 
When in the thicket lay Adonis slain ; 

For power and joy she smiled thereat, and thought 
“ She shall not suffer all this pain for nought” 

And slowly for Olympus sailed away, 

And thither came at hottest of the day. 

Then through the heavenly courts she went, and when 
She found the father both of gods and men, 

She smiled upon him, and said, “ Knowest thou 
What deeds are wrought by men in Argos now ? 
Wherein a brazen tower well builded is, 

That hides a maid away from all my bliss ; 

Since thereby thinks Acrisius to forego, 

This doom that has been fated long ago, 

That by his daughter’s son he shall be slain; 
Wherefore he puts the damsel to this pain 
To see no man, and thinks to ’scape his doom 



223 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


If she but live and die with barren womb ; 

And great dishonour is it unto me 
That such a maiden lives so wretchedly ; 

And great dishonour is it to us all 
That ill upon a guiltless head should fall 
To save a King from what we have decreed. 

Now, therefore, tell me, shall his impious deed 
Save him alive, while she that might have borne 
Great kings and glorious heroes, lives forlorn 
Of love’s delight, in solitude and woe ? ” 

Then said the Thunderer, “ Daughter, nowise so 
Shall this be in the end ; heed what shall fall, 

And let none think that any brazen wall 
Can let the gods from doing what shall be.” 

Now therewithal went Venus to the sea 
Glad of her father’s words, and, as she went, 
Unseen the gladness of the spring she sent 
Across the happy lands o’er which she moved, 
Until all men felt joyous and beloved. 

But while to Paphos carelessly she fared, 

All day upon the tower the hot sun glared, 

And Danae within that narrow space 
Went to and fro, and sometimes hid her face 
Between her hands, moaning in her despair. 

Or sometimes tore the fillets from her hair, 

And sometimes would begin a piteous tale 
Unto her maids, and in the midst would fail 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 229 

For sobs and tears ; but mostly would she sit 
Over against the window, watching it, 

And feel the light wind blowing from the sea 
Against her face, with hands laid listlessly 
Together in her lap ; so passed the day, 

And to their sleep her damsels went away, 

And through the dead of night she slept awhile, 

But when the dawn came, woke up with a smile, 

As though she had forgotten all her pain, 

But soon the heavy burden felt again, 

And lay a wretch unhappy, till the sun 
Drew nigh the sea’s lip, and the night was done 

In that fresh mom was no one stirring yet, 

And many a man his troubles did forget 
Buried in sleep, but nothing she forgat, 

She raised herself and up in bed she sat, 

And towards the window turned round wearily 
To watch the changing colours of the sky ; 

And many a time she sighed, and seemed as though 
She would have told the story of her woe 
To whatsoever god near by might be 
Betwixt the grey sky and the cold grey sea, 

But to her lips no sound at all would rise, 

Except those oft-repeated heavy sighs. 

And yet, indeed, within a little while 
Her face grew calm, the shadow of a smile 
Stole o’er her parted lips and sweet grey eyes, 

And slowly from the bed did she arise, 

And towards the window drew, and yet did seem, 



230 THE EAR THE Y FARADISE. 

Although her eyes were open, still to dream. 

There on the sill she laid her slender hand, 

And looking seaward, pensive did she stand, 

And seemed as though she waited for the sun 
To bring her news that evil days were done ; 

At last he came and cast his golden road 
Over the green sea toward that lone abode, 

And into Danae’s face his glory came 
And lit her softly waving hair like flame. 

But in his light she held out both her hands, 

As though he brought her from some far-off lands 
Healing for all her great distress and woe. 

But yellower now the sunbeams seemed to grow 
Not whiter as their wont is, and she heard 
A tinkling sound that made her, half afeard, 

Draw back a little from the fresh green sea, 

Then to a clang the noise rose suddenly, 

And gently was she smitten on the breast, 

And some bright tiring within her palm did rest, 
And trickled down her shoulder and her side, 

And on her limbs a little did abide, 

Or lay upon her feet a little while. 

Then in her face increased the doubtful smile, 
While o’er her eyes a drowsy film there came, 

And in her cheeks a flush as if of shame, 

And, looking round about, could she behold 
The chamber scattered o’er with shining gold, 
That grew, till ankle-deep she stood in it 

Then through her limbs a tremor did there flit 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 231 

As through white water runs the summer wind, 

And many a wild hope came into her mind, 

But her knees bent and soft she sank down there, 

And on the gold was spread her golden hair, 

And like an ivory image still she lay, 

Until the mght again had hidden day. 

But when again she lifted up her head, 

She found herself laid soft within her bed, 

While midmost of the room the taper shone, 

And all her damsels from the place were gone, 

And by her head a gold-robed man there stood, 

At sight of whom the damsel’s shamefast blood 
Made all her face red to the golden hair, 

And quick she covered up her bosom fair. 

Then in a great voice said he, “ Danae, 

Sweet child, be glad, and have no fear of me 
And have no shame, nor hide from thy new love 
The breast that on this day has pillowed Jove. 

Come now, come from that balmy nest of thine, 

And stand with me beneath the taper’s shine 
That I may see thy beauty once again ; 

Then never shalt thou be in any pain, 

But if thou liffcest up thy face to Jove 
I shall be kind to my sweet simple love ; 

I shall bethink me of thy body sweet, 

From golden head to fair and dainty feel.” 

Then, trembling sore, from out the bed she came 



2 32 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE . . 


And hid away her face for dread and shame. 

But soon she trembled more for very love, 

To feel the loving hands of mighty Jove 
Draw down her hands, and kisses on the head 
And tender bosom, as again he said, 

“ Now must I go ; and sweet love, Danae; 

Fear nothing more that man can do to thee, 

For soon shall come an ending to thy woe, 

And thou shaft have a son whose name shall grow 
Still greater, till the mountains melt away 
And men no more can tell the night from day.” 

Then forth he sprang and o’er the sea did fly 
And loud it thundered from a cloudless sky. 


S O when her damsels came to her next mom, 
And thought to see her laid alow forlorn 
Upon the bed, and looking out to sea 
Moaning full oft, and sighing heavily, 

They found her singing o’er a web of silk 
Where through the even warp as white as milk 
Quick flew the shuttle from her arm of snow, 
And SGmewhat from her girded gown did show 
On the black treadles both her rosy feet, 

Moving a little as the tender wheat 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRIS 1 US. 233 

Moves in the June when Zephyr blows on it, 

So, like a goddess weaving did she sit. 

But when she saw her maidens wondering stand 
She ceased her song and spake and stayed her hand, 
“ If now ye see me merry of my mood 
Be nought amazed, for e’en as die the good 
So die ill days ; and now my heart is light, 

For hearken ; a fair dream I had last night, 

That in his claws an eagle lifted me 
And bore me to a land across the sea : 

Wherefore I think that here I shall not die 
But live to feel dew falling from the sky, 

And set my feet deep in the meadow grass 
And underneath the scented pine-trees pass, 

Or in the garden feel the western breeze, 

The herald of the rain, sweep through the trees, 

Or in the hottest of the summer day, 

Betwixt green banks within the mill-stream play. 

“ For either shall my father soon relent, 

Or for my sake some marvel shall be sent, 

And either way these doors shall open wide ; 

And then doubt not to see me soon a bride 
With some king’s amorous son before my feet. 

“ Ah ! verily my life shall then be sweet ; 

Before these days I knew not life or death, 

With little hope or fear I drew my breath, 

But now when all this sorrow is o’erpast, 

Then shall I feel how sweet life is at last, 

And learn how dear is peace from all these fears. 



234 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE . 

“ So nc more will I waste my life m tears, 

But pass the time as swiftly as may be, 

Until ye step out on the turf with me.” 

Then glad they were, when such-like words the} 
heard, 

And yet some doubted and were sore afeard 
That she had grown light-headed with her woe. 
Dreading the time might come when she would throw 
Her body on the ground and perish there, 

Slain by her own hand mighty with despair. 

Nathless the days more merrily went by 
And from that prison men heard minstrelsy, 

When nought but mourning, fisher-folk afeard 
Who passed that way, in other times had heard. 

Yet truly Danae said that all things pass 
And are forgotten ; in that house of brass 
Forgotten was the stunning bitter pain 
Wherewith she entered it, and yet again 
In no long time, hope was forgotten too 
When wringing torments moaning from her drew, 

And to and fro the pale scared damsels went, 

And those her guards unto Acrisius sent 

But ere the messenger returned again 
She had been eased of half her bitterest pain, 

And on her breast a fair man-child was laid ; 

Then round the messenger her maids afraid 
Drew weeping ; but he charged them earnestly, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 235 

Ever to watch her in that chamber high, 

Lest any man should steal the babe away, 

And so to bide until there came a day 
When on her feet she might arise and go, 

Whereof by messengers the King must know ; 

So, threatening torments unendurable, 

If any harm through treachery befell, 

He left them, and no more to them he told, 

But in his face the sooth they might behold. 

Now, therefore when some wretched days were past, 
And trembling by the bed she stood at last, 

She heard the opening of the outer door, 

And footsteps came again from floor to floor, 

And soon with all-armed men her chamber shone, 
Who with few words now led her forth alone 
Adown the stairs from out the brazen place ) 

And on her hot hands, and her tear-stained face 
Half-fainting, the pine-scented air she felt, 

And all about the salt sea savour smelt, 

And in her ears the dashing of the sea 
Rang ever ; thus the God had set her free. 

But by the shore further they led her still 
To where the sea beat on a barren hill, 

And a long stage of timber met the sea. 

At end whereof was tossing fearfully 
A little boat that had no oars or sail, 

Or aught that could the mariner avail. 

Thither with her their steps the soldiers bent, 

And as along the narrow way they went 



236 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


The salt waves leapt aloft to kiss her feet 
And in the wind streamed out her tresses sweet ; 

But little heed she took of feet or head 
For nought she doubted she to death was led, 

But ever did she hold against her breast 
The little babe, and spoke not for the rest, 

No, not when in the boat they bade her go, 

And ’twixt its bulwarks thin she lay alow, 

Nor when adrift they set her presently 
And all about was but the angry sea. 

No word she said until the sun was down, 

And she beheld the moon that on no town. 

On no fair homestead, no green pasture shone. 

But lit up the unwearied sea alone ; 

No word she said till she was far from shore 
And on her breast the babe was wailing sore, 

And then she lifted up her face to Jove, 

And said, “ O thou who once didst call me love, 
Hast thou forgotten those fair words of thine, 

When underneath the taper’s glimmering shine 
Thou bad’st me stand that thou mightst look on me, 
And love thou calPdst me, and sweet Danae ? 

Now on thy promised help to-day I call, 

For on what day can greater woe befall 
Than this wherein to-night my body is, 

And brought thereto, O King, by thy sweet kiss ? ” 

But neither did she pray the God in vain ; 

For straight he set himself to end her pain, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACFISIUS. 23 

And while he cast on her a gentle sleep, 

The winds within their houses did he keep 
Except the west which soft on her did blow, 

That swiftly through the sea the boat might go. 

Far out to sea a certain isle doth lie 
Men call Seriphos, craggy, steep, and high : 

It rises up on every side but one, 

And mariners its ill-famed headlands shun ; 

But toward the south the meads slope soft adown, 
Until they meet the yellow sands and brown, 

That slope themselves so gently to the sea, 

The nymphs are hidden only to the knee 
When half a mile of rippling water is 
Between the waves that their white limbs do kiss 
And the last wave that washes shells ashore. 

To this fair place the west wind onward bore 
The skiff that carried Danae and her son, 

And on the mom, when scarce the dusk was done, 
Upon the sands the shallop ran aground ; 

And still they slept, and for awhile around 
Their wretched bed the waves sang lullaby, 

But sank at last and left the long strand dry. 

Then uprose Danae, and nothing knew 
What land it was : about her sea-fowl flew ; 

Behind her back the yet retreating sea 
Beat on the yellow sands unceasingly ; 

Landward she saw the low green meadows lie, 
Dotted with homesteads, rich with elm-trees high ; 



* 3 8 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


And at her feet the little boat there lay 
That happily had brought her on the way. 

But as it happed, the brother of the King 
Had ridden forth to hear the sea-fowl sing, 

With hawk on fist, right early on that mom, 

Hard by the place whereunto she was borne. 

He, seeing far away a white thing stand, 

Deemed her at first some maiden of the sand, 

Such as to fishers sings a honied strain, 

And leave them longing for their love in vain. 

So, wishful to behold the sea-folk’s bride, 

He set the spurs into his horse’s side. 

But drawing nigher, he but saw her there, 

Not moving much, her unbound yellow hair 
Heavy with dew and washing of the sea; 

And her wet raiment clinging amorously 
About her body, in the wind’s despite ; 

And in her arms her woe and her delight, 
Spreading abroad the small hands helplessly 
That on some day should still the battle’s cry. 

And furthermore he saw where by her side 
Yet lay her ferry o’er the waters wide : 

Then, though he knew not whence she might have 
come, 

He doubted not the firm land was her home. 

But when he came anigh, beholding him 
She fell a trembling in her every limb, 

And kneeling to him held the young babe out. 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 23Q 

And said : “ O Sir, if, as I have no doubt, 

In this strange land thou art a king and lord, 

Speak unto me some comfortable word. 

“ Bom of a king who rules a lovely land, 

I in my house that by the sea doth stand, 

With all my girls, made merry on a day : 

Now some of them upon the sands did play, 

Dancing unto their fellows* minstrelsy ; 

And some it pleased upon sweet flowers to lie, 

Ripe fruits around, and thence to look on them , 

And some were fain to lift their kirdes* hem, 

And through the shallows chase the fishes fleet ; 

But in this shallop would I have my seat 
Alone, and holding this my little son, 

And knowing not that my good days were done. 

“ Now how it chanced, in sooth I cannot say, 

But yet I think that one there was that day, 

Who for some hidden cause did hate me sore, 

Who cut the cord that bound me to the shore, 

And soon amidst my helpless shrieks the boat, 

Oarless and sailless, out to sea did float. 

“ But now that many a danger has been passed, 

The gods have sent me to your land at last. 

Alive, indeed, but such-like as you see, 

Cold and drenched through with washing of the sea, 
Half-dad, and kneeling on an unknown land. 

And for a morsel holding out my hand n 


Then said he, “ Lady, fear not any more. 



240 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


For thou art come unto no savage shore, 

But here shall be a queen as erst at home : 

And if thou askest whereto thou art come 
This is the isle Seriphos ; and for me, 

My name is Dictys, and right royally 
My brother lives, the king of all the isle. 

Him shalt thou see within a little while, 

And doubtless he will give thee everything 
That ’longs unto the daughter of a king. 

“ Meanwhile I bid thee in mine house to rest 
And there thy wearied body shall be dressed 
In seemly raiment by my women slaves, 

And thou shalt wash thee from the bitter waves. 
And eat and drink, and sleep full easily 
And on the morrow shalt thou come with me 
And take King Polydectes by the hand, 

Who in good peace rules o’er this quiet land.” 

Then on his horse he set the Queen, while he 
Walked by the side thereof right soberly, 

And half asleep, as slow they went along, 

She laid her hand upon the war-horse strong, 
While Dictys by her side Jove’s offspring bore, 
And thus they left the sea-beat yellow shore. 
And as one dreaming to the house she came, 
Where in the sun the brazen doors did flame ; 
And there she ate and drank as in a dream ; 
Dreamlike to her the scented bath did seem 
After the icy sprinkling of the waves, 

And like a dream the fair, slim women-slaves. 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 241 


Who laid her in the soft bed, where she slept 
Dreamless, until the homed white moon had stept 
Over the fresh pine-scented hills again. 

But when the sun next day drave forth his wain. 
The damsel, clad in queen-like gold array, 

With Dictys to the palace took her way ; 

And there by minstrels duly were they met, 

Who brought them to the great hall, where was set 
The King upon a royal throne of gold : 
Black-bearded was he, thirty summers old, 

Comely and strong, and seemed a king indeed ; 
Who, when he saw the minstrels thither lead 
Fair Danae, rose up to her, and said : 

Oh, welcome, lady I be no more afraid 
That thou shalt lose thy state and dignity : 

Yea, since a gem the gods have sent to me, 

With plates of silver will I overlay 

The casket that hath brought it on the way, 

And set it in King Neptune’s house to stand 
Until the sea shall wash away the land. 

“ And for thyself a fair house shalt thou have 
With all things needful, and right many a slave, 
Both men and women ; fair shall all things be 
That thou mayst dwell here in felicity, 

And that no care may wrinkle thy smooth brow. 

“ And for the child, when he is old enow 
The priests of Pallas shall of him have care, 

And thou shalt dwell hard by her temple fair; 

But on this good day in mine hall abide, 

R 



242 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And do me grace in sitting by my side.” 

Then mounted she the dais and sat, and then 
Was she beheld of all the island-men 
Who praised her much, and praised the sturdy child 
Who at their shouting made as if he smiled. 

So passed the feast, and when the day had end 
Unto her house did wearied Danae wend, 

That stood amid Minerva’s olive-trees 
Hidden away from moaning of the seas. 

And there began fair Danae’s life again, 

And quite forgotten was her ancient pain, 

And peacefully did day succeed to day, 

While fairer grew the well-loved child alway, 

And strong and wise beyond his scanty years, 

And in the island all his little peers 

Held him for lord whatso might be their worth, 

And Perseus is his name from this time forth. 


L O, eighteen summers now have come and gone 
Since on the beach fair Danae stood alone 
Holding her little son, nor yet was she 
Less fair than when the hoarse unwilling sea 
Moaned loud that Neptune drew him from her feet, 
And the wind sighed upon her bosom sweet 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS 243 

For in that long-past half-forgotten time, 

While yet the world was young, and the sweet clime. 
Golden and mild, no bitter storm-clouds bred, 

Light lay the years upon the untroubled head, 

And longer men lived then by many a year 
Than in these days, when every week is dear. 

Now on a day was held a royal feast 
Whereon there should be slain full many a beast 
Unto Minerva ; thereto the King came, 

And in his heart love lit a greedy flame 
At sight of Danae’s arms stretched out in prayer 
Unto the goddess, and her yellow hair, 

Wreathed round with olive wreaths, that hung adown 
Over the soft folds of her linen gown ; 

And when at last he took her by the hand 
Speechless by her did Polydectes stand, 

So was he with desire bewildered 
At sight of all that wondrous white and red, 

That peaceful face wherein all past distress 
Had melted into perfect loveliness 

So when that night he lay upon his bed, 

Full many a thought he turned within his head 
Of how he best might unto that attain, 

Whose lack now filled him with such burning pain. 
And at the first it seemed a little thing 
For him who was a rich man and a king, 

Either by gifts to win her, or to send 
And fetch her thither, and perforce to end 



244 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Her widowhood ; but then there came the thought. 
4C By force or gifts hither she might be brought, 
And here might I get that for which I long, 

Yet has she here a son both brave and strong, 

Nor will he think it much to end my days 
If he may get thereby the people’s praise, 

E’en if therewith he shortly needs must die ; 

Ah, verily, a purblind fool was I, 

That when I first beheld that matchless face 
I had no eyes to see her heavenly grace ; 

Then with few words might I have held her here 
And kept her for mine own with little fear ; 

But now I have no will the lad to slay, 

For he would be revenged some evil day, 

Who now Jove’s offspring do I think to be, 

So dowered he is with might and majesty. 

“ Yet could I find perchance some fair pretence 
Whereby with honour I might send him hence, 

Nor have the youngling’s blood upon my head, 
Then might he be well-nigh as good as dead.” 

So pondering on his bed long time he lay, 

Until the night began to mix with day, 

And then he smiled and so to sleep turned round 
As though at last some sure way he had found. 

And now it chanced to come round to the day , 
When all the lords dad in their rich array 
Unto the King should come for royal feast ; 

And there the custom was, that most and least 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 245 

Should thither bear some present for the King, 

As horse or sword, gold chain, fair cup, or ring. 

Unto which feast was Perseus bidden now 
Who giftless came, bare as the winter bough, 

For little was his wealth in that strange land. 

So there ashamed it was his lot to stand, 

Before the guests were called to meat, and when 
He sat amidst those royally-clad men 
Little he spake for shame of his estate, 

Not knowing yet his god-like birth and great. 

So passed the feast, and when the full time came 
To show the gifts, he waxed all red for shame : 

For through the hall white horses were brought up, 
And well-clad slaves, and many a dainty cup, 

And many a gem well set in brooch or ring, 

And laid before the dais of the King. 

But all alone of great folk of the land 

With eyes cast down for rage did Perseus stand. 

Yet for his manhood thence he would not go. 

Now some that secretly were bidden so, 

Beholding him began to gibe and jeer, 

Yet not too loud, held back perchance by fear, 

And thus a murmur spread about the hall 
As, each to each, men cast about the ball, 

Which the King heard, or seemed to hear at last, 

And round the noisy hall a look he cast, 

And then beholding Perseus with a smile 
He said, “ Good friends, fair lords, be still awhile. 
And say no ill about this giftless guest, 



246 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


For truly not the worst, if scarce the best, 

I hold him, and forsooth so rich I live 
Within this land, that I myself may give 
Somewhat to him, nor yet take from him aught, 
And when I bade him here this was my thought” 

Then stretching out his arm did he take up 
From off the board, a jewelled golden cup 
And said, “ O Perseus, come and sit by me, 

And from my hand take this, that thou dost see 
And be my friend.” Then Perseus drew anear, 
And took the cup and said, “ This shall be dear 
Unto mine eyes while on the earth I live ; 

And yet a gift I in my turn may give, 

When to this land comes bitter war, or when 
Some enemy thou hast among great men ; 

Yea, sire, among these knights and lords I swear 
To do whatso thou bidd’st me without fear.” 

Then the King smiled and said, “Yea, verily 
Then wilt thou give a noble gift to me, 

Nor yet, forsooth, too early by a day; 

To-morrow may’st thou be upon thy way. 

“ Far in the western sea a land there is 
Desert and vast, and emptied of all bliss, 

Where dwell the Gorgons wretchedly enow ; 

Two of them die not, one above her brow 
And wretched head bears serpents, for the shame 
That on an ill day fell upon her name, 

When in Minerva’s slirine great sin was wrought, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 247 

For thither by the Sea-god she was brought, 

And in the maiden’s house in love they mixed ; 

Who wrathful, in her once fair tresses fixed 
That snaky brood, and shut her evermore 
Within a land west of the Lybian shore. 

“ Now if a king could gain this snaky head 
Full well for war were he apparelled, 

Because no man may look thereon and live. 

A great gift, therefore, Perseus, wouldst thou give 
If thou shouldst bring this wonder unto me ; 

And for the place, far in the western sea 
It lies, I say, but nothing more I know, 

Therefore I bid thee, to some wise man go 
Who has been used this many a day to pore 
O’er ancient books of long-forgotten lore.” 

Thus spoke the King, knowing the while full well 
None but a god of that far land could tell. 

But Perseus answered, “ O my Lord, the King, 
Thou settest me to win a dreadful thing, 

Yet for thy bounty this gift will I give 
Unto thine hands, if I should chance to live.” 

With that he turned, and silent, full of thought 
From out the hall he passed not noting aught, 

And toward his home he went but soberly, 

And thence went forth an ancient man to see 
He hoped might tell him that he wished to know 
And to what land it were the best to go. 

But when he told the elder all the tale, 



248 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


He shook his head, and said, “ Nought will avail 
My lore for this, nor dwells the man on earth 
Whose wisdom for this thing will be of worth, 

Yea, to this dreadful land no man shall win 
Unless some god himself shall help therein ; 
Therefore, my son, I rede thee stay at home, 

For thou shalt have full many a chance to roam 
Seeking for something that all men love well. 

Not for an unknown isle where monsters dwell.” 

Then forth again went Perseus soberly 
And walked along the border of the sea, 

Upon the yellow sands where first he came 

That time when he was deemed his mother’s shame. 

And now was it the first hour of the night, 
Therefoie within the west a yellow light 
Yet shone, though risen was the horned moon. 
Whose lonely cold grey beams would quench it soon, 
Though now her light was shining doubtfully 
On the wet sands, for low down was the sea 
But rising, and the salt-sea wind blew strong 
And drave the hurrying breakers swift along 
So there walked Perseus thinking many a thing 
About those last words of the wily king, 

And as he went at last he came upon 
An ancient woman, who said, “ Fair, my son, 

What dost thou wandering here in the cold night ? 
When in the King’s hall glance from shade to light 
The golden sandals of the dancing girls, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACE IS I US. 249 

And in the gold cups set with gems and pearls 
The wine shines fair that glads the heart of man ; 
What dost thou wandering ’neath the moonlight wan?” 

“ This have I done.” said he, “as one should swear 
To make the vine bear bunches twice a-year, 

For I have sworn the Gorgon’s head to bring 
A worthy gift unto our island King, 

When neither I, nor any man can tell 
In what far land apart from men they dwell. 

Some god alone can help me in my need ; 

And yet unless somehow I do the deed 
An exile I must be from this fair land, 

Nor with my peers shall I have heart to stand.” 

Grim in the moonlight smiled the aged crone. 

And said, “ If living there thou com’st, alone 
Of all men yet, what thinkest thou to do ? 

Then verily thy journey shalt thou me, 

For whoso looks upon that face meets death, 

That in his sick heart freezes up his breath 
Until he has the semblance of a stone.” 

But Perseus answered straightly to the crone, 

“ O Mother, if the gods but give me grace 
To come anigh that fail and dreadful face, 

Well may they give me grace enough also 
Their enemy and mine to lay alow.” 

Now as he spake, the white moon risen high 
Burst from a cloud, and shone out gloriously, 

And down the sands her path of silver shone, 



250 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


And lighted full upon that ancient crone ; 

And there a marvel Perseus saw indeed, 

Because in face, in figure, and in weed, 

She wholly changed before his wondering eyes. 

Now tall and straight her figure did arise, 

That erst seemed bent with weight of many a yeai, 
And on her head a helmet shone out clear 
For the rent clout that held the grizzled head : 

With a fair breastplate was she furnished, 

From whence a hauberk to her knees fell down ; 

And underneath, a perfumed linen gown, 

O’erwrought with many-coloured Indian silk, 

Fell to her sandall’d feet, as white as milk. 

Grey-eyed she was, like amber shone her hair, 

Aloft she held her right arm round and bare, 

Whose hand upheld a spear-shaft mgh the steel. 

Unwonted trembling fear did Perseus feel 
When he beheld before him Pallas stand, 

And with bowed head he stood and outstretched hand 
But she smiled on him softly, and she said, 

“ Hold up again, O Perseus, thy fair head, 

Because thou art indeed my father's son, 

And in this quest that now thou goest upon 
Thou shalt not fail : I swear it by my head, 

And that black water all immortals dread. 

“ Look now before my feet, and thou shalt see 
Four helpful things the high gods lend to thee, 

Not willing thou shouldst journey forth in vain : 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 251 

Hermes himself, the many-eyed one’s bane, 

Gives these two-wing£d shoes, to carry thee 
Tireless on high o’er every land and sea ; 

This cap is his whose chariot caught away 
The maid of Enna from her gentle play ; 

And if thou art hard-pressed of any one 
Set this on thee, and so be seen of none : 

The halting god was craftsman of this blade. 

No better shone, when, making heaven afraid, 

The giants round our golden houses cried, 

For neither brass nor steel its edge can bide, 

Or flinty rocks or gleaming adamant : 

With these, indeed, but one thing dost thou want, 
And that I give thee ; little need’st thou reck 
Of those grey hopeless eyes, if round thy neck 
Thou hang’st this shield, that, hanging once on mine, 
In the grim giant’s hopeless eyes did shine. 

“ And now be strong, and fly forth with good heart 
Far northward, till thou seest the ice-walls part 
The weary sea from snow-clad lands and wan, 
Untrodden yet by any son of man. 

There dwell the Gorgons’ ancient sisters three 
Men call the Graise, who make shift to see 
With one eye, which they pass from hand to hand. 
Now make thyself unseen in this white land 
And snatch the eye, while crooning songs they sit, 
From hand to withered hand still passing it ; 

And let them buy it back by telling thee 
How thou shalt find within the western sea 
The unknown country where their sisters dwell. 



252 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


“ Which thing unto thee I myself would tell, 
But when with many a curse I set them there, 

I in my wrath by a great oath did swear 
I would not name again the country grey 
Wherein they dwell, with little light of day. 

“ Good speed, O Perseus ; make no tarrying, 
But straightiy set thyself to do this thing.” 

Now as his ears yet rung with words like these, 
And on the sand he sank upon his knees 
Before the goddess, there he knelt alone 
As in a dream ; but still the white moon shone 
Upon the sword, the shield, and cap and shoes, 
Which half afeard he was at first to use, 

Until the goddess gave him heart at last, 

And his own gear in haste aside he cast, 

And armed himself in that wild, lonely place : 
Then turning round, northward he set his face, 
And rose aloft and o’er the lands ’gan fly, 

Betwixt the green earth and the windy sky. 

Young was the night when first he left the sand 
Of small Seriphos, but right many lands 
Before the moon was down his winged feet 
Had borne him over, tireless, strong, and fleet. 
Then in the starlight black beneath him lay 
The German forests, where the wild swine play, 
Fearless of what Diana’s maids may do, 

Who ever have more will to wander through 
The warm and grassy woods of Thessaly, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACE IS I US. 


Or in Sicilian orange-gardens lie. 

But ere the hot sun on his arms ’gan shine 
He had passed o’er the Danube and the Rhine, 
And heard the faint sound of the northern sea ; 
But ever northward flew untiringly, 

Till Thule lay beneath his feet at last. 

Then o’er its desert icy hills he passed, 

And on beneath a feeble sun he flew, 

Till, rising like a wall, the cliffs he knew 
That Pallas told him of : the sun was high. 

But on the bleak ice shone but wretchedly ; 

Pale blue the great mass was, and cold enow ; 
Grey tattered moss hung from its jagged brow, 

No wind was there at all, though ever beat 
The leaden tideless sea against its feet. 

Then lighted Perseus on that dreary land, 

And when on the white plain his feet did stand 
He saw no sign of either beast or man, 

Except that near by rose a palace wan, 

Built of some metal that he could not name. 
Thither he went, and to a great door came 
That stood wide open, so without a word 
He entered in, and drew his deadly sword, 
Though neither sword or man might one behold 
More than folk see their death ere they grow old. 

So having entered, through a cloister grey 
With cautious steps and slow he took his wav 
At end whereof he found a mighty hall ; 



254 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Where, bare of hangings, a white marble wall 
And milk-white pillars held the roof aloft, 

And nothing was therein of fair or soft ; 

And at one end, upon a dais high, 

There sat the crones that had the single eye, 

Clad in blue sweeping cloak and snow-white gown , 
While o’er their backs their straight white hair huT.g 
down 

In long thin locks ; dreadful their faces were 
Carved all about with wrinkles of despair ; 

And as they sat they crooned a dreary song, 
Complaining that their lives should last so long, 

In that sad place that no one came anear, 

In that wan place desert of hope and fear; 

And singing, still they rocked their bodies bent, 

And ever each to each the eye they sent 

Awhile stood Perseus gazing on the three 
Then sheathed his sword, and toward them warily 
He went, and from the last one snatched the eye, 
Who, feeling it gone from her, with a cry 
Sprung up and said, c< 0 sisters, he is here 
That we were warned so long ago to fear, 

And venly he has the eye of me.” 

Then those three, thinking they no more should see 
What feeble light the sun could show them there, 

And that of all joys now their life was bare. 

Began a wailing and lamenting sore 
That they were worse than ever heretofore. 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 255 

Then Perseus cried, “ Unseen am I indeed, 

But yet a mortal man, who have a need 
Your wisdom can make good, if so ye will ; 

Now neither do I wish you any ill, 

Nor this your treasure will I keep from you 
If ye will tell me what I needs must do 
To gain, upon the earth or under it, 

The dreary country where your sisters sit i 
Of whom, as wise men say, the one is fair 
As any goddess, but with snaky hair 
And body that shall perish on some day, 

While the two others ancient are, and grey 
As ye be, but shall see the whole world die.'* 

Then said they, “ Rash man, give us back the eye 
Or rue this day, for wretched as we are, 

Beholding not fair peace or godlike war, 

Or any of the deeds of men at all, 

Yet are we strong, and on thy head shall fall 

Our heavy curses, and but dismally 

Thy life shall pass until thou com’st to die.” 

“ Make no delay,” he said, “ to do this thing, 

Or this your cherished sight I soon shall fling 
Into the sea, or bum it up with fire.” 

*' What else, what else, but this wilt thou desire?” 
They said, “ Wilt thou have long youth at our hands ? 
Or wilt thou be the king of lovely lands ? 

Or store up wealth to lead thy life in mirth ? 

Or wilt thou have the beauty of the earth 
With all her kindness for thy very own ? 



256 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Choose what thou wilt except this thing alone.” 

“ Nav,” said he, “ for nought else I left my home, 
For this sole knowledge hither am I come, 

Not all unholpen of the gods above ; 

Nor yet shall words my stedfast purpose move.” 

Then with that last word did he hold his peace, 
And they no less from wailing words did cease. 
Hoping that in that silence he might think 
Of their dread words and from the evils shrink 
Wherewith they threatened him ; but in his hear* 
Most godlike courage fit for such a part 
The white-armed goddess of the loom had set 
Nor in that land her help did he forget 

Withal, when many an hour had now gone by, 
Together did the awesome sisters cry, 

' e O man ! O man ! hear that which thou wouid’st kno 
And with thy knowledge let the dread curse go. 
Which us hath cursed most of all those who dwell 
Upon this wretched fire-concealing shell. 

Slave of the cruel gods ! go, get ye hence, 

And storing deeds for fruitless penitence, 

Go east, as though in Scythia were thine home, 

But when unto the wind-beat seas ye come 
Stop short, and turn round to the south again 
Until ye reach the western land of Spain ; 

Then o’er the straits ye soon shall come to be 
Betwixt the ocean and the inner sea, 

Thenceforth go westward even as thou mayst 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 257 

Until ye find a dark land long laid waste. 

Where green cliffs rise from out an inky sea- 
But no green leaf may grow on bush or tree. 

No sun makes day there, no moon lighteth night, 

The long years there must pass in grey twilight *, 
There dwell our sisters, walking dismally, 

Between the dull-brown caverns and the sea. 

“ Tool in the hand of god ! do there thy might ! 
Nor fall like us, nor strive for peace and right ; 

But give our own unto us and be gone, 

And leave us to our misery all alone.” 

Then straight he put the eye into the hand 
Of her that spoke, and turned from that white land 
Leaving them singing their grim song again 
But flying forth he came at last to Spain, 

And so unto the southern end of it, 

And then with restless wings due west did flit 
For many a day across the sea he flew, 

That lay beneath him clear enough and blue, 

Until at last rose such a thick grey mist, 

That of what lay beneath him nought he wist; 

But still through this he flew a night and day 
Hearkening the washing of the watery way, 

Unseen : but when, at ending of the night, 

The mist was gone and grey sea came in sight, 

He thought that he had reached another world ; 
This way and that the leaden seas were hurled, 

s 



253 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Moved by no wind, but by some unseen power ; 
Twilight it was and still his feet dropped lower, 

As through the thickening, dim hot air he passed, 
Until he feared to reach the sea at last 
But even as his feet dragged in the sea, 

He, praying to the goddess fervently, 

Felt her good help, for soon he rose again 
Three fathoms up, and flew with lessened pain ; 

And looking through the dimness could behold 
The wretched land whereof the sisters told. 

And soon could see how down the green cliffs fell 
A yellow stream, that from some inland well 
Arose, and through the land ran sluggishly, 

Until it poured with dull plash in the sea 
Like molten lead ; and nigher as he came 
He saw great birds, whose kind he could not name, 
That whirling noiselessly about did seem 
To seek a prey within that leaden stream ; 

And drawing nigher yet, at last he saw 
That many of them held, with beak or daw, 

Great snakes they tore still flying through the air. 
Then making for the cliff and lighting there 
He saw, indeed, that tawny stream and dull 
Of intertwining writhen snakes was full, 

So, with a shudder, thence he turned away, 

And through the untrodden land he took his way. 

Now cave-pierced rocks there rose up everywhere, 
And gaunt old trees, of leaves and fruit all bare ; 
And midst this wretchedness a mighty hall, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS . 259 

Whose great stones made a black and shining wall ; 
The doors were open, and thence came a ciy 
Of one in anguish wailing bitterly ; 

Then o’er its threshold passed the son of Jove, 

Well shielded by the grey-eyed Maiden’s love. 

Now there he saw two women bent and old, 
like to those three that north he did behold, 

There were they sitting well-nigh motionless, 

Their eyes grown stony with their long distress, 
Staring at nought, and still no sound they made, 

And on their knees their wrinkled hands were laid. 

But a third woman paced about the hall, 

And ever turned her head from wall to wall 
And moaned aloud, and shrieked in her despair : 
Because the golden tresses of her hair 
Were moved by writhing snakes from side to side, 
That in their writhing oftentimes would glide 
On to her breast, or shuddering shoulders white ; 

Or, falling down, the hideous things would light 
Upon her feet, and crawling thence would twine 
Their slimy folds about her ankles fine. 

But in a thin red garment was she clad, 

And round her waist a jewelled band she had, 

The gift of Neptune on the fatal day 
When fate her happiness first put away. 

So there awhile unseen did Perseus stand, 

With softening heart, and doubtful trembling hand 
Laid on his sword-hilt, muttering, “ Would that she 
Had never turned her woeful face to me.” 



s6o 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


But therewith Pallas smote him with this thought, 
“ Does she desire to live, who has been brought 
Into such utter woe and misery, 

Wherefrom no god or man can set her free, 

Since Pallas’ dreadful vow shall bind her fast, 

Till earth and heaven are gone, and all is past ? 
— And yet, would God the thing were at an end.’*' 
Then with that word, he saw her stop and rend 
The raiment from her tender breast and soft, 

And with a great cry lift her arms aloft ; 

Then on her breast her head sank, as she said, 

“ O ye, be merciful, and strike me dead I 
How many an one cries unto you to live, 

■Which gift ye find no little thing to give, 

O give it now to such, and unto me 
That other gift from which all people flee ! 

“ O was it not enough to take away 
The flowery meadows and the light of day? 

Or not enough to take away from me 
The once-loved faces that I used to see ; 

To take away sweet sounds and melodies, 

The song of birds, the rustle of the trees ; 

To make the prattle of the children cease, 

And wrap my soul in shadowy hollow peace, 
Devoid of longing ? Ah, no, not for me ! 

For those who die your friends this rest shall be \ 
For me no rest from shame and sore distress, 

For me no moment of forgetfulness ; 

For me a soul that still might love and hate, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 261 


Shut in this fearful land and desolate, 

Changed by mine eyes to horror and to stone , 
For me perpetual anguish all alone, 

Midst many a tormenting misery, 

Because I know not if I e’er shall die. 

“ And yet, and yet, thee will I pray unto, 

Thou dweller in the shifting halls of blue, 
Fathoms beneath the treacherous bridge of lands. 
Call now to mind that day upon the sands, 

Hard by the house of Pallas white and cold, 
Where hidden in some wave thou didst behold 
This body, fearless of the cold grey sea, 

And dowered as yet with fresh virginity. 

“ How many things thou promisedst me then ! 
Who among all the daughters of great men 
Should be like me ? what sweet and happy life ! 
What peace, if all the world should be at strife, 
Thou promisedst me then ! Lay all aside, 

And give unto the great Earth-Shaker’s bride 
That which the wretch shut up in prison drear, 
Deprived of all, yet ceases not to fear ; 

That which all men fear more than all distress, 
The rest of death, and dull forgetfulness.” 

Her constant woeful prayer was heard at last, 
For now behind her unseen Perseus passed, 

And silently whirled the great sword around ; 

And when it fell, she fell upon the ground. 

And felt no more of all her bitter pain. 



26 2 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


But from their seats rose up with curses vain 
The two immortals when they saw her fall 
Headless upon the floor, and loud ’gan call 
On those that came not, because far away 
Their friends and kindred were upon that day. 
Then to and fro about the hall they ran 
To find the slayer, were he god or man, 

And when unseen from out the place he drew, 
Upon the unhappy corpse, with wails, they threw 
Their wretched and immortal bodies old : 

But when the one the other did behold, 

Alive and hideous there before her eyes, 

Such anguish for the past time would arise 
Within their hearts, that the lone hall would ring 
With dreadful shrieks of many an impious thing. 

Yet of their woe but little Perseus knew, 

As with a stout heart south-east still he flew. 


N OW at his side a -wallet Perseus bore, 

With threads of yellow gold embroidered o er, 
Shuddering, therein he laid the fearful head, 

Lest he unwitting yet might join the dead, 

Or those he loved by sight of it be slain. 

But strong fate led him to the Lybian plain, 

Where, at the ending of a sultry day, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 263 


A palace huge and fair beneath him lay, 

Whose roofs with silver plates were covered o’er ; 
Then lighting down by its enormous door, 

He heard unmeasured sounds of revelry, 

And thought, < A fair place this will be for me, 

Who lack both food and drink, and rest this night* 
So turning to the ruddy flood of light, 

Up the huge steps he toiled unto the hall ; 

But even as his eager foot did fall 
Upon the threshold, such a mocking shout 
Rang in his ears as Etna sendeth out 
When, at the day’s end, round the stithy cold 
The Cyclops some unmeasured banquet hold. 

And monstrous men could he see sitting there, 
Burnt by the sun, with length of straight back hair, 
And taller far than men are wont to be ; 

And at a gold-strewn dais could he see 
A mighty King, a fearful man to face, 
Brown-skinned and black-haired, of the giants’ race, 
Who seeing him, with thundering voice ’gan call, 

“ O Stranger, come forthwith into the hall, 

Atlas would see thee !” Forth stood Perseus then, 
And going ’twixt the rows of uncouth men 
Seemed but a pigmy ; but his heart was great, 

And vain is might against the stroke of fate. 

Then the King cried, “ Who art thou, little one? 
Surely in thy land weak must be the sun 
If there are bred such tender folk as thou : 

May the gods grant such men are few enow J 



264 THE earthly paradise. 

Art thou a king’s son ?” Loud he laughed withal, 
And shouts of laughter rang throughout the hall, 
Like dattering thunder on a July night 
But Perseus quailed not “ Little were my might 7 
He said, “ if helpless on the earth I were ; 

But to the equal gods my life is dear, 

And certes victory over Jove’s own son 
By earthly men shall not be lightly won. 

So spake he, moving inward from the door, 

But louder laughed the black King than before, 

And all his people shouted at his beck; 

Therewith he cried, “ Break now this Prince’s neck, 
And take him forth and hang him up straightway 
Before my door, that henceforth from this day 
Pigmies and jesters may take better heed, 

Lest at our hands they gain a liar’s meed.” 

Then started up two huge men from the board, 
And Perseus, seeing them come, half drew his sword, 
Looking this way and that ; but in a while, 

Upon his wallet with a deadly smile 

He set his hand, and forth the head he drew, 

Dead, white midst golden hair, where serpents blue 
Yet dangled dead ; and ere they stooped to take 
His outstretched arms, before them he did shake 
The dreadful thing : then stopped they suddenly, 
Stone dead, without a wound or any cry. 

Then toward the King he held aloft the head, 

And as he stiffened cried at him, and said, 

“ O King 1 when such a gift I bring to thee, 



THE DOOM OF KING A CKISIU& 26$ 

Wilt thou be dumb and neither hear nor see? 

Listen how sing thy men, and in thy hall 
How swift the merry dancers’ feet do fall !” 

For now these, thinking him some god to be, 

Cried in their fear, and made great haste to flee, 
Crowding about the great doors of the hall, 

Until not one was left of great or small, 

But the dead king, and those that there had died. — 
— Lo, in such way Medusa’s head was tried ! 

But when the living giant-folk were gone, 

And with the dead men there he stood alone, 

He turned him to the food that thereby lay, 

And ate and drank with none to say him nay ; 

And on the floor at last he laid him down, 

Midst heaps of unknown tawny skins and brown. 

There all the night in dreamless sleep he lay, 

But rose again at the first streak of day, 

And looking round about rejoiced to see 
The uncouth image of his enemy, 

Silent for ever, with wide mouth agape 

E’en as he died ; and thought, “ Who now shall ’scape 

When I am angry, while this gift I have ? 

How well my needy lovers I may save 
While this dread thing still hangeth by my side I” 

Then out he passed : a plain burnt up, and wide, 
He saw before him, bare of any trees, 

And much he longed for the green dashing seas, 

And merry winds of the sweet island shore, 

Fain of the gull’s cry, for the lion’s roar. 



266 . THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Yet, glad at heart, he lifted up his feet 
From the parched earth, and soon the air did beat, 
Going north-east, and flew forth all the day, 

And when the night fell still was on the way ; 

And many a sandy plain did he pass o’er, 

And many a dry much-trodden river shore, 

Where thick the thirsty beasts stood in the night 
The stealthy leopard saw him with affright, 

As whining from the thicket it crept out ; 

The lion drew back at his sudden shout 
From off the carcass of some slaughtered beast ; 

And the thin jackals waiting for the feast 
Stinted their hungry howls as he passed by; 

And black men sleeping, as he came anigh 
Dreamed ugly dreams, and reached their hands to seize 
The spear or sword that lay across their knees. 

So at the last the sea before him lay, 

But not for that did he make any stay, 

But flew on till the night began to wane, 

And the grey sea was blue and green again ; 

Until the sunlight on his wings shone fair, 

And turned to red the gold locks of his hair. 

Then in a little while he saw no land, 

But all was heaving sea on every hand, 

Driven this way and that way by the wind. 

Still fast he flew, thinking some coast to find. 

And so, about the middle of the day, 

Far to the east a land before him lay, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 267 

And when unto it he was come anigh 
He saw the sea beat on black cliffs and high, 

With green grass growing on the tops of them, 

Binding them round as gold a garment’s hem. 

Then slowly alongside thereof he flew 
If haply by some sign the land he knew, 

Until a ness he reached, whereon there stood 
A tower new-built of mighty beams of wood; 

So nigh he came that, unseen, he could see 
Pale haggard faces peering anxiously 
From out its well-barred windows that looked forth 
Into a bay that lay upon the north ; 

But inland over moveless waves of down 
Shone the white walls of some great royal town. 

Now underneath the scarped cliffs of the bay 
From horn to horn a belt of sand there lay 
Fast lessening as the flood-tide swallowed it, 

There all about did the sea-swallows flit, 

And from the black rocks yellow hawks flew down, 
And cormorants fished amidst the sea-weed brown, 

Or ©n the low rocks nigh unto the sea, 

While over all the fresh wind merrily 

Blew from the sea, and o’er the pale blue sky 

Thin clouds were stretched the way the wind went by 

And forward did the mighty waters press 

As though they loved the green earth’s stedfastness. 

Nought slept, but everything was bright and fair 

Beneath the bright sun and the noon-day air. 



268 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Now hovering there, he seemed to hear a sound 
Unlike the sea-bird’s cry, and, looking round, 

He saw a figure standing motionless 
Beneath the cliff, midway ’twixt ness and ness. 

And as the wind lull’d heard that cry again, 

That sounded like the wail of one in pain ; 
Wondering thereat, and seeking marvels new 
He lighted down, and toward the place he drew, 
And made invisible by Pallas’ aid, 

He came within the scarped cliff’s purple shade, 

And found a woman standing lonely there, 

Naked, except for tresses of her hair 
That o’er her white limbs by the breeze were wound. 
And brazen chains her weary arms that bound 
Unto the sea-beat overhanging rock, 

As though her golden-crowned head to mock. 

But nigh her feet upon the sand there lay 
Rich raiment that had covered her that day, 

Worthy to be the ransom of a king, 

Unworthy round such loveliness to cling. 

Alas, alas ! no bridal play this was, 

The tremors that throughout her limbs did pass, 

Her restless eyes, the catching of her breath, 

Were but the work of the cold hand of death. 

She waited for, midst untold miseries, 

As, now with head cast back, and close-shut eyes. 
She wailed aloud, and now all spent with woe 
Stared out across the rising sea, as though 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 269 


She deemed each minute brought the end anigh 
For which in her despair she needs must cry. 

Then unseen Perseus stole anigh the maid, 

And love upon his heart a soft hand laid, 

And tender pity rent it for her pain, 

Nor yet an eager cry could he refrain, 

As now, transformed by that piteous sight, 

Grown like unto a god for pride and might, 

Down on the sand the mystic cap he cast 
And stood before her with flushed face at last, 

And grey eyes glittering with his great desire 
Beneath his hair, that like a harmless fire 
Blown by the wind shone in her hopeless eyes. 

But she, all rigid -with her first surprise, 

Ceasing her wailing as she heard his cry, 

Stared at him, dumb with fear and misery, 

Shrunk closer yet unto the rocky place 

And writhed her bound hands as to hide her face ; 

But sudden love his heart did so constrain, 

With open mouth he strove to speak in vain 
And from his heart the hot tears ’gan to rise ; 

But she midst fear beheld his kind grey eyes, 

And then, as hope came glimmering through her dread, 
In a weak voice he scarce could hear, she said, 

“■ O Death ! if thou hast risen from the sea, 

Sent by the gods to end this misery, 

I thank them that thou comest in this form , 

Who rather thought to see a hideous worm 



270 THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 

Come trailing up the sands from out the deep. 

Or suddenly swing over from the steep 
To lap me in his folds, and bone by bone 
Crush all my body : come then, with no moan, 

Will I make ready now to leave the light. 

“ But yet — thy face is wonderful and bright ; 

Art thou a god? Ah, then be kind to me ! 

Is there no valley far off from the sea 
Where I may live alone, afar from strife 
Nor anger any god with my poor life ? 

Or do the gods delight in misery 

And art thou come to mock me ere I die? 

Alas, must they be pitiless, when they 
Fear not the hopeless slayer of the day ! 

Speak, speak I what meanest thou by that sad smile ? 

“ O, if the gods could be but men awhile 
And learn such fearful things unspeakable 
As I have learned this mom, what man can tell 
What golden age might wrap the world again ? 

Ah, dost thou love me, is my speech not vain ? 

Did not my beauty perish on this mom 
Dost thou not kiss me now for very scorn ? 

Alas, my shame, I cannot flee from thee 1 
Alas, my sin ! no green-stemmed laurel tree 
Shall mock thy grasp, no misty mountain stream 
Shall wake thee shuddering from a lovely dream, 

No helping god shall hear, but thou alone l — 

Help me, I faint 1 I see not ! art thou gone ? 

Alas ! thy lips were warm upon my brow, 



THE BOOM OF KING A CFISIUS. 21 1 

What good deed will it be to leave me now ! 

“ Oh, yet I feel thy kind and tender hand 
On my chained wrist, and thou wilt find some land 
Where I may live a little, free from fear 

“ And yet, and yet, if thou hast sought me here 
Being but a man, no manly thing it is, 

Nor hope thou from henceforth to live in bliss, 

If here thou wrongest me, who am but dead.” 

Then as she might she hung adown her head, 

Her bosom heaved with sobs, and from her eyes 
Long dried amidst those hopeless miseries 
Unchecked the salt tears o’er her bosom ran 
As love and shame their varying strife began. 

But overwhelmed with pity, mad with love 
Stammering, nigh weeping spoke the son of Jove, — 

“ Alas, what land is this, where such as thou 
Are thus tormented ? look upon me now, 

And cease thy fear ! no evil man am I, 

No cruel god to mock thy misery ; 

But the gods help me, and their unmoved will 
Has sent me here to save thee from some ill, 

I know not what ; to give thee rest from this, 

And unto me unutterable bliss, 

If from a man thou takest not away 
The gift thou gavest to a god to-day ; 

But I may be a very god to thee, 

Because the gods are helpful unto me, 

Nor would I fear them aught if thou wert nigh* 

Since unto each it happeneth once to die. 



272 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


“Speak not, sweet maid, till I have loosed thine hands 
From out the grasp of these unworthy bands.” 

So straight, and ere her lips could frame a word, 
From out its sheath he drew the gleaming sword, 

And while she shut her dazzled eyes for fear 
To see the glittering marvel draw anear, 

Unto her side her weary arms fell freed ; 

Then must she shrink away, for now indeed 
With rest and hope and growing love there came 
Remembrance of her helplessness and shame, 

Weeping she said, “ My fate is but to die, 

Forget the wild words of my misery, 

Take a poor maiden’s thanks, and leave this placa 
Nor for thy pity die before my face, 

As verily thou wilt if thou stay’st here ; 

Because, however free thou art from fear, 

What hopest thou against this beast to do. 

My death, and thine unconquerable foe P 
When all a kingdom’s strength has had no hope 
With this strange horror, God-endowed, to cope, 

But deemed it good to give up one poor maid 
Unto his wrath, who makes the world afraid.” 

“ Nay,” said he, “but thy fate shall be my fate, 

And on these sands thy bane will I await, 

Though I know nought of all his mightiness ; 

For scarcely yet a man, I none the less 
Such things have done as make me now a name, 

Nor can I live a loveless life of shame, 

Or leave thee now, this day’s most god-like gift, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS . 273 
Into some unknown mortal pain to drift.” 

She, hunying as he spoke, with trembling hands 
Had lifted up her raiment from the sands, 

And yet therewith she was not well arrayed, 

Before she turned round, ghastly white, and said, 

“ Look seaward and behold, my death draw nigh, 

Not thine — not thine — but kiss me ere I die , 

Alas ! how many things I had to tell, 

For certainly I should have loved thee well.” 

He came to her and kissed her as she sank 
Into his arms, and from the horror shrank, 

Clinging to him, scarce knowing he was there ; 

But through the diifting wonder of her hair. 

Amidst his pity, he beheld the sea, 

And saw a huge wave rising mightily 
Above the smaller breakers of the shore, 

Which in its green breast for a minute bore 
A nameless horror, that it cast aland, 

And left, a huge mass on the oozing sand, 

That scarcely seemed a living thing to be, 

Until at last those twain it seemed to see, 

And gathering up its strange limbs, towards them passed 
And therewithal a dismal trumpet-blast 
Rang from the tower, and from the distant town 
The wind in answer brought loud wails adown. 

Then Perseus gently put the maid from him, 

Who sank down shivering in her every limb, 

Silent despite herself for fear and woe, 


x 



274 the EARTHL y PARADISE. 

As down the beach he ran to meet the foe. 

But he, beholding Jove’s son drawing near, 

A great black fold against him did uprear, 

Maned with grey tufts of hair, as some old tree 
Hung round with moss, in lands where vapours be ; 
From his bare skull his red eyes glowed like flame. 
And from his open mouth a sound there came, 
Strident and hideous, that still louder grew 
As that rare sight of one in arms he knew : 

But godlike, fearless, burning with desire, 

The adamant jaws and lidless eyes of fire 
Did Perseus mock, and lightly leapt aside 
As forward did the torture-chamber glide 
Of his huge head, and ere the beast could turn, 

One moment bright did blue-edged Herpe bum, 
The next was quenched in the black flow of blood ; 
Then in confused folds the hero stood, 

His bright face shadowed by the jaws of death. 

His hair blown backward by the poisonous breath ; 
But all that passed, like lightning-lighted street 
In the dark night, as the blue blade did meet 
The wrinkled neck, and with no faltering stroke. 
Like a god’s hand the fell enchantment broke. 

And then again in place of crash and roar, 

He heard the shallow breakers on the shore, 

And o’er his head the sea-gull’s plaintive cry. 
Careless as gods for who might live or die. 

Then Perseus from the slimy loathsome coil 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 275 

Drew out his feet, and then with little toil 
Smote off the head, the terror of the lands, 

And, dragging it along, went up the sands, 

Shouting aloud for joy, “Arise, arise, 

O thou whose name I know not! Ope thine eyes 
To see the gift, that I, first seen to-day, 

Am hastening now before thy feet to lay 1 
Look up, look up ! What shall thy sweet face be, 
That I have seen amidst such misery, 

When thou at last beginnest to rejoice.” 

Slowly she rose, her burdened heart found voice 
In sobs and murmurs inarticulate, 

And clean forgetting all the sport of fate, 

She scarce could think that she should ever die, 

As locked in fearless, loving, straight embrace, 

They made a heaven of that lone sandy place. 

Then on a rock smoothed by the washing sea 
They sat, and eyed each other lovingly. 

And few words at the first the maiden said, 

So wrapped she was in all the goodlihead 
Of her new life made doubly happy now : 

For her alone the sea-breeze seemed to blow, 

For her in music did the white surf fall, 

For her alone the wheeling birds did call 
Over the shallows, and the sky for her 
Was set with white clouds, far away and clear 5 
E’en as her love, this strong and lovely one 
Who held her hand, was but for her alone. 

But after loving silence for a while. 



276 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


She, turning round to him her heavenly smile, 

Said, “ Tell me, O my love, what name is thine, 
What mother brought thee forth so nigh divine, 
Whence art thou come to take away my shame ? ” 

Then said he, “ Fair love, Perseus is my name. 
Not known of men, though that may come to be : 
And her that bore me men call Danae, 

And tales of my begetting people tell 
And call my father, Jove : but it befell 
Unto my mother, when I first was bom, 

That she, cast out upon the sea, forlorn 
Of help of men, unto Seriphos came ; 

And there she dwells as now, not gathering shame. 
But called a Queen ; and thence I come indeed. 
Sent by the gods to help thee in thy need.” 

Then he began and told her everything 
Down to the slaying of the monstrous king, 

She listening to him meanwhile, glad at heart 
That he had played so fair and great a part 
But all being told, she said, “This salt pool nigh 
Left by the tide, now mirrors well the sky, 

So smooth it is, and now I stand aneax 
Canst thou not see my foolish visage dear, 

Yea, e’en the little gems upon my hands? 

May I not see this marvel of the lands 
So mirrored, and yet live — make no delay 
The sea is pouring fast into the bay, 

And we must soon be gone.” 


14 Look down,” he said, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 277 

“ And take good heed thou tumest not thine head.” 
Then gazing down, with shuddering dread and awe, 
Over her imaged shoulder, soon she saw 
The head rise up, so beautiful and dread, 

That, white and ghastly, yet seemed scarcely dead 
Beside the image of her own fair face, 

As, daring not to move from off the place, 

But trembling sore, she cried, “ Enough, O love ! 
What man shall doubt thou art the son of Jove ; 

I think thou wilt not die then with her hand 
She hid her eyes, and trembling did she stand 
Until she felt his lips upon her cheek ; 

Then turning round, with anxious eyes and meek. 

She gazed upon him, and some doubtful thought 
Up to her brow the tender colour brought, 

And sinking somewhat down her golden head, 
Stammering a little now these words she said, — 

“ O godlike man, thou dost not ask my name, 

Or why folk gave me up to death and shame ; 

Dost thou not dread I am some sorceress, 

Whose evil deeds well earned me that distress ?” 

“Tell me thy name,” he said ; “ yet as for thee 
I deem that thou wert bound beside the sea, 

Because the gods would have the dearest thing 
Which thy land held for its own ransoming.” 

She said, “ O love, the sea is rising fast, 

And time it is that we henceforth were past; 

The only path that leadeth to the down 
Is far, and thence a good way is the town ; 



278 THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


Wend we, and on our journey will I tell 

How all these things, now come to nought, befell.” 

“ Lead me,” he said, and lifted from the sand 
The monster’s head ; and therewith, hand in hand, 
Together underneath the cliffs they went, 

The while she told her tale to this intent 

“ This is the Syrian land, this town anigh 
Is Joppa, and Andromeda am I, 

Daughter of him who holds the sceptre there, 

King Cepheus and Cassiope the fair. 

“ She, smit by cruel madness, brought ill fate 
Upon the land to make it desolate ; 

For by the place whence thou deliveredst me, 

An altar to the daughters of the sea 
Erewhile there stood, and we in solemn wise, 

Unto the maids were wont to sacrifice, 

And give them gifts of honey, oil, and wine, 

That we might have the love of folk divine ; 

And so it chanced that on a certain day, 

When from that place the sea was ebbed away. 
Upon the firm sands I and many a maid 
About that altar went, while the flutes played 
Such notes as sea-folk love ; and as we went 
Upon the wind rich incense-clouds we sent 
About the hallowed stone, whereon there lay 
Fruits of the earth for them to bear away ; 

Thus did we maids, as we were wont to do, 

And watchmg us, as was their wont also, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 279 

Our mothers stood, my own amidst the rest 
“ But ere the rites were done, as one possessed 
She cried aloud, £ Alas, what do we now, 

Such honour unto unseen folk to show ! 

To spend our goods, our labour, and our lives, 

In serving these the careless sea-wind drives 
Hither and thither through the booming seas ; 

While thou Andromeda art queen of these, 

And in thy limbs such lovely godhead moves, 

That thou shalt be new Mother of the Loves ; 

Thou shalt not die ! Go, child, and sit alone, 

And take our homage on thy golden throne ; 

And I that bore thee will but be thy slave, 

Nor shall another any worship have.’ 

“ Trembling awhile we stood with heads downcast, 
To hear those words, then from the beach we passed ; 
And sick at heart each went unto her home 
Expecting when the fearful death should come, 

Like those of Thebes, who, smit by arrows, fell 
Before the feet of her who loved too well. 

“ And yet stayed not my mother’s madness there ; 
She caused men make a silver image fair 
Of me unhappy, round the base she writ 
* Fairest of all] and bade men carry it, 

With flowers and music, down unto the sea. 

Who on the altar fixed it solidly 
Against the beating of the winds and waves. 

“ But we, expecting now no quiet graves. 

Trembled at every murmur of the night, 



28 o 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


And if a cloud should hide the noon sun bright 
Grew faint with terror; yet the days went by 
Harmless above our great iniquity, 

Until one wretched mom I woke to hear, 

Down in the street loud wails and cries of fear, 
And my heart died within me, nor durst I 
Ask for the reason of that bitter cry, 

Though soon I knew it — nigh unto the sea 
Were gathered folk for some festivity ; 

When, at the happiest moment of their feast, 

Forth from the deep there came a fearful beast 
No man could name, who quickly snatched away 
Their fairest maid, and with small pain did slay 
Such men as there in arms before him stood; 

For unto him was steel as rotten wood, 

And darts as straw — nor grew the story old, 

Day after day e’en such a tale was told. 

— Kiss me, my love ! I grow afraid again; 

Kiss me amid the memory of my pain. 

Draw me to thee, that I thine arms may feel, 

A better help tnan triple brass or steel ! 

“Alas, love I folk began to look on me 
With angry eyes, and mutter gloomily, 

As pale and trembling through the streets I passed 
And from the heavy thunder-cloud, at last 
The dreadful lightning quivered through the air : 
For on a day the people filled the square 
With arms and tumult, and my name I heard. 

But heard no more ; for, shuddering and afeard, 



THE DOOM OF KING A CRTS I US. 28 1 


Unto my far-off quiet bower I fled, 

And from that moment deemed myself but dead. 
How the time passed I know not, what they did 
I know not now; for like a quail half hid, 

When the hawk’s pinions shade the sun from him, 
Crouching adown, I felt my life wax dim. 

“ The gods have made us mighty certainly 
That we can bear such things and yet not die. 

This mom — Ah, love, and was it yet this year, 
Wherein thou earnest to me, kind and dear? — 

This mom they brought me forth, they did on me 
This mocking raiment bright with bravery ; 

They mocked my head with gold, with gems my feet, 
My heart with lovely songs and music sweet 
Thou wouldst have wept to see me led along 
Amidst that dreary pomp with flowers and song, 

But if folk wept, how could I note it then ; 

Most vain to me were grown all ways of men. 

“ They brought me to mine image on the sands, 
They took it down, they bore it in their hands 
To deck mine empty tomb, I think, and then — 

O cruel is the fearfiilness of men, 

Striving a little while to ’scape death’s pain ! — 

My naked body they spared not to chain, 

Lest I should ’scape the death from which they fled, 
Then left me there alone and shamed — and dead — 
While to his home each went again, to live 
Such vain forgetful life as fate might give. 



282 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

“ 0 love, to think that love can pass away, 

That, soon or late, to us shall come a day 
When this shall be forgotten 1 e’en this kiss 
That makes us now forget the high God’s bliss, 

And sons of men with all their miseries.” 

“ Turn round,” he said, “and let thy well-loved eyes 
Behold the sea from this high grassy hill, 

And thou shalt see the risen waves now fill 
The bay from horn to horn of it : no more 
Thy footprints bless the shell-strewn sandy shore, 

The vale the monster scooped as ’neath my sword 
He writhed, the black stream that from out him poured. 
The rock we sat on, and the pool wherein 
Thou sawest the gods’ revenge for heedless sin — 

IIow the green ripples of the shallow sea 
Cover the strife and passion peacefully, 

Nor lack the hallowing of the low broad sun. 

“ So has love stolen upon us, lovely one, 

And quenched our old lives in this new delight, 

And if thou needs must think of that dull night 
That creepeth on no otherwise than this, 

Yet for that thought hold closer to thy bliss, 

Come nigher, come 1 forget the more thy pain.” 

So there of all love’s feasting were they fain, 

Words fail to tell the joyance that they had, 

And with what words they made each other glad. 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRIS1US. 283 


S O, as it drew to ending of the day, 

Unto the city did they take their way. 

And when they stood before its walls at last 
They found the heavy gate thereof shut fast 
And no one on the walls for very shame ; 

Then to the wicket straightway Perseus came, 

And down the monster’s grinning head he threw, 
While on the horn a mighty blast he blew, 

But no one answered ; then he cried aloud, 

“ Come forth, O warders, and no more shrink cowed 
Behind your battlements ! one man alone 
Has dared to do what thousands have not done, 
And the great beast besides the sea lies dead : 

Come forth, come forth ! and gaze upon this head !” 

Then opened was the door a little way, 

And one peered forth and saw him with the may, 
And turning round some joyous words he cried 
Unto the rest, who oped the great gates wide, 

And through them Perseus the saved maiden led. 
Then as the folk cast eyes upon the head, 

They stopped their shouts to gaze thereon with fear, 
And timidly the women drew anear ; 

But soon, beholding Perseus’ godlike grace, 

His mighty limbs, and flushed and happy face, 

Cried out unto the maid, “ 0 happy thou, 

Who art well paid for every trouble now, 

In winning such a godlike man as this.” 



284 THE EARTRL V PARADISE. 

And many there were fain his skirts to kiss ; 

But he smiled down on them, and said, “ Rejoice, 

O girls, indeed, but yet lift heart and voice 
Unto the gods to-day, and not to me ! 

For they it was who sent me to this sea. 

And first of all fail not to bless the Maid 
Through whom it came that I was not afraid.” 

So through the streets they went, and quickly spread 
News that the terror of the land was dead. 

And folk thronged round to see the twain go by, 

Or went before with flowers and minstrelsy, 

Rejoicing for the slaying of their shame. 

Thus harbingedd the happy lovers came 
Unto King Cepheus’ royal house of gold. 

To whom by this the joyful cries had told 
That all was changed and still his days were good, 

So, eager in his well-built porch he stood. 

No longer now in mournful raiment clad. 

But when they met, then were those two more glad 
Than words can say ; there came her mother, too, 
And round about her neck fair arms she threw, 
Weeping for joy; and all about the King 
The great men stood and eyed the fearful thing 
That lay at Perseus’ feet : then the King said, 

“ O thou, who on this day hast saved my maid, 

Wilt thou rule half my kingdom from to-day? 

Or wilt thou carry half my wealth away? 

Or in some temple shall we honour thee, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACFTSIUS . 285 

Setting thine image up beside the sea? 

Ask what thou wilt before these mighty lords, 

And straightway is it thine without more words.” 

Then in his heart laughed Perseus : and, “ O King,” 
He said, “ I ask indeed a mighty thing ; 

Yet neither will I take thy wealth away, 

Or make thee less a king than on this day 
And in no temple shall mine image stand 
To look upon the sea that beats the land, 

For fear the God who now is friend to me 
Thereby should come to be mine enemy ; 

And yet on this day am I grown so bold, 

I ask a greater gift than power or gold ; 

Give me thy maiden saved, to be my bride, 

And let me go, because the world is wide, 

And the gods hate me not, and I am fain 
Some fertile land with these my hands to gain. 

Nor think thereby that thou wilt get thee shame, 

For if thou askest of my race and name, 

Perseus I am, the son of Danae, 

Bom nigh to Argos, by the sounding sea, 

And those that know, call me the son of Jove, 

Who in past days my mother’s face did love.” 

Then, glad at heart, the King said, “ Poor indeed 
Were such a gift, to give thee to thy meed 
This that thine own unconquered hands have won. 

O ye ! bring now the head and cast thereon 
Jewels and gold from out my treasury, 

Till nothing of its grimness men can see ; 



286 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


And let folk bring round to the harbour mouth 
My ship that saileth yearly to the south; 

That to his own land since it is his will 
This Prince may go ; nor yet without his fill 
Of that which all men long for everywhere, 
Honour, and gold, and women kind and fair. 
And ye, O lords, to-morrow ere midday, 

Come hither to my house in great array, 

For then this marriage will we solemnise. 
Appeasing all the gods with gifts of price.” 

Then loud all shouted, and the end of day 
Being come, Andromeda was led away 
Unto her bower, and there within a while 
She fell asleep, and in her sleep did smile, 

For on the calm of that forgetfulness 
Her bliss but happy longings did impress. 

But in the Syrian King's adorned hall 
Sat Perseus till the shadows 5 gan to fall 
Shorter beneath the moon, and still he thought 
Amid the feast of what a day had brought 
Unto his heart, a foolish void before, 

And for the morrow must he long so sore 
That all those joyances and minstrelsy 
Seemed unto him but empty things to be. 

Early next mom the city was astir, 

And country folk came in from far and near 
Hearing the joyous tidings that the beast 
Was dead, and fain to see the marriage feasts 



THE DOOM OF KING ACEIS 1 US. 287 

And joyous folk wandered from street to street 
Crowned with, fair flowers and singing carols sweet 
Then to the maiden’s chamber maidens ca m e, 

And woke her up to love and joyous shame, 

And as the merry sun streamed through the room 
Spread out unequalled marvels of the loom, 

Stored up for such an end in days long done, 

Ere yet her grey eyes looked upon the sun, 

Fine webs like woven mist, wrought in the dawn, 
Long ere the dew had left the sunniest lawn, 

Gold cloth so wrought that nought of gold seemed there. 
But rather sunlight over blossoms fair ; 

You would have said that gods had made them, bright 
To hide her body from the common light 
Lest men should die from unfulfilled desire. 

Gems too they showed wrought by the hidden fire 
That eats the world, and from the unquiet sea 
Pearls worth the ransom of an argosy. 

Yet all too little all these riches seemed 
In worship of her, who as one who dreamed, 

By her fair maidens’ hands was there arrayed, 

Then, with loose hair, ungirded as a maid 
Unto the threshold of the house was brought, 

But when her hand familiar fingers caught 
And when that voice, that erst amidst her fear 
She deemed a god’s, now smote upon her ear 
Like one new-born to heaven she seemed to be. 

But dreamlike was the long solemnity, 

Unreal the joyous streets, where yesterday 



288 THE EARTHL Y PAR ARISE. 

She passed half dead upon her wretched way ; 

And though before the flickering altar flame 
She trembled when she thought of that past shame. 
And midst the shouting knit her brows to think 
Of what a cup these men had bidden her drink, 
Unreal they seemed, forgotten as a tale 
We cannot tell, though it may still avail 
For pensive thoughts betwixt the day and night 
All things unto the gods were done aright ; 

Beside the sea the flame and smoke uprose 
Over rich gifts of many things to those 
A woman’s tongue had wounded ; golden veils 
And images, and bowls wrought o’er with tales, 

By all the altars of the gods were laid ; 

On this last day of maidenhood the maid 
Had stood before the shrines, and there had thrown 
Sweet incense on the flame, and through the town 
The praises of immortals had been sung, 

And sacied flowers about the houses hung ; 

And now the last hours of the dreamlike day 
Amid great feasting slowly passed away. 

But in that land there was a mighty lord, 

To whom erewhile the King had pledged his word 
That he should wed Andromeda, and he 
Heard through sure friends of this festivity 
And raged thereat, and thought that eve to come 
Unhidden to the feast and bear her home ; 

Phineus his name was, great amidst great men. 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 289 

He setting out, came to the great hall when 
The sun was well-nigh down, all armed was ne, 

And at his back came on tumultuously 

His armed men-slaves, and folk that loved him dear. 

Beholding him, the King rose up in fear, 

And all about the place scared folk uprose 
As men surprised at feast by deadly foes ; 

But Perseus laughing said, “ What feat do ye 
This eve in honour of my sweet and me ? 

Or are ye but the servants of the King 
Returned from doing for him some great thing 
In a fax land ? then sit here and be glad, 

For on this day the King feeds good and bad.” 

Then inarticulate with rage and grief 
Phineus turned on him, snatching at a sheaf 
Of darts that hung against a pillar there, 

And hurled one at him, that sung through his hair 
And slew a serving varlet by his side ; 

Then finding voice, he faced the King and criea, 

“ What dost thou drinking with this robber here. 

Who comes to steal that which I hold so dear 
That on my knees I prayed for her to thee ? 

Speak, Cepheus ! wilt thou give her yet to me 
And have good peace withal, or wilt thou die ? 

Ho, friends, and ye that follow, cry my cry ! ’ 

Then straight the hall rang with a mighty shout 
Of “ Phineus,” and from sheath and belt leapt out 
The gleaming steel, and Cepheus stammering 

v 



29 o THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Took heart to say, “ Think well upon this thing ; 
What should I do ? the man did save her life, 

And her he might have made his slave, as wife 
He asks for now ; take gifts and go thy way 
Nor quench in blood the joyance of this day.” 

Then forth stood Perseus with a frowning face 
Before them all, and cried out from his place, 

" Get ye behind my back, all friends to me i 
And ere the lamps are lighted ye shall see 
A stranger thing than ye have ever dreamed;” 
And as he spake in his left hand there gleamed 
The gold-wrought satchel ; but amazed and cowed 
Did the King’s friends behind the hero crowd. 
Who, ere from out the bag he drew the head, 

Unto that band of fierce new-comers said ; 

“ Will ye have life or death ? if life, then go 
And on the grass outside your armour throw, 

And then returning, drink to my delight 
Until the summer sun puts out the night.” 

But loud they shouted, swaying to and fro, 

And mocked at him, and cried aloud to know 
If in his hand Jove’s thunderbolt he had, 

Or Mars’ red sword that makes the eagles glad ; 
But Phineus, raging, cried, “ Take him alive, 

That we for many an hour the wretch may drive 
With thongs and clubs until he longs to die I” 
Then all set on him with a mighty ay. 

But, with a shout that thrilled high over theirs. 

He drew the head out by the snaky hairs 



THE DOOM OF KING ACFISIUS . . 


And turned on them the baleful glassy eyes ; 
Then sank to silence all that storm of cries 
And clashing arms ; the tossing points that shone 
In the iast sunbeams, went out one by one 
As the sun left them, for each man there died, 
E’en as the shepherd on the bare hill-side, 
Smitten amid the grinding of the storm ; 

When, while the hare lies flat in her wet form. 
E’en strong men quake for fear in houses strong, 
And nigh the ground the lightning runs along. 

But upright on their feet the dead men stood, 
In brow and cheek still flushed the angry blood ; 
This smiled, the mouth of that was open wide, 
This other drew the great sword from his side, 

All were at pomt to do this thing or that 

But silent in the hall the living sat 
As those dead men, till Perseus turned at last 
And over all a kingly look he cast, 

And said, “ O friends, drink yet one cup to me, 
And then to-morrow will I try the sea 
With this my love ; and, sweet Andromeda, 
Forgive me that I needs must play this play ; 
Forget it, sweet ! thou wilt not see again 
This land of thine, upland, or hill, or plain ; 
There where we go shall all be new to thee 
Except the love that thou hast won from me.” 
Then to her frightened face there came a smile* 
And in her cheeks within a little while 



2$2 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Sweet colour came again ; but right few words 
Upon that night were said of king or lords. 

But soon again the lovers were alone 
Of all the sons of men remembering none, 
Forgetting every god but him whose bow 
About the vexed and flowery earth doth go. 


S O on the mom, when risen was the sun 
About the capstan did the shipmen rur. 
Warping the great ship to the harbour mouth 
That yearly went for treasures to the south, 

And thither from the palace did men bear 
Bales of rich cloth, and golden vessels rare, 

And gold new coined, and silver bars of weight 
And women-slaves with bodies slim and straight 
Stood on the snow-white deck, and strong men-s'laves 
Brought from some conquered land beyond the waves 
Bore down rich burdens ; so when all things due 
Were laid on ship-board, and to noon it grew 
Thither came Perseus with his new-wed wife, 

And she, as losing somewhat of her life 
Was pensive now, and silent, and regret 
Moved in her that her heart must soon forget 
All folk and thmgs where first her life began, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 293 


Yea, e’en the mother, whose worn face and wan, 
Tearless and haughty, yet looked o’er the sea, 

As though the life wherein no good could be 
She still would bear in every god’s despite — 

— Ah, folk forget ; the damsel’s heart grew light 
E’en while her country’s cliffs she yet could see. 
Should she remember, when so lovingly 
That cheek touched hers, and he was hers alone ? 

Love while ye may ; if twain grow into one 
’Tis for a little while ; the time goes by, 

No hatred ’twixt the pair of friends doth lie, 

No troubles break their hearts — and yet, and yet — 
How could it be? we strove not to forget ; 

Rather in vain to that old time we clung, 

Its hopes and wishes round our hearts we hung, 

We played old parts, we used old names — in vain, 

We go our ways, and twain once more are twain ; 

Let pass — at latest when we come to die 
Thus shall the fashion of the world go by. 

But these, while still at brightest love’s flame burned, 
Were glad indeed, as towards Seriphos turned 
Bright shone their gilded prow against the sun. 

Meanwhile the folk of Joppa, one by one, 

Took Phineus’ people and their master dead 
All turned to stone as they had seen the head, 

And in a lonely place they set them down, 

Upon a hill that overlooked the town, 



294 


THE EARTHL Y PARADISE 


And round about them built a wall, four-square, 

And at each comer raised a temple fair, 

And therein altars made they unto Jove, 

Pallas, and Neptune, and the God of Love ; 

And in Jove’s temple carved that history, 

That those who came there after them might see, 
From first to last, how all these things were done, 
And how these men last looked upon the sun. 

But the two lovers going on their way 
Grew happier still, as bright day followed day ; 

And, the wind favouring, in a little while 
They reached the low shore of the friendly isle ; 

And, having beached the well-built keel, took land 
Where Danae’s boat first touched the yellow sand. 
Then cityward alone did Perseus go 
His fatal gift unto the King to show ; 

And, passing through the fair fields hastily, 

Reached the green precinct, where he thought to see 
His mother, he had left alive and well ; 

But from inside upon his ears there fell 
A noise of shrieks and clashing arms and shouts ; 
Thereto he ran beset with many doubts, 

Since Polydectes’ evil wiles he knew, 

And what a fate he erst had doomed him to ; 

So, hurrying through, he reached the shrine at last, 
And there beheld his mother, her arms cast 
About Minerva’s image, and by her 
Good Dictys, who, with shield and glittering spear, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRTSIUS. 295 

Abode the onslaught of an armed band, 

At head of whom did Polydectes stand 
Then to her side sprang Perseus with a cry, 

And at that sight and sound she spake on high 
“Com’st thou, long looked for? nothing fear I now, 
This kingly traitor soon shall lie alow.” 

Then the King tottered backward, and awhile 
Stood staring at him : but an evil smile 
Soon hid his fear, as, turning, he beheld 
The glittering weapons that his stout slaves held, 

And he cried out, “ Yea, art thou back again? 

And was my story forged for thee in vain ? 

Be merry then, but give me place or die ! 

I am not one to meet thee fearfully. 

But thee, O brother, must I then slay thee, 

And in our house must one more story be ? 

Give back ! nor for a woman’s foolishness, 

Bring curses on the name thou shouldest bless. 

— Set on at once then ! take the three of them ! ” 
Then once more clashed the spears, but on the hem 
Of that dread satchel Perseus set his hand, 

And put his friend aside, and took his stand 
Betwixt his mother and the island men ; 

And terribly he cried, “ Thus take thou then 
The gift thou badst me bring to thee ! nor ask 
Of any man again another task, 

Except to throw on thee a little sand 

That thou may’st reach in peace the shadowy land.” 

His mocking speech he ended with a shout. 



296 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


And from the bag the dreadful head drew out. 

And shook it in the King’s bewildered face ; 

Who unto him yet strove to make one pace 
With feebly brandished spear and drooping shield, 
Then unto stony death his heart did yield, 

And without any cry upright he died, 

With fallen arms and fixed eyes staring wide. 

But of his men the bravest turned and fled, 

And on the ground some trembled, well-nigh dead 
For very fear, till Perseus cried, “Arise, 

Lay down your arms and go ! Henceforth be wise ; 
Nor at kings’ biddings ’gainst the just gods strive.” 
But as they slunk away, too glad to live 
To need more words, and shivering with their dread. 
Once more did Perseus hide the fearful head. 

And toward his mother turned ; who. with pale face, 
Stood trembling there, remembering that embrace 
Within the brazen house , but now he threw 
His arms about her as he used to do 
When her own arms his little body bore ; 

And smiling, even as he smiled of yore, 

He said, “ O mother, fear me not at all, 

But yet bethink thee of the brazen wall 
And golden Jove, nor doubt from him I came ; 

And no more now shall I be called thy shame. 

But thy defence and glory everywhere. 

u But now to lovely Argos let us fare. 

Too small a land this is become for thee, 



THE DOOM OF KING ACEISIUS. 297 

And I may hope a greater sovereignty, 

Who, by God’s help, have done such mighty things, 
Which I will tell thee of, while the wind sings 
Amongst the shrouds of my rich-laden keel, 

While by thy feet a god-given gift shall kneel, 

My bride new won ; in such-like guise will we 
Come back to him who gave us to the sea, 

And make our peace and all ill blood forget, 

That through long happy years thou mayst live yet” 
Then did he take good Dictys by the hand, 

And said, “ O righteous man, we leave this land, 

Nor leave thee giftless for the welcoming 
Thou gav’st us erst, nor for this other thing 
That thou hast wrought for us this happy tide; 
Therefore do thou as King herein abide, 

Vnd win Jove’s love by helping in such wise 
Vs thou didst us, folk sunk in miseries.” 

So gave he kingdoms, as he took away, 
r or strong the God was in him on that day, 
md the gods smiled to hear him ; yea, and she 
Vho armed him erst, then dealt so lovingly, 
he caused the people’s hearts towards him to yearn, 
/ho, thronging round, began somehow to learn 
'he story of his deeds, and cried aloud, 

Be thou our King !” Then showed he to the crowd 
►ictys his friend, and said, “ I to my kin 
[ust go, mine heritage and goods to win, 
nd deal a king with kings ; but yet see here 
his royal man, my helpful friend and dear ; 



298 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


Loved of the gods, surely he is of worth 
For greater things,” So saying he went forth 
And midst their reverence, leading by the hand 
His happy mother, turned into the strand ; 

And still the wondering folk with them must go, 
And now such honour unto him would show, 

That rather they would make him God than King ; 
But while fresh carols round him these did sing 
They came unto the low, sea-beaten sand ; 

And Danae took the Syrian by the hand 
And kissed her, full of joy that such an one 
Should bear brave children to her godlike son : 
Then Perseus gave command, and on the shore 
Great gifts they laid from out his plenteous store, 

To glad King Dictys’ eyes withal, and then 
Bade farewell to him and his island men ; 

And all took ship, and hoisting sail straightway, 
Departed o’er the restless plain and grey. 

Now fair the wind was for a day and night, 

But on the second day as it grew light, 

And they were thinking that they soon should be 
At Argos, rose a tempest on the sea, 

And drave them from their course unto a land 
Far north thereof. So on the yellow sand 
They hauled their ship, and thereto presently 
The good folk of the country drew anigh, 

To make their market ; and being asked, they said 
That this was Thessaly, that strait paths led 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS . 299 

Through rugged mountains to a fertile plain 
Peneus watered, rich with many a fane : 

That following down the stream they soon should come 
Unto a mighty people’s glorious home, 

A god-loved ancient city, called of men 

Larissa, and the time was fitting then 

To go thereto, and there should they have rest, 

For now each comer was an honoured guest, 

Because Teutamias, the Thessalian king, 

His father dead with games was honouring. 

Then to that city Perseus fain would go, 

His might unto the gathered men to show; 

Desiring, too, to gather tidings there 
Of how the old Acrisius yet might fare, 

And if unto his scarce-seen Argive home 
He in good peace might venture now to come. 

So of the country folk he took fair steeds 
And gave them gold, and goods for all their needs. 
And with a trusty band with this intent 
Through the rough passes of the hills he went, 

Bearing his mother, and the Syrian may : 

As of a king’s men deemed of his array, 

When to the fertile peopled fields he came; 

But yet he bade that none should tell his name. 

So coming to Larissa, all men thought, 

That he who with him such great marvels brought 
Was some great king, though scanty was his band : 

So honour did he get on every hand. 

But when the games began, and none could win 



300 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A prize in any, if he played therein, 

A greater name they gave him, saying, “ What worth 
In this poor age is left upon the earth 
To do such deeds ? Surely no man this is, 

But some god weary of the heavenly bliss.” 

At last, when all the other games were done. 

Men fell to play at casting of the stone , 

And strong men cast it, mighty of their hands, 

Bearers of great names in the Grecian lands : 

But Perseus stood and watched the play alone, 

Nor did he move when every man had thrown. 

Then cried Teutamias, “ Nameless one ! see now 
How mightily these strong-armed heroes throw : 

Canst thou prevail in this as in the rest?” 

“ O King 1” said Perseus, “ now I think it best 
To try the Fates no more j I must be gone : 
Therefore to-day thou seest me thus alone, 

For in the house my white-armed damsels stay 
To order matters for our homeward way.” 

“ Nay, stranger,” said the King, “ but rather take 
This golden garland for Teutamias’ sake, 

And try one cast : look, here I have with me 
A well-loved guest, who is most fain to see 
Thy godlike strength, yea we will draw anigh 
To watch the heavy stone like Jove’s bolt fly 
Forth from thine hand.” Then Perseus smiled and said 
“ Nay then, be wary, and guard well thine head ! 

For who of mortals knoweth where and when 
The bolts of Jove shall smite down foolish men?” 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 301 

So said he, and withal the King drew nigh, 

And with him an old man, who anxiously 
Peered round him as if looking for a foe 
Then Perseus made him ready for the throw, 

But even as he stooped the stone to raise, 

The old man said, “ That I the more may praise 
This hero’s cast, come to the other end 
And we shall see the hill of granite send 
The earth and stones up as its course is spent. 

So then beyond the furthest cast they went 
By some three yards, and stood aside ; but now 
Since it was evening and the sun was low 
Its beams were in their eyes, nor could they see 
If Perseus moved or not, then restlessly 
Looking this way or that, the ancient man, 

Gathering his garments up, in haste began 
To cross the place, but when a warning shout 
Rang in his ears, then wavering and in doubt 
He stopped, and scarcely had he time to hear 
A second cry of horror and of fear, 

Ere crushed, and beaten down upon the ground, 

The end of all his weary life he found. 

Then women shrieked, and strong men shouted out 
And Perseus ran to those that drew about 
The slain old man, and asked them of his name. 

But the King, eyeing him as nigh he came, 

Said “ This we know, and thy hid name we know, 
For certainly thou art his fated foe, 



302 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


His very daughter's strange-begotten son, 

The child the sea cast up, the dreaded one. 

This was Acrisius, who for fear of thee 
Shut up thy mother by the sounding sea ; 

This was the man, who, for the veiy dread 
Of meeting thee, from lovely Argos fled 
To be my guest. Nay, let thy sharp sword bide 
Within its sheath, the world is fair and wide, 

Nor have we aught to do to thee for this; 

Go then in peace, and live in woe or bliss 
E’en as thou may’st, but stay with us no more, 
Because we fear the gods may plague us sore 
For this thy deed, though they would have it so. r 

Then soberly thenceforth did Perseus go 
Unto his folk, and straightly told them all 
That on that luckless day had chanced to fall ; 
Wondering thereat, there made they no delay, 

But down unto the sea they took their way ; 

And much did Danae ponder as they went 
How the high gods had wrought out their intent. 
And thinking on these things she needs must sigh 
For pity of her sweet life passing by. 

But when they reached the border of the sea, 
Then Perseus said, “ Though all unwittingly 
I slew this man, and though perchance of right 
His rhrone is mine, yet never will I fight 
Against the just gods, and I fear the stain 
Of kindred blood, if slaying him I gain 



THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. 303 

His kingdom and the city of my birth : 

Now, therefore, since the gods have made the earth 
Most fair in many places, let us go 
Where’er the god-sent fated wind shall blow 
The ship, that carries one the high gods love 
But first the bright- armed lovely maid of Jove 
Here let us worship, on this yellow beach. 

That her, my helper erst, we may beseech 
To grant us much, and first of all things, this, 

A land where we may dwell awhile in bliss.” 

They heard him gladly, for the most of those 
Were young, nor yet by mishaps and by foes 
Had learned to think the world a dreary thing ; 

So round about the altar did they sing 
And feasted well, and when the day came round 
Once more, they went a-shipboard to the sound 
Of trumpets and heart-moving melody, 

And gave their rich keel to the restless sea. 

Then for four days before the wind they drove, 

Until at last in sight a new land hove 
Their pilot called the coast of Argolis, 

That rich in cattle and in horses is. 

But landing there had Perseus’ godlike fame 
Gone on before him, and the people came 
And cried upon him for their king and lord, 

The people’s saving shield and conquering sword; 

So in that land he failed not to abide, 

And there with many rites he purified 
His fated hands of that unlooked-for guilt : 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


3°4 

And there a town within a while he built 
Men call Mycenae. Peaceful grew the land 
The while the ivory rod was in his hand, 

For robbers fled, and good men still waxed strong, 
And in no house was any sound of wrong, 

Until the Golden Age seemed there to be, 

So steeped the land was in felicity. 

Time past, and there his wife and mother died, 
And he, no god, must lie down by their side. 
While Alceus his first son reigned after him, 

A conquering king, and fair, and strong of limb. 

But long ere this he did not fail to lay 
The sacred things that brought him on his wav 
Within Minerva’s temple ; there with awe 
’Twixt silver bars, all folk these marvels saw. 

But not for long, for on the twentieth day 
From the fair temple were they snatched away 
Though by the aimed priests guarded faithfully. 
But still the empty wallet there did lie 
Wherein had Perseus borne the head with him, 
Which still when his great deeds were waxing dim 
Hung in the Maiden’s temple near the shrine, 

And folk would pour before it oil and wine. 

And know besides, that from that very year 
Those who are wise say that the Maid doth bear 
Amidst her shield that awful snaky head 
Whereby so many heedless ones are dead. 



APRIL 


305 


B EFORE the last words of his tale were doue 
The purple hills had hidden half the sun. 
But when the story’s death a silence made 
Within the hall, in freshness and in shade 
The trembling blossoms of the garden lay* 

Few words at first the elder men could say. 

For thinking how all stories end with this, 
Whatever was the midway gain and bliss : 
ce He died, and in his place was set his son , 

He died, and in a few days every one 

Went on their way as though he had not been.” 

Yet with the pictures that their eyes had seen, 
As still from point to point that history past, 

And round their thoughts its painted veil was cast, 
Their hearts were softened, — far away they saw 
That other world, that ’neath another law 
Had lived and died ; when man might hope to see 
Some earthly image of Divinity, 

And yet not die, but, strengthened by the sight, 
Cast fear away, and go from might to might, 

Until to godlike life, though short, he came. 
Amidst all losses winning hope of fame, 

Nor losing joy the while his life should ’dure, 

For that at least his valiant strife made sure. 

That still in place of dreamy, youthful hope. 

With slow decay and certain death could cope. 


x 



5 o6 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

So mused the Wanderers, and awhile might deem 
That world might not be quite an empty dream, 

But dim foreshadowings of what yet might come 
When they perforce must leave that new-gained home , 
Foreshadowings mingled with the images 
Of man’s misdeeds in greater days than these. 

With no harsh words their musing was undone, 

The garden Dirds sang down the setting sun, 

A rainy wind from ’twixt the trees arose, 

And sang a mournful counterpoint to those ; 

And, ere the rain amidst the dark could fall* 

The minstrel’s song was ringing through the ha.IL 



APRIL. 


3°7 


W HEN April-tide was melting into May, 

Within a hall that midst the gardens lay 
These elders met, and having feasted well, 

The time came round the wonted tale to telL 
Then spake a Wanderer : “ Sirs, it happed to me. 
Long years agone, to cross the narrow sea 
That ’twixt us Drontheimers and England lies ; 
Young was I then, and little thought these eyes 
Should see so many lands ere all was done. 

“ But this land was a fair and fertile one, 

As at that time, for April-tide it was, 

Even as now ; well, sirs, it came to pass 
That to this town or that we took our way, 

Or in some abbey’s guesten-chamber lay, 

And many tales we heard, some false, some true, 
Of the ill deeds our fathers used to do 
Within that land ) and still the tale would end, 
c Yet did the Saint his Holy House defend 
_Or, ‘ Sirs, their fury all was nought and vain, 

Add by our Earl the pirate-king was slain.’ 

God wot, I laughed full often in my sleeve, 

And could have told them stories, by their leave. 
With other endings : but I held my tongue. 

Let each king’s deeds in his own land be sung, 
And then will lies stretch far. Besides, these men 
Were puffed up with their luck and glory then. 



3 o8 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

For at that tide, within the land of France, 

Unto their piping must all people dance. — 

— But let that pass, for Captain Rolf has told 
How, on the way, their king he did behold. 

" For other tales they told, and one of these 
Not all the washing of the troublous seas, 

Not all the changeful days whereof ye know, 

Have swept from out my memory , even so 
Small things far off will be remembered clear 
When matters both more weighty, and more near. 
Are waxing dim to us. I, who have seen 
So many lands, and midst such marvels been. 
Clearer than these abodes of outland men, 

Can see above the green and unburat fen 
The little houses of an English town, 

Cross-timbered, thatched with fen-reeds coarse and 
brown, 

And high o’er these, three gables, great and fair, 
That slender rods of columns do upbear 
Over the minster doors, and imagery 
Of kings, and flowers no summer field doth see, 
Wrought on those gables. — Yea, I heard withal, 

In the fresh morning air, the trowels fall 
Upon the stone, a thin noise far away ; 

For high up wrought the masons on that day, 

Since to the monks that house seemed scarcely well 

Till they had set a spire or pinnacle 

Each side the great porch. In that burgh I heard 



APRJL. 


309 


This tale, and late have set down every word 
That I remembered, when the thoughts would come 
Of what we did in our deserted home, 

And of the days, long past, when we were young, 
Nor knew the cloudy woes that o’er us hung. 

And howsoever I am now grown old, 

Yet is it still the tale I then heard told 
Within the guest-house of that minster-close, 

Whose walls, like cliffs new-made, before us rose.'* 1 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


310 


THE PROUD KING. 

ARGUMENT. 

A CERTAIN King, blinded by pride, thought that he was some- 
thing more than man, if not equal to God ; but such a judg- 
ment fell on him that none knew him for king, and he 
suffered many things, till in the end, humbling himself, he 
regained his kingdom and honour. 

I N a far country that I cannot name, 

And on a year long ages past away, 

A King there dwelt, in rest and ease and fame, 

And richer than the Emperor is to-day : 

The very thought of what this man might say, 

From dusk to dawn kept many a lord awake, 

For fear of him did many a great man quake. 

Young was he when he first sat on the throne, 

And he was wedded to a noble wife, 

But at the dais must he sit alone, 

Nor durst a man speak to him for his life, 

Except with leave : nought knew he change or strife, 
But that the years passed silently away, 

And in his black beard gathered specks of grey. 



THE PROUD KING. 


Now so it chanced ; upon a May morning, 
Wakeful he lay when yet low was the sun, 

Looking distraught at many a royal thing, 

And counting up his titles one by one, 

And thinking much of things that he had done ; 

For full of life he felt, and hale and strong, 

And knew that none durst say when he did wrong. 

For no man now could give him dread or doubt, 
The land was ’neath his sceptre far and wide, 

And at his beck would well-armed myriads shout 
Then swelled his vain, unthinking heart with pride, 
Until at last he raised him up and cried, 

“ What need have I for temple or for priest? 

Am I not God, whiles that I live at least?” 

And yet withal that dead his fathers were, 

He needs must think, that quick the years pass by ; 
But he, who seldom yet had seen death near 
Or heard his name, said, “ Still I may not die 
Though underneath the earth my fathers lie ; 

My sire indeed was called a mighty king, 

"Yet m regard of mine, a little thing 

“ His kingdom was ; moreover his grandsire 
To him was but a prince of narrow lands, 

Whose father, though to things he did aspire 
Beyond most men, a great knight of his hands, 

Yet ruled some little town where now these stands 



$12 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


The kennel of my dogs ; then may not I 
Rise higher yet, nor like poor wretches die? 

“ Since up the ladder ever we have gone 
Step after step nor fallen back again ; 

And there are tales of people who have won 
A life enduring, without care or pain, 

Or any man to make their wishes vain ; 

Perchance this prize unwitting now I hold ; 

For :.mes change fast, the world is waxen old.” 

So mid these thoughts once more he fell asleep, 
And when he woke again, high was the sun, 

Then quickly from his gold bed did he leap, 

And of his former thoughts remembered none, 

But said, “ To-day through green woods will we run. 
Nor shall to-day be worse than yesterday, 

But better it may be, for game and play.” 

So for the hunt was he apparelled, 

And forth he rode with heart right well at ease ; 

And many a strong, deep-chested hound they led, 
Over the dewy grass betwixt the trees, 

And fair white horses fit for the white knees 
Of Her the ancients fabled rides a-nights 
Betwixt the setting and the rising lights. 

Now following up a mighty hart and swift 
The King rode long upon that morning tide, 



THE PROUD RING. 


And since his horse was worth a kingdom’s gift, 

It chanced him all his servants to outride, 

Until unto a shaded river-side 
He came alone at hottest of the sun, 

When all the freshness of the day was done. 

Dismounting there, and seeing so far adown 
The red-finned fishes o’er the gravel play, 

It seemed that moment worth his royal crown 
To hide there from the burning of the day, 
Wherefore he did off all his rich array, 

And tied his horse unto a neighbouring tree, 

And in the water sported leisurely. 

But when he was fulfilled of this delight 
He gat him to the bank well satisfied, 

And thought to do on him his raiment bright 
And homeward to his royal house to ride ; 

But ’mazed and angry, looking far and wide 
Nought saw he of his horse and rich attire, 

And ’gainst the thief ’gan threaten vengeance dire. 

^ _J3ut little help his fury was to him, 

So lustily he ’gan to shout and cry , 

None answered, still the lazy chub did swim 
By inches ’gainst the stream ; away did fly 
The small pied bird, but nathless stayed anigh, 
And o’er the stream still plied his fluttering trade. 
Of such a helpless man not much afraid. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


J l 4 

Weary of crying in that lonely place 
He ceased at last, and thinking what to do, 

E'en as he was, up stream he set his face, 

Since not far off a certain house he knew 
Where dwelt his ranger, a lord leal and true, 

Who many a bounty at his hands had had, 

And now to do him ease would be right glad. 

Thither he hastened on, and as he went 
The hot sun sorely burned his naked skin, 

The whiles he thought, “ When he to me has lent 
Fine raiment, and at ease I sit within 
His coolest chamber dad in linen thin, 

And drinking wine, the best that he has got, 

I shall forget this troublous day and hot” 

Now note, that while he thus was on his way, 
And still his people for their master sought, 

There met them one who in the King’s array 
Bestrode his very horse, and as they thought 
Was none but he in good time to them brought, 
Therefore they hailed him King, and so all rode 
From out the forest to his fair abode. 

And there in royal guise he sat at meat, 

Served, as his wont was, ’neath the canopy, 

And there the hounds fawned round about his feet. 
And there that city’s elders did he see, 

And with his lords took counsel what should be ; 



THE PROUD KING. 31$ 

And there at supper when the day waxed dim 
The Queen within his chamber greeted him. 


L EAVE we him there ; for to the ranger’s gate 
The other came, and on the horn he blew, 
Till peered the wary porter through the grate 
To see if he, perchance, the blower knew, 

Before he should the wicket-gate undo ; 

But when he saw him standing there, he cried, 

“ What dost thou, friend, to show us all thine hide ? 

“ We list not buy to-day or flesh or fell ; 

Go home and get thyself a shirt at least, 

If thou wouldst aught, for saith our vicar well. 

That God hath given clothes e’en to the beast” 
Therewith he turned to go, but as he ceased 
The King cried out, “ Open, O foolish man I 
I am thy lord and King, Jovinian; 

“ Go now, and tell thy master I am here 
Desiring food and clothes, and m this plight, 

And then hereafter need’st thou have no fear, 
Because thou didst not know me at first sight” 
“Yea, yea, I am but dreaming in the night,” 

The carle said, “and I bid thee, Mend, to dream, 
Come through ! here is no gate, it doth but seem. 1 



3 16 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 


With that his visage vanished from the grate ; 

But when the King now found himself alone, 

He hurled himself against the mighty gate, 

And beat upon it madly with a stone, 

Half wondering midst his rage, how any one 
Could live, if longed-for things he chanced to lack t 
But midst all this, at last the gate flew back, 

And there the porter stood, brown-bill in hand, 
And said, “Ah, fool, thou makest this ado, 

Wishing before my lord’s high seat to stand ; 

Thou shalt be gladder soon hereby to go, 

Or surely nought of handy blows I know. 

Come, willy nilly, thou shalt tell this tale 
Unto my lord, if aught it may avail.” 

With that his staff he handled, as if he 
Would smite the King, and said, “ Get on before ! 
St Mary ! now thou goest full leisurely, 

Who, erewhile, fain wouldst batter down the door. 
See now, if ere this matter is passed o’er, 

I come to harm, yet thou shalt not escape, 

Thy back is broad enow to pay thy jape.” 

Half blind with rage the King before him passed 
But nought of all he doomed him to durst say, 

Lest he from rest nigh won should yet be cast, 

So with a swelling heart he took his way. 

Thinking right soon Ms shame to cast away, 



THE PROUD KING. 


3i7 


And the carle followed still, ill satisfied 
With such a wretched losel to abide. 

Fair was the ranger's house and new and white. 
And by the King built scarce a year agone, 

And carved about for this same lord’s delight 
With woodland stories deftly wrought in stone ; 
There oft the King was wont to come alone, 

For much he loved this lord, who erst had been 
A landless squire, a servant of the Queen. 

Now long a lord and clad in rich attire, 

In his fair hall he sat before the wine 
Watching the evening sun’s yet burning fire, 
Thiough the close branches of his pleasance shine 
In mood of him who deems himself divine, 
Remembering not whereto we all must comq 
Not thinking aught but of his happy home. 

From just outside loud mocking merriment 
He heard midst this 5 and therewithal a squire 
Came hurrying up, his laughter scarcely spent, 
Who said, “ My lord, a man in such attire 
As Adam’s, ere he took the devil’s hire, 

Who saith that thou wilt know him for the King, 
Up from the gate John Porter needs must bring. 

“ He to the King is nothing like in aught 
But that his beard he weaieth in such guise 



3 i8 the earthl y paradise. 

As doth my lord : wilt thou that he be brought? 
Perchance some treason ’neath his madness lies.” 

“ Yea,” saith the ranger, “ that may well be wise. 

But haste, for now am I right well at ease, 

Nor would be wearied with such folk as these.” 

Then went the squire, and coming back again. 

The porter and the naked King brought in, 

Who thinking now that this should end his pain, 
Forgat his fury and the porter’s sin, 

And said, “Thou wonderest how I came to win 
This raiment, that kings long have ceased to wear, 
Since Noah’s flood has altered all the air? 

“Well, thou shalt know, but first I pray thee, Hugh 
Reach me that cloak that lieth on the board, 

For certes, though thy folk are leal and true, 

It seemeth that they deem a mighty lord 
Is made by crown, and silken robe, and sword ; 

Lo, such are borel folk ; but thou and I 
Fail not to know the signs of majesty. 

“ Thou risest not ! thou lookest strange on me l 
Ah, what is this? Who reigneth in my stead? 

How long hast thou been plotting secretly? 

Then slay me now, for if I be not dead 
Armies will rise up when I nod my head. 

Slay me I — or cast thy treachery away, 

And have anew my favour from this day." 



THE PROUD KING . 


3 Z 9 

“Why should I tell thee that thou ne’er wast 
king?” 

The ranger said, “thou knowest not my mind; 

Poor man, I pray God help thee in this thing, 

And, ere thou diest send thee days more kind ; 

And help from us a-going shalt thou find. 

Good fellows, this poor creature is but mad, 

Take him, and in a coat let him be clad ; 

“ And give him meat and drink, and on this night 
Beneath some roof of ours let him abide, 

For some day God may set his folly right.” 

Then spread the King his arms abroad and cried, 
“Woe to thy food, thy house, and thee betide, 

Thou loathsome traitor! Get ye from the hall, 

Lest smitten by God’s hand this roof should fall ; 

“ Yea, if the world be but an idle dream, 

And God deals nought with it, yet shall ye see 
Red flame from out these carven windows stream. 

I, I, will bum this vile place utterly, 

And strewn with salt the poisonous earth shall be. 
S£hat such a wretch of such a man has made, 

That so such Judases may grow afraid.” 

Thus raving, those who held him he shook ofi 
And rushed from out the hall, nigh mad indeed. 

And gained the gate, not heeding blow or scoff, 

Nor longer of his nakedness took heed, 



320 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


But ran, he knew not where, at headlong speed 
Till, when at last his strength was fully spent. 
Worn out, he fell beneath a woody bent 

But for the ranger, left alone in peace, 

He bade his folk bring in the minstrelsy ; 

And thinking of his life, and fair increase 
Of all his goods, a happy man was he, 

And towards his master felt right lovingly, 

And said, “ This luckless madman will avail 
When next I see the King for one more tale/ 


M EANWHILE Jovinian by the roadside 

Panting, confused, scarce knowing if he dreamed, 
Until at last, when vanished was the day, 

Through the dark night far off a bright light gleamed; 
Which growing quickly, down the road there streamed 
The glare of torches, held by men who ran 
Before the litter of a mighty man. 

These mixed with soldiers soon the road did fill, 
And on their harness could the King behold 
The badge of one erst wont to do his will, 

A counsellor, a gatherer-up of gold, 

Who underneath his rule had now grown old : 



THE PEOUD KING. 


321 


Then wrath and bitterness so filled his heart, 

That from his wretched lair he needs must start 

And o’er the clatter shrilly did he cry, 

“ Well met, Duke Peter ! ever art thou wise ; 

Surely thou wilt not let a day go by 

Ere thou art good friends with mine enemies ; 

O fit to rule within a land of lies, 

Go on thy journey, make thyself more meet 
To sit in hell beneath the devil's feet I” 

But as he ceased a soldier drew anear, 

And smote him flatling with his sheathed sword, 

And said, “ Speak louder, that my lord may hear 
And give thee wages for thy ribald word ! 

Come forth, for I must show thee to my lord, 

For he may think thee more than mad indeed, 

Who of men’s ways has taken wondrous heed.” 

Now was the litter stayed midmost the road, 

And round about, the torches in a ring 

Were gathered, and their flickering light now glowed 

In gold and gems and many a lordly thing, 

And showed that face well known unto the King, 
That, smiling yesterday, right humble words 
Had spoken midst the concourse of the lords. 

But now he said, “ Man, thou wert cursing me 
If these folk heard aright ; what wilt thou then, 


v 



322 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


Deem’st thou that I have done some wrong to thee, 
Or hast thou scathe from any of my men ? 

In any case tell all thy tale again 

When on the judgment-seat thou see’st me sit 

And I will give no careless ear to it” 

“ The night is dark, and in the summer wind 
The torches flicker; canst thou see my face? 

Bid them draw nigher yet, and call to mind 
Who gave thee all thy riches and thy place — 

— Well; — if thou canst, deny me, with such grace 
As by the fire-light Peter swore of old, 

When in that Maundy-week the night was cold — 

“ — Alas ! canst thou not see I am the King? 1 ' 
So spoke he, as their eyes met midst the blaze. 
And the King saw the dread foreshadowing 
Within the elder’s proud and stony gaze, 

Of what those lips, thin with the lapse of days. 
Should utter now ; nor better it befell ; — 

“Friend, a strange story thou art pleased to tell 

“Thy luck it is thou tellest it to me, 

Who deem thee mad and let thee go thy way : 

The King is not a man to pity thee, 

Or on thy folly thy fool’s tale to lay : 

Poor fool ! take this, and with the light of day 
Buy food and raiment of some labouring clown. 

And by my counsel keep thee from the town. 



THE PROUD KING. 323 

“ For fear thy madness break out in some place 
Where folk thy body to the judge must hale, 

And then indeed wert thou in evil case — 

Press on, sirs ! or the time will not avail.” 

— There stood the King, with limbs that ’gan to fail, 
Speechless, and holding in his trembling hand 
A coin new stamped for people of the land ; 

Thereon, with sceptre, crown, and royal robe, 

The image of a King, himself, was wrought ; 

His jewelled feet upon a quartered globe, 

As though by him all men were vain and nought. 

One moment the red glare the silver caught, 

As the lord ceased, the next his hurrying folk 
The flaring circle round the litter broke. 

The next, their shadows barred a patch of light 
Fast vanishing, all else around was black 5 
And the poor wretch, left lonely with the night, 
Muttered, “ I wish the day would ne’er come back, 

If all that once I had I now must lack : 

Ah God ! how long is it since I was King, 

N£Jor lacked enough to wish for anything?” 

Then down the lonely road he wandered yet, 
Following the vanished lights, he scarce knew why, 
Till he began his sorrows to forget, 

And, steeped in drowsiness, at last drew nigh 
A grassy bank, where, worn with misery, 



$24 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

He slept the dreamless sleep of weariness, 

That many a time such wretches’ eyes will bless. 


B UT at the dawn he woke, nor knew at first 

What ugly chain of grief had brought him there, 
Nor why he felt so wretched and accursed ; 

At last remembering, the fresh morning air, 

The rising sun, and all things fresh and fair, 

Yet caused some little hope in him to rise, 

That end might* come to these new miseries. 

So looking round about,. he saw that he 
To his own city gates was come an ear ; 

Then he arose and going warily, 

And hiding now and then for very fear 

Of folk who bore their goods and country cheer, 

Unto the city’s market, at the last 
Unto a stone’s-thxow of the gate he passed. 

But when he drew unto the very gate, 

Into the throng of country-folk he came 
Who for the opening of the door did wait, 

Of whom some mocked, and some cried at him shame 
And some would know his country and his name , 

But one into his waggon drew him up, 

And gave him milk from out a beechen cup, 



THE PROUD KING. 


3*5 


And asked him of his name and misery; 

Then in his throat, a swelling passion rose, 

Which yet he swallowed down, and, “ Friend,” said he 
“ Last night I had the hap to meet the foes 
Of God and man, who robbed me, and with blows 
Stripped off my weed and left me on the way : 
Thomas the Pilgrim am I called to-day. 

“ A merchant am I of another town, 

And rich enow to pay thee for thy deed, 

If at the King's door thou wilt set me down, 

For there a squire I know, who at my need 
Will give me food and drink, and fitting weed. 

What is thy name? in what place dost thou live 
That I some day great gifts to thee may give.” 

<c Fair sir,” the carle said, “ I am poor enow, 
Though certes food I lack not easily ; 

My name is Christopher a-Green ; I sow 
A little orchard set with bush and tree, 

And ever there the kind land keepeth me, 

^For I, now fifty, from a little boy 
Have dwelt thereon, and known both grief and joy. 

“ The house my grandsire built there has grown oid 
And certainly a bounteous gift it were 
If thou shouldst give me just enough of gold 
To build it new ; nor shouldst thou . lack my prayer- 
For such a gift” a Nay, friend, have thou no care,” 



326 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Tlie King said : “ this is but a little thing 
To me, who oft am richer than the King.” 

Now as they talked the gate was opened wide, 

And toward the palace went they through the street, 
And Christopher walked ever by the side 
Of his rough wain, where midst the May-flowers sweet 
Jovinian lay, that folk whom they might meet 
Might see him not to mock at his bare skin : 

So shortly to the King’s door did they win. 

Then through the open gate Jovinian ran 
Of the first court, and no man stayed him there ; 

But as he reached the second gate, a man 
Of the King’s household, seeing him all bare 
And bloody, cried out, “ Whither dost thou fare ? 

Sure thou art seventy times more mad than mad, 

Or else some magic potion thou hast had, 

“ Whereby thou fear’st not steel or anything,” 

“ But,” said the King, “ good fellow, I know thee; 
And can it be thou knowest not thy King? 

Nay, thou shalt have a good reward of me, 

That thou wouldst rather have than ten years’ fee, 

If thou wilt clothe me in fair weed again, 

For now to see my council am I fain.” 

“Out, ribald!” quoth the fellow: “What sa/st thou? 
Thou art my lord, whom God reward and bless ? 



THE PROUD KING. 


327 


Truly before long sbalt thou find out how 
John Hangman cureth ill folk’s wilfulness; 

Yea, from his scourge the blood has run for less 
Than that which now thou sayest : nay, what say I ? 
For lighter words have I seen tall men die. 

“ Come now, the sergeants to this thing shall see !” 
So to the guard-room was Jovinian brought, 

Where his own soldiers mocked him bitterly, 

And all his desperate words they heeded nought ; 
Until at last there came to him this thought, 

That never from this misery should he win, 

But, spite of all his struggles, die therein. 

And terrible it seemed, that everything 
So utterly was changed since yesterday, 

That these who were the soldiers of the King, 

Ready to lie down in the common way 
Before him, nor durst rest if he bade play, 

Now stood and mocked him, knowing not the face 
At whose command each man there had his place. 

^ “ Ah, God !” said he, “ is this another earth 
From that whereon I stood two days ago ? 

Or else in sleep have I had second birth ? 

Or among mocking shadows do I go, 

Unchanged myself of flesh and fell, although 
My fair weed I have lost and royal gear? 

And meanwhile all are changed that meet me here ; 



328 THE EARTHL V PARADISE. 


u And yet in heart and nowise outwardly.” 

Amid his wretched thoughts two sergeants came, 
Who said, “ Hold, sirs I because the King would see 
The man who thus so rashly brings him shame, 

By taking his high style and spotless name, 

That never has been questioned ere to-day. 

Come, fool J needs is it thou must go our way.” 

So at the sight of him all men turned round, 

As ’twixt these two across the courts he went. 

With downcast head and hands together bound ; 
"While from the windows maid and varlet leant, 

And through the morning air fresh laughter sent ; 
Until unto the threshold they were come 
Of the great hall within that kingly home. 

Therewith right fast Jovinian’s heart must beat, 

As now he thought, “ Lo, here shall end the strife ; 
For either shall I sit on mine own seat, 

Known unto all, soldier and lord and wife, 

Oi else is this the ending of my life, 

And no man henceforth shall remember me, 

And a vain name in records shall I be.” 

Therewith he raised his head up, and. beheld 
One dad in gold set on his royal throne, 
Gold-crowned, whose hand the ivory sceptre held ; 
And underneath him sat the Queen alone, 

Ringed round with standing lords, of whom not one 



THE JPROUD KING. 


Did aught but utmost reverence unto him ; 

Then did Jovinian shake in every limb. 

Yet midst amaze and rage to him it seemed 
This man was nowise like him in the face ; 

But with a marvellous glory his head gleamed. 

As though an angel sat in that high place, 

Where erst he sat like all his royal race, — 

— But their eyes met, and with a stem, calm brow 
The shining one cried out, “ And where art thou ? 

“Where art thou, robber of my majesty?” 

“Was I not King,” he said, “but yesterday? 

And though to-day folk give my place to thee, 

I am Jovinian ; yes, though none gainsay, 

If on these very stones thou shouldst me slay. 

And though no friend be left for me to moan, 

I am Jovinian still, and King alone.” 

Then said that other, “ O thou foolish man. 
King was I yesterday, and long before, 

Nor is my name aught but Jovinian, 

Whom in this house the Queen my mother bore. 
Unto my longing father, for right sore 
Was I desired before I saw the light : 

Thou, fool, art first to speak against my right 

“ And surely well thou meritest to die ; 

Yet ere I bid men lead thee unto death 



330 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE, 

Hearken to these my lords that stand anigh, 

And what this faithful Queen beside me saith, 

Then may’st thou many a year hence draw thy breath, 
If these should stammer m their speech one whit : 
Behold this face, lords, look ye well on it ! 

“Thou, O fair Queen, say now whose face is this ! n 
Then cried they, “ Hail, O Lord Jovinian ! 

Long may’st thou live !” and the Queen knelt to kiss 
His gold-shod feet, and through her face there ran 
Sweet colour, as she said, “ Thou art the man 
By whose side I have lain for many a year, 

Thou art my lord Jovinian lief and dear.” 

Then said he, “ O thou wretch, hear now and see ! 
What thing should hinder me to slay thee now ? 

And yet indeed, such mercy is in me, 

If thou wilt kneel down humbly and avow 
Thou art no King, but base-born, as I know 
Thou art indeed, in mine house shalt thou live, 

And as thy service is, so shalt thou thrive.” 

But the unhappy King laughed bitterly, 

The red blood rose to flush his visage wan 
Where erst the grey of death began to be ; 

“Thou liest,” he said, “ I am Jovinian, 

Come of great kings ; nor am I such a man 
As still to live when all delight is gone, 

As thou might’st do, who sittest on my throne. 1 * 



THE PROUD KING. 


33 1 


No answer made the other for a while, 

But sat and gazed upon him steadfastly, 

Until across his face there came a smile, 

Where scorn seemed mingled with some great pity. 
And then he said, u Nathless thou shalt not die. 

But live on as thou mayst, a lowly man 
Forgetting thou wast once Jovinian.” 

Then wildly round the hall Jovinian gazed, 
Turning about to many a well-known face, 

But none of all his folk seemed grieved or mazed, 
But stood unmoved, each in his wonted place ; 
There were the Lords, the Marshal with his mace, 
The Chamberlain, the Captain of the Guard, 
Grey-headed, with his wrinkled face and hard, 

That had peered down so many a lane of war; 
There stood the grave ambassadors arow, 

Come from half-conquered lands ; without the bar 
The foreign merchants gazed upon the show, 

Willing new things of that great land to know ; 

Nor was there any doubt in any man 
That the gold throne still held Jovinian. 

Yea, as the sergeants laid their hands on him, 
The mighty hound that crouched before the throne, 
Flew at him fain to tear him limb from limb, 
Though in the woods, the brown bear’s dying groan. 
He and that beast had often heard alone. 



33 * 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 


“Ah !” muttered he, “take thou thy wages too 
Worship the risen sun as these men do.” 

They thrust him out, and as he passed the door, 
The murmur of the stately court he heard 
Behind him, and soft footfalls on the floor, 

And, though by this somewhat. his skin was seared, 
Hung back at the rough eager wind afeard ; 

But from the place they dragged him through the gate, 
Wherethrough, he oft had rid in royal state. 

Then down the streets they led him, where of. old,. 
He, coming back, from some well-finished war, 

Had seen the line of flashing steel and gold 
Wind upwards } twixt the houses from the bar, 

While clashed the bells from wreathed spires afar ; 
Now moaning, as they haled him on, he said, 

“God and the world against one lonely head !” 


B UT soon, the bar being past they loosed their hold. 

And said, “ Thus saith by us our Lord the King, 
Dwell now in peace, but yet be not so bold 
To come again, or to thy lies to ding. 

Lest unto thee there fell a worser thing;* 

And for ourselves we bid thee ever pray 
For him who has been good to thee this day.” 



THE PROUD KING. 


333 


Therewith they turned away into the town, 

And still he wandered on and knewnot where, 

Till, stumbling at the last, he fell adown, 

And looking round beheld a brook right fair, 

That ran in pools and shallows here and there, 

And on the further side of it a wood, 

Nigh which a lowly clay-built hovel stood. 

Gazing thereat, it came into his mind 
A priest dwelt there, a hermit wise and old, 

Whom he had ridden oftentimes to find, 

In days when first the sceptre he did hold, 

And unto whom his mind he oft had told, 

And had good counsel from him, though indeed 
A scanty crop had sprung from that good seed. 

Therefore he passed the brook with heavy* dheei 
And toward the little house went speedily, 

And at the door knocked, trembling with his fear, 
Because he thought, “ Will he remember me? 

If not, within me must there surely be 
Some devil who turns everything to ill, 

And makes my wretched body do his will” 

So, while such doleful things as this he thought 
There came unto the door the holy man, 

Who said, “Good friend, what tidings hast thou 
brought?” 

“ Father,” he said, “ knowest thou Jovinian? 



334 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE . 


Know’st thou me not, made naked, poor, and wan ? 
Alas, 0 father 1 am I not the King, 

The rightful lord of thee and everything ?” 

“ Nay, thou art mad to tell me such a tale I” 

The hermit said; “if thou seek’st soul’s health here, 
Right little will such words as this avail ; 

It were a better deed to shrive thee clear, 

And take the pardon Christ has bought so dear. 
Than to an ancient man such mocks to say 
That would be fitter for a Christmas play.” 

So to his hut he got him back again, 

And fell the unhappy King upon his knees, 

And unto God at last he did complain, 

Saying, “Lord God, what bitter things are these? 
What hast thou done, that every man that sees 
This wretched body, of my death is fain? 

0 Lord God, give me back myself again 1 

“ E’en if therewith I needs must die straightway. 
Indeed I know that since upon the earth 

1 first did go, I ever day by day 

Have grown the worse, who was of little woith 
E’en at the best time since my helpless birth. 

And yet it pleased thee once to make me King, 
Why hast thou made me now this wretched thing ? 


“Why am I hated so of every one 



THE PROUD KING. 


335 


Wilt thou not let me live my life again, 

Forgetting all the deeds that I have done. 
Forgetting my old name, and honours vain. 

That I may cast away this lonely pain ? 

Yet if thou wilt not, help me in this strife. 

That I may pass my little span of life, 

“ Not made a monster by unhappiness. 

What shall I say? thou mad’st me weak of will, 
Thou wrapped’st me in ease and carelessness, 

And yet, as some folk say, thou lovest me still ; 
Look down, of folly I have had my fill, 

And am but now as first thou madest me, 

Weak, yielding clay to take impress of thee.” 

So said he weeping, and but scarce had done. 
When yet again came forth that hermit old, 

And said, “Alas ! my master and my son, 

Is this a dream my wearied eyes behold ? 

What doleful wonder now shall I be told, 

Of that ill world that I so long have left ? 

What thing thy glory from thee has bereft ?” 

A strange surprise of joy therewith there came 
To that worn heart ; he said, “ For some great sin 
The Lord my God has brought me unto shame ; 

I am unknown of servants, wife, and kin, 
Unknown of all the lords that stand within 
My father's house ; nor didst diou know me more 



.336 THE EARTHL V PARADISE. 

When e’en just now I stood before thy door. 

“ Now since thou know’st me, surely God is good, 
And will not slay me, and good hope I have 
Of help from Him that died upon the rood. 

And is a mighty lord to slay and save : 

So now again these blind men will I brave, 

If thou wilt give me of thy poorest weed, 

And some rough food, the which I sorely need ; 

“ Then of my sins thou straight shalt shrive me 
clean.” 

Then weeping said the holy man, “ Dear lord, 

What heap of woes upon thine head has been; 

Enter, O King, take this rough gown and cord, 

And what scant food my hovel can afford ; 

And tell me everything thou hast to say ; 

And then the High God speed thee on thy way.” 

So when in coarse serge raiment he was clad, 

He told him all that pride had made him think : 

And showed him of his life both good and bad : 

And then being houselled, did he eat and drink, 
While in the wise man’s heart his words did sink. 

For, “ God be praised ! ” he thought, “ I am no king. 
Who scarcely shall do right in anything ! ” 


Then he made ready for the King his ass, 
And bade again, God speed him on the way. 



THE PROUD KING. 


337 


And down the road the King made haste to pass 
As it was growing toward the end of day, 

With sober joy for troubles passed away ; 

But trembling still, as onward he did ride, 
Meeting few folk upon that even-tide. 


S O to the city gate being come at last. 

He noted there two ancient warders stand, 
Whereof one looked askance as he went past, 

And whispered low behind his held-up hand 
Unto his mate, “ The King, who gave command 
That if disguised this eve he pass this gate, 

No reverence we should do his kingly state.” 

Thereat with joy, Jovinian smiled again, 

And so passed onward quickly down the street ; 
And well-nigh was he eased of all his pain 
When he beheld the folk that he might meet 
Gaze hard at him, as though they fain would greet 
His well-known face, but durst not, knowing well 
He would not any of his state should tell 

Withal unto the palace being come, 

He lighted down thereby and entered, 

And once again it seemed his royal home. 

For folk again before him bowed the head ; 

z 



338 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And to him came a Squire, who softly said, 

“ The Queen awaits thee, 0 my lord the King, 
Within the little hall where minstrels sing, 

“ Since there thou badst her meet thee on this night ' 
“Lead on then !” said the King, and in his heart 
He said, “ Perfay all goeth more than right 
And I am King again ; ” but with a start 
He thought of him who played the kingly part 
That mom, yet said, “ If God will have it so 
This man like all the rest my face will know.” 

So in the Little Hall the Queen he found, 

Asleep, as one a spell binds suddenly ; 

For her fair broidery lay upon the ground. 

And in her lap her open hand did lie, 

The silken-threaded needle close thereby ; 

And by her stood that image of the King 
In rich apparel, crown and signet-ring. 

But when the King stepped forth with angry eye 
And would have spoken, came a sudden light, 

And changed was that other utterly ; 

For he was dad in robe of shining white, 

Inwrought with flowers of unnamed colours bright 
Girt with a marvellous girdle, and whose hem 
Fell to his naked feet and shone in them ; 


And from his shoulders did two wings arise, 



THE PROUD KING. 


339 


That with the swaying of his body, played 
This way and that \ of strange and lovely dyes 
Their feathers were, and wonderfully made : 

And now he spoke, “ O King, be not dismayed, 

Or think my coming here so strange to be, 

For oft ere this have I been close to thee. 

“ And now thou knowest in how short a space 
The God that made the world can unmake thee, 
And though He alter in no whit thy face, 

Can make all folk forget thee utterly, 

That thou to-day a nameless wretch mayst be, 

Who yesterday woke up without a peer. 

The wide world’s marvel and the people’s fear. 

“ Behold, thou oughtest to thank God for this, 
That on the hither side of thy dark grave 
Thou well hast learned how great a God He is 
Who from the heavens such countless rebels drave, 
Yet turns himself such folk as thee to save ; 

For many a man thinks nought at all of it 
Till in a darksome land he comes to sit, 

Lamenting everything : so do not thou ! 

For inasmuch as thou thoughtst not to die 
This thing may happen to thee even now, 

Because the day unspeakable draws nigh, 

When bathed in unknown flame all things shall lie ; 
And if thou art upon God’s side that day, 

Unslain, thine earthly part shall pass away. 



340 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

“ Or if thy body in the grave must rot. 

Well mayst thou see how small a thing is this, 
Whose pain of yesterday now hurts thee not. 

Now thou hast come again to earthly bliss, 
Though bitter-sweet thou knowest well this is, 
And though no coming day can ever see 
Ending of happiness where thou mayst be. 

u Now must I go, nor wilt thou see me more, 
Until the day, when, unto thee at least 
This world is gone, and an unmeasured shore, 
Where all is wonderful and changed, thou seest : 
Therefore, farewell 1 at council and at feast 
Thy nobles shalt thou meet as thou hast done, 
Nor wilt thou more be strange to any one.” 

r 

So scarce had he done jpeaking, ere his wings 
Within the doorway of the hall did gleam, 

And then he vanished quite ; and all these things 
Unto Jovinian little more did seem 
Than some distinct and well-remembered dream, 
From which one wakes amidst a feverish night, 
Taking the moonshine for the morning light 

Silent he stood, not moving for a while. 
Pondering o’er all these wondrous things, until 
The Queen arose from sleep, and with a smile. 
Said, “ O fair lord, your great men by your will 
E’en as I speak the banquet-chamber fill. 



THE PROUD KING. 


34i 


To greet thee amidst joy and revelling* 

Wilt thou not therefore meet them as a King ?” 

So from that place of marvels having gone, 
Half mazed, he soon was clad in rich array, 

And sat thereafter on his kingly throne, 

As though no other had sat there that day , 

Nor did a soul of all his household say 
A word about the man, who on that mom 
Had stood there, naked, helpless, and forlorn. 

But ever day by day the thought of it 
Within Jovinian’s heart the clearer grew, 

As o’er his head the ceaseless 4 time did flit, 

And everything still towards its ending drew, 
New things becoming old, and old things new ; 
Till, when a moment of etejnity 
Had passed, grey-headed did Jovinian lie 

One sweet May morning, wakeful in his bed 
And thought, “ That day is thirty years a-gone 
Since useless folly came into my head, 

Whereby, before the steps of mine own throne, 

I stood in helpless agony alone, 

And of the wondrous things that there befell, 
When I am gone there will be none to tell : 

“No man is now alive who thinks that he, 
Who bade thrust out the madman on that tidj^x 



*42 


THE EARTHLY PARADISE , . 


Was other than the King they used to see : 

Long years have passed now, since the hermit died. 
So must I tell the tale, ere by his side 
I lie, lest it be unrecorded quite, 

Like a forgotten dream in morning light 

“Yea, lest I die ere night come, this same day 
Unto some scnbe will I tell everything, 

That it may lie when I am gone away, 

Stored up within the archives of the King , 

And may God grant the words thereof may rim; 

Like His own voice in the next comer's earn ! 
Whereby his folk shall shed the fewer tears.” 

So it was done, and at the King’s command 
A derk that day did note it every whit. 

And after by a man of skilful hand 
In golden letters fairly was it writ ; 

Yet little heed the new King took of it 
That filled the throne when King Jovmian died 
So much did all things feed his swelling pride. 

But whether God chastised him in his turn. 

And he grew wise thereafter, I know not ; 

I think by eld alone he came to learn 
How lowly on some day must be his lot 
But ye, O Kings, think all that ye have got 
To be but gawds cast out upon some heap, 

And stolen the while the Master was asleep. 



APRIL. 


343 


T HE story done, for want of happier things, 

Some men must even fall to talk of kings : 
Some trouble of a far-off Grecian isle, 

Some hard Sicilian craftsman’s cruel guile 
Whereby he raised himself to be as God, 

Till good men slew him ; the fell Peisian rod 
As blighting as f he deadly pestilence, 

The brazen net of armed men from whence 
Was no escape ; The fir-built Norway hall 
Filled with the bonders waiting for the fall 
Of the great roof whereto the torch is set ; 

The laughing mouth, beneath the eyes still wet 
With more than sea-spray, as the well-loved land 
The freeman still looks back on, while his hand 
Clutches the tiller, and the eastern breeze 
Grows fresh and fresher : many things like these 
They talked about, till they seemed young again, 
Remembering what a glory and a gain 
Their fathers deemed the death of kings to be. 

And yet amidst it, some smiied doubtfully 
For thinking how few men escape the yoke, 

From this or that man’s hand, and how most folk 
Must needs be kings and slaves the while they live, 
And take from this man, and to that man give 
Things hard enow. Yet as they mused, again 
The minstrels raised some high heroic strain 
That led men on to battle in old times; 

And midst the glory of its mingling rhymes, 

Their hard hearts softened, and strange thoughts arose 
Of some new end to all life’s cruel foes. 




Printed by B A r. LANTYNE, HANSON & Co 
Edinburgh <3* London 







MR. WILLIAM MORRIS'S WORKS. 
THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

A COLLECTION OF TALES IN VERSE. 

Parts I. and II. Prologue, March, April, May, June, July, and August, 
containing the Stories of 

THE WANDERERS. THE WRITING ON THE IMAGE. 

ATALANTA'S RACE. THE LOVE OF ALCESTIS. 

THE MAN BORN TO BE KING. THE LADY OF THE LAND. 

THE DOOM OF KING ACRISIUS. THE SON OF CRCESUS. 

THE PROUD KING. THE WATCHING OF THE FALCON. 

CUPID AND PSYCHK. PYGMALION AND THE IMAGE. 

OGIER THE DANE. 

In one volume, Crown 8vo Edition, Cloth, gilt top, price, $ 3.00. 

" " i6mo " $ 2. 25. 

Part III. September, October, and November, containing the 

Stories of 

THE DEATH OF PARIS. THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED 

THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN AND AGAIN. 

WEST OF THE MOON. THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 

ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 

In one volume, Crown 8vo Edition, Cloth, gilt top, price, $ 3.00. 
" " i6mo " #2.25. 



IN PREPARATION. 
The 4th and concluding part of 

THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

December, January, and February. 
A New Edition of 

THE DEFENCE OF GUENEVERE, 

And other Early Poems, 
with the addition of some Pieces not hitherto collected. 



Sixth Edition. i6mo, cloth, price, $ 1.50. 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON. 

A Poem, in Seventeen Books. 



Mailed, post-paid, by the Publishers, 

BOBEBTS BBOTHEBS, Boston. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



THE 



EARTHLY PARADISE 



A POEM. 



BY WILLIAM MORRIS, 

AUTHOR OF "THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON." 



PART III. 



BOSTON: 
ROBERTS BROTHERS. 

1870. 



AUTHOR'S EDITION. 



UNIVERSITY PRESS : WELCH, BIGELOW, & Co., 
CAMBRIDGE. 



Annex 



5075' 
V&70 

Y-2- 
A TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



PAGE 
SEPTEMBER . 2 

THE DEATH OF PARIS 5 

THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN AND WEST OF 
THE MOON . . 26 



OCTOBER 118 

THE STORY OF ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE . 120 
THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN . .152 

NOVEMBER 199 

THE STORY OF RHODOPE 201 

THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN .... 245 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



SEPTEMBER, OCTOBER, NOVEMBER. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



SEPTEMBER. 

OCOME at last, to whom the spring-tide's hope 
Looked for through blossoms, what hast thou for 

me? 

Green grows the grass upon the dewy slope 
Beneath thy gold-hung, gray-leaved apple-tree 
Moveless, e'en as the autumn fain would be 
That shades its sad eyes from the rising sun 
And weeps at eve because the day is done. 

What vision wilt thou give me. autumn morn, 
To make thy pensive sweetness more complete ? 
What tale, ne'er to be told, of folk unborn ? 
What images of gray-clad damsels sweet 
Shall cross thy sward with dainty noiseless feet ? 
What nameless shamefast longings made alive, 
Soft-eyed September, will thy sad heart give ? 

Look long, O longing eyes, and look in vain ! 
Strain idly, aching heart, and yet be wise, 
And hope no more for things to come again 
That thou beheldest once with careless eyes ! 
Like a new-wakened man thou art, who tries 
To dream again the dream that made him glad 
When in his arms his loving love he had. 



SEPTEMBER. 



MID young September's fruit-trees next they met, 
With calm hearts, willing such things to forget 
As men had best forget ; and certainly 
E'en such a day it was when this might be 
If e'er it might be ; fair, without a cloud, 
Yet windless, so that a gray haze did shroud 
The bright blue ; neither burning overmuch, 
Nor chill, the blood of those old folk to touch 
With fretful restless memory of despair. 
Withal no promise of the fruitful year 
Seemed unfulfilled in that fair autumn-tide ; 
The level ground along the river-side 
Was merry through the day with sounds of those 
Who gathered apples ; o'er the stream arose 
The northward-looking slopes where the swine ranged 
Over the fields that hook and scythe had changed 
Since the last month ; but 'twixt the tree-boles gray 
Above them did they see the terraced way, 
And over that the vine-stocks, row on row, 
Whose dusty leaves, well thinned and yellowing now, 
But little hid the bright-bloomed vine-bunches. 

There day-long 'neath the shadows of the trees 
Those elders sat ; chary of speech they were, 
For good it seemed to watch the young folk there, 
Not so much busied with their harvesting, 
But o'er their baskets they might stop to sing ; 
Nor for the end of labor all so fain 
But eyes of men from eyes of maids might gain 
Some look desired. 

So at the midday those 

Who played with labor in the deep green close 
Stinted their gathering for a while to eat ; 
Then to the elders did it seem most meet 
Amidst of these to set forth what they might 
Of lore remembered, and to let the night 
Bury its own dead thoughts with wine and sleep ; 
So while the loitering autumn sun did creep 



4 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

O'er flower-crowned heads, and past sweet eyes of gray, 
And eager lips, and fresh round limbs that lay 
Amid the golden fruit fruit sweet and fair 
Themselves, that happy days and love did bear 
And life unburdened while the failing sun 
Drew up the light clouds, was this tale begun, 
Sad, but not sad enow to load the yoke, 
E'en by a feather's weight, of those old folk. 
Sad, and believed but for its sweetness' sake 
By the young folk, desiring not to break 
The spell that sorrow's image cast on them, 
As dreamlike she went past with fluttering hem. 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 



ARGUMENT. 

PARIS the son of Priam was wounded by one of the poisoned arrows 
of Hercules that Philoctetes bore to the siege of Troy ; wherefore he 
had himself borne up into Ida that he might see the nymph QEnone, 
whom he once had loved, because she, who knew many secret things, 
alone could heal him ; but when he had seen her and spoken with her, 
she would deal with the matter in no wise, wherefore Paris died of that 
hurt. 

IN the last month of Troy's beleaguerment, 
When both sides, waiting for some God's great 

hand, 

But seldom o'er the meads the war-shout sent, 
Yet idle rage would sometimes drive a band 
From town or tent about Troy-gate to stand 
All armed, and there to bicker aimlessly ; 
And so at least the weary time wore by. 

In such a fight, when wide the arrows flew, 
And little glory fell to any there, 
And naught there seemed for a stout man to do, 
Rose Philoctetes from the ill-roofed lair 
That hid his rage, and crept out into air, 
And strung his bow, and slunk down to the fight, 
'Twixt rusty helms, and shields that once were bright. 

And even as he reached the foremost rank, 
A glimmer as of polished steel and gold 
Amid the war-worn Trojan folk, that shrank 
To right and left, his fierce eyes could behold ; 
He heard a shout, as if one man were bold 
About the streams of Simoeis that day 
One heart still ready to play out the play. 



6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Therewith he heard a mighty bowstring twang, 
And a shaft screamed 'twixt hostile band and band, 
And close beside him fell, with clash and clang, 
A well-tried warrior from the Cretan land, 
And rolled in dust, clutching with desperate hand 
At the gay feathers of the shaft that lay 
Deep in his heart, well silenced from that day. 

Then of the Greeks did man look upon man, 
While Philoctetes from his quiver drew. 
A dreadful shaft, and through his fingers ran 
The dull-red feathers ; of strange steel and blue 
The barbs were, such as archer never knew, 
But black as death the thin-forged bitter point, 
That with the worm's blood fate did erst anoint. 

He shook the shaft, and notched it, and therewith 
Forth from the Trojans rang that shout again, 
Whistled the arrow, and a Greek did writhe 
Once more upon the earth in his last pain ; 
While the gray clouds, big with the threat of rain, 
Parted a space, and on the Trojans shone, 
And struck a glory from that shining one. 

Then Philoctetes scowled, and cried, " O Fate, 
I give thee this, thy strong man gave to me. 
Do with it as thou wilt ! let small or great 
E'en as thou wilt before its black point be ! 
Late grows the year, and stormy is the sea, 
The oars lie rotten by the gunwales now 
That nevermore a Grecian surf shall know." 

He spake and drew the string with careless eyes, 
And, as the shaft flew forth, he turned about 
And tramped back slowly, noting in no wise 
How from the Greeks uprose a joyous shout, 
And from the Trojan host therewith brake out 
Confused clamor, and folk cried the name 
Of him wherethrough the weary struggle came, 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 

Paris the son of Priam ! then once more 
O' er head of leaguer and beleaguered town 
Gray grew the sky, a cold sea-wind swept o'er 
The ruined plain, and the small rain drove down, 
While slowly underneath that chilling frown 
Parted the hosts ; sad Troy into its gates, 
Greece to its tents, and waiting on the fates. 



NEXT day the seaward-looking gates none swung 
Back on their hinges, \vhatso Greek might fare, 
With seeming-careless mien, and bow unstrung, 
Anigh them ; whatso rough-voiced horn might dare 
With well-known notes, the war-worn warders there ; 
Troy slept amid its nightmares through the day, 
And dull with waking dreams the leaguer lay. 

Yet in the streets did man say unto man, 
" Hector is dead, and Troilus is dead ; 
ALneas turneth toward the waters wan ; 
In his fair house Antenor hides his head ; 
Fast from the tree of Troy the boughs are shred ; 
And now this Paris, now this joyous one, 
Is the cry cried that biddeth him begone ? " 

But on the morrow's dawn, ere yet the sun 
Had shone athwart the mists of last night's rain, 
And shown the image of the Spotless One 
Unto the tents and hovels of the plain 
Whose girth of war she long had made all vain, 
From out a postern looking towards the north 
A little band of silent men went forth. 

And in their midst a litter did they bear 
Whereon lay one with linen wrapped around, 
Whose wan face turned unto the fresher air 
As though a little pleasure he had found 
Amidst of pain ; some dreadful torturing wound 



8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The man endured belike, and as a balm 
Was the fresh morn, with all its rest and calm, 

After the weary tossing of the night 
And close dim-litten chamber, whose dusk seemed 
Laboring with whispers fearful of the light, 
Confused with images of dreams long dreamed, 
Come back again, now that the lone torch gleamed 
Dim before eyes that saw naught real as true 
To vex the heart that naught of purpose knew. 

Upon the late-passed night in e'en such wise 
Had Paris lain. What time like years of life, 
Had passed before his weary heart and eyes ! 
What hopeless, nameless longings ! what wild strife 
'Gainst naught for naught, with wearying changes rife, 
Had he gone through, till in the twilight gray 
They bore him through the cold deserted way. 

Mocking and strange the streets looked now, most 

meet 

For a dream's ending, for a vain life's end ; 
While sounded his strong litter-bearers' feet, 
Like feet of men who through Death's country wend 
Silent, for fear lest they should yet offend 
The grim King satisfied to let them go, 
Hope bids them hurry, fear's chain makes them slow. 

In feverish doze of time a-gone he thought, 
When love was soft, life strong, and a sweet name, 
The first sweet name that led him down love's ways, 
Unbidden ever to his fresh lips came ; 
Half witting would he speak it, and for shame 
Flush red, and think what folk would deem thereof 
If they might know CEnone was his love. 

And now, CEnone no more love of his. 
He worn with war and passion must he pray, 
" O thou, I loved and love not, life and bliss 
Lie in thine hands to give or take away ; 



THE DEA TH OF PARIS. c 

O heal me, hate me not ! think of the day 
When as thou thinkest still, e'en so I thought, 
That all the world without thy love was naught." 

Yea, he was borne forth such a prayer to make, 
For she alone of all the world, they said, 
The thirst of that dread poison now might slake, 
For midst the ancient wise ones nurtured 
On peaceful Ida, in the lore long dead, 
Lost to the hurrying world, right wise she was, 
Mighty to bring most wondrous things to pass. 

Was the world worth the minute of that prayer 
If yet her love, despised and cast aside, 
Should so shine forth that she should heal him there ? 
He knew not and he recked not ; fear and pride 
'Neath Helen's kiss and Helen's tears had died, 
And life was love, and love too strong that he 
Should catch at Death to save him misery. 

So, with soul drifting down the stream of love, 
He let them bear him through the fresh fair morn, 
From out Troy-gates ; and no more now he strove 
To battle with the wild dreams, newly born 
From that past night of toil and pain forlorn ; 
No farewell did he mutter 'neath his breath 
To failing Troy, no eyes he turned toward death. 

Troy dwindled now behind them, and the way 
That round about the feet of Ida wound, 
They left ; and up a narrow vale, that lay, 
Grassy and soft betwixt the pine-woods bound, 
They went, and ever gained the higher ground, 
For as a trench the little valley was 
To catch the runnels that made green its grass. 

Now ere that green vale narrowed to an end, 
Blocked by a shaly slip thrust bleak and bare 
From the dark pine-wood's edge, as men who wend 
Upon a well-known way, they turned them there, 



io THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And through the pine-wood's dusk began to fare 
By blind ways, till all noise of bird and wind 
Amid that odorous night was left behind. 

And in mean while deepened the languid doze 
That lay on Paris into slumber deep, 
O'er his unconscious heart, and eyes shut close, 
The image of that very place 'gan creep, 
And twelve years younger in his dreamful sleep, 
Light-footed, through the awful wood he went, 
With beating heart, on lovesome thoughts intent. 

Dreaming, he went, till thinner and more thin, 
And bright with growing day, the pine-wood grew, 
Then to an open rugged space did win ; 
Whence a close beech-wood was he passing through, 
Whose every tall white stem full well he knew ; 
Then seemed to stay awhile for loving shame, 
When to the brow of the steep bank he came, 

Where still the beech-trunks o'er the mast-strewn 

ground 

Stood close, and slim and tall, but hid not quite 
A level grassy space they did surround 
On every side save one, "that to the light 
Of the clear western sky, cold now, but bright, 
Was open, and the thought of the far sea, 
Toward which a small brook tinkled merrily. 

Him seemed he lingered there, then stepped adown 
With troubled heart into the soft green place, 
And up the eastmost of the beech-slopes brown 
He turned about a lonesome, anxious face, 
And stood to listen for a little space 
If any came, but naught he seemed to hear 
Save the brook's babble, and the beech-leaves' stir. 

And then he dreamed great longing o'er him came ; 
Too great, too bitter of those days to be 
Long past, when love was born amidst of shame ; 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. n 

He dreamed that, as he gazed full eagerly 
Into the green dusk between tree and tree, 
His trembling hand slid clown the horn to take 
Wherewith he erst was wont his herd to wake. 

Trembling, he set it to his lips, and first 
Breathed gently through it ; then strained hard to 

blow, 

For dumb, dumb was it grown, and no note burst 
From its smooth throat ; and ill thoughts poisoned now 
The sweetness of his dream ; he murmured low, 
" Ah ! dead and gone, and ne'er to come again ; 
Ah, past away ! ah, longed for long in vain ! 

" Lost love, sweet Helen, come again to me ! " 
Therewith he dreamed he fell upon the ground 
And hid his face, and wept out bitterly, 
But woke with fall and torturing tears, and found 
He. lay upon his litter, and the sound, 
Of feet departing from him did he hear, 
And rustling of the last year's leaves anear. 

But in the self-same place he lay indeed, 
Weeping and sobbing, and scarce knowing why ; 
His hand clutched hard the horn that erst did lead 
The dew-lapped neat round Ida merrily ; 
He strove to raise himself, he strove to ciy 
That name of Helen once, but then withal 
Upon him did the load of memory fall. 

Quiet he lay a space, while o'er him drew 
The dull, chill cloud of doubt and sordid fear, 
As now he thought of what he came to do, 
And what a dreadful minute drew anear ; 
He shut his eyes, and now no more could hear 
His litter-bearers' feet ; as lone he felt 
As though amid the outer wastes he dwelt. 

Amid that fear a minute naught and vain 
His life and love seemed ; with a dreadful sigh 



12 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

He raised his arm, and soul's and body's pain 
Tore at his heart with new-born agony 
As a thin quavering note ; a ghost-like cry 
Rang from the long-unused lips of the horn, 
Spoiling the sweetness of the happy morn. 

He let the horn fall down upon his breast 
And lie there, and his hand fell to his side ; 
And there indeed his body seemed to rest, 
But restless was his soul, and wandered wide 
Through a dim maze of lusts unsatisfied ; 
Thoughts half thought out, and words half said, and 

deeds 
Half done, unfruitful, like o'er-shadowed weeds. 

His eyes were shut now, and his dream's hot tears 
Were dry upon his cheek ; the sun grown high 
Had slain the wind, when smote upon his ears 
A sudden rustling in the beech-leaves dry ; 
Then came a pause ; then footsteps drew anigh 
O'er the deep grass ; he shuddered, and in vain 
He strove to turn, despite his burning pain. 

Then through his half-shut eyes he seemed to see 
A woman drawing near, and held his breath, 
And clutched at the white linen eagerly, 
And felt a greater fear than fear of death, 
A greater pain than that love threatened!, 
As soft low breathing o'er his head he heard, 
And thin fine linen raiment gently stirred. 

Then spoke a sweet voice close, ah, close to him ! 
" Thou sleepest, Paris ? would that I could sleep ! 
On the hillside do I lay limb to limb,' 
And lie day-long watching the shadows creep 
And change, till day is gone, and night is deep, 
Yet sleep not ever, wearied with the thought 
Of all a little lapse of time has brought. 

" Sleep, though thou calledst me ! yet 'mid thy dream 
Hearken, the while I tell about my life, 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 13 

The life I led, while 'mid the steely gleam 
Thou wert made happy with the joyous strife ; 
Or in the soft arms of the Greek king's wife 
Wouldst still moan out that day had come too soon, 
Calling the dawn the glimmer of the moon. 

" Wake not, wake not, before the tale is told ! 
Not long to tell, the tale of those ten years ! 
A gnawing pain that never groweth old, 
A pain that shall not be washed out by tears ; 
A dreary road the weary foot-sole wears, 
Knowing no rest, but going to and fro, 
Treading it harder 'neath the weight of woe. 

" No middle, no beginning, and no end ; 
No staying place, no thought of anything, 
Bitter or sweet, with that one thought to blend ; 
No least joy left that I away might fling 
And deem myself grown great ; no hope to cling 
About me, naught but dull, unresting pain, 
That made all memory sick, all striving vain. 

"Thou hastthou thought thereof, perchance anights 
In early dawn, and shuddered, and then said, 
1 Alas, poor soul ! yet hath she had delights, 
For none are wholly hapless but the dead.' 
Liar ! O liar ! my woe upon thine head, 
My agony that naught can take away ! 
Awake, arise, O traitor, unto day ! " 

Her voice rose as she spoke, till loud and shrill 
It rang about the place ; but when at last 
She ended, and the echoes from the hill, 
Woful and wild, back o'er the place were cast 
From her lost love a little way she passed 
Trembling, and looking round as if afeard 
At those ill sounds that through the morn she heard. 

Then still she stood, her clenched hands slim and 

white 
Relaxed, her drawn brow smoothed ; with a great sigh 



14 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Her breast heaved, and she muttered : " Ere the light 

Of yesterday had faded from the sky 

I knew that he would seek me certainly ; 

And, knowing it, yet feigned I knew it not, 

Or with what hope, what hope my heart was hot. 

" That tumult in my breast I might not name 
Love should I call it ? nay, my life was love 
And pain these ten years should I call it shame ? 
What shame my weary waiting might reprove 
After ten years ? or pride ? what pride could move 
After ten years this heart within my breast ? 
Alas ! I lied I lied, and called it rest. 

" I called it rest, and wandered through the night ; 
Upon my river's flowery bank I stood, 
And thought its hurrying changing black and white 
Stood still beneath the moon, that hill and wood 
Were moving round me, and I deemed it good 
The world should change so, deemed it good, that day 
Forever into night had passed away. 

" And still I wandered through the night, and still 
Things changed, and changed not round me, and the 

day 

This day wherein I am, had little will 
With dreadful truth to drive the night away 
God knows if for its coming I did pray ! 
God knows if at the last in twilight-tide 
My hope my hope undone I more might hide." 

Then looked she toward the litter as she spake, 
And slowly drew anigh it once again, 
And from her worn tried heart there did outbreak 
Wild sobs and weeping, shameless of its pain, 
Till as the storm of passion 'gan to wane 
She looked and saw the shuddering misery 
Wherein her love of the old days did lie. 

Still she wept on, but gentler now withal, 
And passed on till above the bier she stood, 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 15 

Watching the well-wrought linen rise and fall 
Beneath his faltering breath, and still her blood 
Ran fiery hot with thoughts of ill and good, 
Pity and scorn, and love and hate, as she, 
Half dead herself, gazed on his misery. 

At last she spake : " This tale I told e'en now, 
Know'st thou 'mid dreams what woman suffered this ? 
Canst thou not dream of the old days, and how 
Full oft thy lips would say 'twixt kiss and kiss 
That all of bliss was not enough of bliss 
My loveliness and kindness to reward, 
That for thy Love the sweetest life was hard ? 

" Yea, Paris, have I not been kind to thee ? 
Did I not live thy wishes to fulfil ? 
Wert thou not happy when thou lovedst me, 
What dream then did we have of change or ill ? 
Why must thou needs change ? I am unchanged still ; 
I need no more than thee what needest thou 
But that we might be happy, yea e'en now ? " 

He opened hollow eyes and looked on her, 
And stretched a trembling hand out ; ah, who knows 
With what strange mingled look of hope and fear, 
Of hate and love, their eyes met ! Come so close 
Once more, that everything they now might lose 
Amid the flashing out of that old fire, 
The short-lived uttermost of all desire. 

He spake not, shame and other love there lay 
Too heavy on him ; but she spake again : 
" E'en now at the beginning of the day, 
Weary with hope and fear and restless pain, 
I said Alas, I said, If all be vain 
And he will have no pity, yet will I 
Have pity how shall kindness ere pass by ? " 

He drew his hand aback, and laid it now 
Upon the swathings of his wound, but she 



:6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Set her slim hand upon her knitted brow 
And gazed on him with bright eyes eagerly ; 
Nor cruel looked her lips that once would be 
So kind, so longed for : neither spake awhile, 
Till in her face there shone a sweet strange smile. 

She touched him not, but yet so near she came 
That on his very face he felt her breath ; 
She whispered, " Speak ! thou wilt not speak for shame, 
I will not grant for love, and gray-winged Death 
Meanwhile above our folly hovereth ; 
Speak ! was it not all false, is it not done ? 
Is not the dream dreamed out, the dull night gone ? 

" Hearkenest thou, Paris ? O look kind on me ! 
I hope no more indeed, but couldst thou turn 
Kind eyes to me, then much for me and thee 
Might love do yet. Doth not the old fire burn ? 
Doth not thine heart for words of old days yearn? 
Canst thou not say Alas, what wilt thou say, 
Since I have put by hope for many a day ? 

" Paris, I hope no more, yet while ago 
Take it not ill if I must needs say this 
A while ago I cried ; Ah ! no, no, no ! 
It is no love at all, this love of his, 
He loves her not, I it was had the bliss 
Of being the well-beloved dead is his love, 
For surely none but I his heart may move." 

She wept still ; but his eyes grew wild and strange 
With that last word, and harder his face grew 
Though her tear-blinded eyes saw not the change. 
Long beat about his heart false words and true, 
A veil of strange thought he might not pierce through, 
Of hope he might not name, clung round about 
His wavering heart, perplexed with death and doubt 

Then trembling did he speak : " I love thee still, 
Surely I love thee." But a dreadful pain 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 17 

Shot through his heart, and strange presage of ill 

As like the ceasing of the summer rain 

Her tears stopped, and she drew aback again, 

Silent a moment, till a bitter cry 

Burst from her lips grown white with agony. 

A look of pity came across his face 
Despite his pain and horror, and her eyes 
Saw it, and changed, and for a little space 
Panting she stood, as one checked by surprise 
Amidst of passion ; then in tender wise, 
Kneeling, she 'gan the bandages undo 
That hid the place the bitter shaft tore through. 

Then when the wound and his still face and white 
Lay there before her, she 'gan tremble sore, 
For images of hope and past delight, 
Not to be named once, 'gan her heart flit o'er ; 
Blossomed the longing in her heart, and bore 
A dreadful thought of uttermost despair, 
That all if gained would be no longer fair. 

In dull low words she spake : " Yea, so it is, 
That thou art near thy death, and this thy wound 
I yet may heal, and give thee back what bliss 
The ending of thy life may yet surround : 
Mock not thyself with hope ! the Trojan ground 
Holds tombs, not houses now, all Gods are gone 
From out your temples but cold Death alone. 

" Lo, if I heal thee, and thou goest again 
Back unto Troy, and she, thy new love, sees 
Thy lovesome body freed from all its pain, 
And yet awhile amid the miseries 
Of Troy ye twain lie loving, well at ease, 
Yet 'midst of this while she is asking thee 
What kind soul made thee whole and well to be, 

" And thou art holding back my name with lies, 
And thinking, maybe, Paris, of this face 
E'en then the Greekish flame shall sear your eyes, 
2 



i8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The clatter of the Greeks fill all the place, 

While she, my woe, the ruin of thy race, 

Looking toward changed days, a new crown, shall stand, 

Her fingers trembling in her husband's hand. 

" Thou I called love once, wilt thou die e'en thus, 
Ruined 'midst ruin, ruining, bereft 
Of name and honor ? O love, piteous 
That but for this were all the hard things cleft 
That lay 'twixt us and love ; till naught was left 
'Tvvixt thy lips, and my lips ! O hard that we 
Were once so full of all felicity ! 

" O love, O Paris, know'st thou this of me 
That in these hills e'en such a name I have 
As being akin to a divinity ; 
And lightly may I slay and lightly save ; 
Nor know I surely if the peaceful grave 
Shall ever hide my body dead behold, 
Have ten long years of misery made me old ? " 

Sadly she laughed ; and rising wearily 
Stood by him in the fresh and sunny morn ; 
The image of his youth and faith gone by 
She seemed to be, for one short minute born 
To make his shamed lost life seem more forlorn ; 
He shut his eyes and moaned, but once again 
She knelt beside him and the weary pain 

Deepened upon her face. " Hearken ! " she said, 
" Death is anear thee ; is then death so ill 
With me anigh thee since Troy is as dead, 
Ere many tides the Xanthus' mouth shall fill, 
And thou art reft of her that harmed me still, 
Whatso may change shall I heal thee for this, 
That thou may'st die more mad for her last kiss ? " 

She gazed at him with straining eyes ; and he 
Despite himself love touched his dying heart 
And from his eyes desire flashed suddenly, 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 19 

And o'er his wan face the last blood did start 
As with soft love his close-shut lips 'gan part. 
She laughed out bitterly, and said, " Why then 
Must I needs call thee falsest of all men, 

" Seeing thou liest not to save thy life ? 
Yet listen once again fair is this place 
That knew not the beginning of the strife 
And recks not of its end and this my face, 
This body thou wouldst day-long once embrace 
And deem thyself right happy thine it is, 
Thine only, Paris, shouldst thou deem it bliss." 

He looked into her eyes, and deemed he saw 
A strange and awful look a-gathering there, 
And sick scorn at her quivering fine lip draw ; 
Yet trembling he stretched out his hand to her, 
Although self-loathing and strange hate did tear 
His heart that Death made cold, e'en as he said, 
" Whatso thou wilt shall be remembered ; 

" Whatso thou wilt, O love, shall be forgot, 
It may be I shall love thee as of old." 
As thunder laughs she laughed " Nay, touch me not ! 
Touch me not, fool ! " she cried, " Thou grow'st a-cold, 
And I am Death, Death, Death ! the tale is told 
Of all thy days ! of all those joyous days 
When thinking naught of me thou garneredst praise. 

" Turn back again, and think no more of me ! 
I am thy Death ! woe for thy happy days ! 
For I must slay thee ; ah, my misery ! 
Woe for the God-like wisdom thou wouldst praise ! 
Else I my love to life again might raise 
A minute, ah, a minute ! and be glad 
While on my lips thy blessing lips I had ? 

" Would God that it were yesterday again ; 
Would God the red sun had died yester-eve, 
And I were no more hapless now than then ! 



20 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Would God that I could say, and not believe, 
As yesterday, that years past hope did leave 
My cold heart that I lived a death in life 
Ah ! then within my heart was yet a strife ! 

" But now, but now, is all come to an end 
Nay, speak not ; think not of me ! think of her 
Who made me this ; and back unto her wend, 
Lest her lot, too, should be yet heavier ! 
I will depart for fear thou diest here, 
Lest I should see thy woful ghost forlorn 
Here wandering ever 'twixt the night and morn. 

" O heart grown wise, wilt thou not let me go ? 
Will ye be never satisfied, O eyes, 
With gazing on my misery and my woe ; 
O foolish quivering heart, now grown so wise, 
What folly is it that from out thee cries 
To be all close to him once more, once more 
Ere yet the dark stream cleaveth shore from shore ? " 

Her voice was a wail now, with quivering hand 
At her white raiment did she clutch and tear 
Unwitting, as she rose up and did stand 
Bent over his wide eyes and pale face, where 
No torturing hope was left, no pain, or fear ; 
For Death's cold rest was gathering fast on him, 
And toward his heart crept over foot and limb. * 

A little while she stood, and spake no word, 
But hung above him, with white heaving breast, 
And moaning still as moans the gray-winged bird 
In autumn-tide o'er his forgotten nest ; 
And then her hands about her throat she pressed, 
As though to keep a cry back, then stooped down 
And set her face to his, while spake her moan : 

" O love, O cherished more than I can tell, 
Through years of woe, O love, my life and bane, 
My joy and grief, farewell, farewell, farewell ! 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 

Forgetfulness of grief I yet may gain ; 
In some wise may come ending to my pain ; 
It may be yet the Gods will have me glad ! 
Yet, love, I would that thee and pain I had ! 

" Alas ! it may not be, it may not be, 
The falling blossom of the late spring-tide, 
Shall hang a golden globe upon the tree 
When through the vale the mists of autumn glide : 
Yet would, O Love, with thee I might abide. 
Now, now that restful death is drawing nigh 
Farewell, farewell, how good it is to die ! " 

O strange, O strange, when on his lips once more 
Her lips were laid ! O strange that he must die 
Now, when so clear a vision had come o'er, 
His failing heart, and keenest memory 
Had shown him all his changing life passed by : 
And what he was, and what he might have been, 
Yea, and should be, perchance, so clear were seen ! 

Yea, then were all things laid within the scale, 
Pleasure and lust, love and desire of fame, 
Kindness, and hope, and folly all the tale 
Told in a moment, as across him came 
That sudden flash, bright as the lightning-flame, 
Showing the wanderer on the waste how he 
Has gone astray 'mid dark and misery. 

Ah, and her face upon his dying face 
That the sun warmed no more ! that agony 
Of dying love, wild with the tale of days 
Long past, and strange with hope that might not be - 
All was gone now, and what least part had he 
I n Love at all, and why was life all gone ? 
Why must he meet the eyes of death alone ? 

Alone, for she and ruth had left him there ; 
Alone, because the ending of the strife 
He knew, well taught by death, drew surely near ; 



22 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Alone, for all those years with pleasure rife 
Should be a tale 'mid Helen's coming life, 
And she and all the world should go its ways, 
'Midst other troubles, other happy days. 

And yet how was it with him ? As if death 
Strove yet with struggling life and love in vain, 
With eyes grown deadly bright and rattling breath, 
He raised himself, while wide his blood did stain 
The linen fair, and seized the horn again, 
And blew thereon a wild and shattering blast 
Ere from his hand afar the thing he cast. 

Then, as a man who in a failing fight 
For a last onset gathers suddenly 
All soul and strength, he faced the summer light, 
And from his lips broke forth a mighty cry 
Of " Helen, Helen, Helen !" yet the sky 
Changed not above his cast-back golden head, 
And merry was the world though he was dead. 



BUT now when every echo was as still 
As were the lips of Paris, once more came 
The litter-bearers down the beech-clad hill 
And stood about him crying out his name, 
Lamenting for his beauty and his fame, 
His love, his kindness, and his merry heart, 
That still would thrust ill days and thoughts apart. 

Homeward they bore him through the dark woods' 

gloom 

With heavy hearts presaging nothing good, 
And when they entered Troy again, a tomb 
For them and theirs it seemed Long has it stood, 
But now indeed the labor and the blood, 
The love, the patience, and good-heart are vain 
The Greeks may have what yet is left to gain. 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 23 



I CAN NOT tell what crop may clothe the hills, 
The merry hills Troy whitened long ago 
Belike the sheaves, wherewith the reaper fills 
His yellow wain, no whit the weaker grow 
For that past harvest-tide of wrong and woe ; 
Belike the tale, wept over otherwhere, 
Of those old days is clean forgotten there. 



ALAS too short seemed to those ancient men 
The little span of threescore years and ten, 
Too hard, too bitter, the dull years of life 
Beset at best with many a care and strife 
To bear withal Love's torment, and the toils 
Wherewith the days of youth and joy he spoils ; 
Since e'en so God makes equal Eld and Youth 
Tormenting Youth with lies and Eld with truth ; 
Wellnigh they blamed the singer too, that he 
Must needs draw pleasure from men's misery ; 
Nathless a little even they must feel 
How time and tale a long-past woe will heal, 
And make a melody of grief, and give 
Joy to the world that whoso dies shall live. 
Moreover, good it was for them to note 
The slim hand set unto the changing throat, 
The lids down drooped to hide the passionate eyes 
Whereto the sweet thoughts all unbid would rise ; 
The bright-cheeked shame, the conscious mouth as love 
Within the half-hid gentle breast 'gan move, 
Like a swift-opening flower beneath the sun ; 
The sigh and half-frown as the tale was done. 
And thoughts uncertain, hard to grasp, did flit 
'Twixt the beginning and the end of it 
And to their ancient eyes it well might seem 
Lay tale in tale, as dream within a dream, 
Untold now the beginning, and the end 



24 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Not to be heard by those whose feet should wend 
Long ere that tide through the dim ways of death. 

But now the sun grew dull, the south wind's breath 
Ruffled the stream, and spake within the trees 
Of rain beyond the hills ; the images 
The tale wrought changed with the changed deadening 

day, 
Till dim they grew and vanished quite away. 



NOW when September drew unto its end, 
Unto the self-same place those men did wend 
Where last they feasted ; and the autumn day 
Was so alike to that one passed away, 
That, but for silence of the close stripped bare, 
And absence of the merry folk and fair, 
Whose feet the deep grass, making haste to grow 
Before the winter, minded nothing now 
But for the thinned and straightened boughs, well freed 
Of golden fruit ; the vine-stocks that did need 
No pruning more, ere eager man and maid 
Brown fingers on the dusty bunches laid 
But for these matters, they might even deem 
That they had slept awhile and dreamed a dream, 
And woke up weary in the self-same place. 

And now as each man saw his fellow's face 
They 'gan to smile, beholding this same thought 
Each in the other's eyes : 

" Or all is naught 

Whereof I think," at last a wanderer said, 
" Or of my tale shall ye be well apaid ; 
Meet is it for this silent company 
Sitting here musing, well content to see 
The shadows changing, as the sun goes by : 
A dream it is, friends, and no history 
Of men who ever lived ; so blame me naught 



THE DEATH OF PARIS. 25 

If wondrous things together there are brought, 
Strange to our waking world yet as in dreams 
Of known things still we dream, whatever gleams 
Of unknown light may make them strange, so here 
Our dreamland story holdeth such things dear 
And such things loathed, as we do ; else, indeed, 
Were all its marvels naught to help our need. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN AND 
WEST OF THE MOON. 

ARGUMENT. 

THIS tale, which is set forth as a dream, tells of a churl's son who won a 
fair Queen to his love, and afterwards lost her, and yet in the end was 
not deprived of her. 

TN Norway, in King Magnus^ (fays, 
* A man there dwelt, my story says, 
Who Gregory had got to name ; 
Folks said from oulland parts he came, 
Though none knew whence; he served withal 
The Marshal Biorn infield and hall, 
And little, yet was deft of hand 
And stout of heart, when men did stand 
Spear against spear ; and his black eyes 
Folk deemed were somewhat overwise 
For of the stars full well he knew, 
And whither lives of men they drew. 
So Gregory the Star-gazer 
Men called him, and somewhat in fear 
They held him, though his daily mood 
Was ever mild enow and good. 

It chanced upon a summer day, 
When in the south King Magnus lay, 

With all his men, the Marshal sent 
A well-manned cutter, with intent 
To get him fish for housekeeping, 
And Gregory, skilful in this thing, 
The skipper over them to bej 
So merrily they put to sea, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 2^ 

And off a little island /ay, 
Amidst the firth, and fished all day, 
But when night fell, ashore they went 
Upon the isle, and pitched their tent, 
And ate and drank, and slept at last. 
But while sleep held the others fast 
Did Gregory waken, turning oft 
Upon his rough bed nothing soft, 
Till stealthily at last he rose 
And crept from the tent thronged and close 
Into the fresh and cloudless night, 
And'neath the high-set moon's cold light 
Went softly down unto the sea ; 
And sleep, that erst had seemed to be 
A thing his life must hope in vain, 
Now 'gan to fall on him again, 
E'en as he reached the sandy bay 
Where on the beach their cutter lay. 
Calm was the sea 'twixt wall and wall 
Of the green bight; the surf did fall 
With little noise upon the sand, 
Where 'neat A the moon the smooth curved strand 
Shone white 'twixt dark sea, rocks, and turf. 

There, hearkening to the lazy surf, 
Musing he scarcely knew of what, 
Upon a gray rock Gregory sat, 
Till sleep had all its will of him, 
And now at last, with slackened limb 
And nodding head, he fell to dream; 
And far away nou- did he seem, 
Waked up within the great hall, where 
King Magnus held right merry cheer 
In honor of the Christmas-tide, 
At Ladir; and on every side 
His court men and good bonders sat. 

There as folk talked of this and that, 
And drank, and all were blithe enow, 
Amid the drifting of the snow 
And howling of the wind without, 



28 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Within the porch folk heard a shout, 

A nd opening of the outer door ; 

Then one came in, who to the floor 

Cast down the weight of snow, and stood 

Undoing of his fur-lined hood, 

And muttering in his beard the while. 

The King gazed on him with a smile, 
Then said at last, ' What is it then ? 
Art thou called one of my good men, 
And art thou of the country-side, 
Or hast thou mayhap wandered wide ? 
Come sit thee down and eat and drink 
And yet hast thou some news, I think ?" 

The man said, "News from over sea 
Of Mary and the Trinity, 
And goodman Joseph do I bring; 
Nowell, Nowell, Nowell, O King ! " 

Inward he stalked on, therewithal, 
But stopped amidmost of the hall, 
And cast to earth his cloak and hood, 
And there in glittering raiment stood, 
While the maids went about the board 
And deftly the cup^s river poured, 
And ''mid great clank of ewer and horn 
Men drank the day when Christ was born. 

Then by the King the gold-clad man 
Sat, Gregory dreamed, and soon began 
Great marvels of far lands to tell, 
And said at last : 

" Ye serve me well, 

And strange things therefore will I show, 
Wonders that none save ye may know j 
That ye this stormy night may call 
A joyful tide in kingly hall 
A night to be remembered" 

Then Gregory dreamed he turned his head 
Unto the stranger, and their eyes 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 29 

Met therewith, and a great surprise 
Shot through his heart, because indeed 
That strange man in the royal iveed l 
Sezined as his other self to be 
As he began this history. 



IN this your land there once did dwell 
A certain carle who lived full well, 
And lacked few things to make him glad ; 
And three fair sons this goodman had, 
Whereof were two stout men enow 
Betwixt the handles of the plough, 
Ready to drive the wagons forth, 
Or pen the sheep up from the north, 
Or help the corn to garner in, 
Or from the rain the hay to win ; 
To dyke after the harvesting, 
And many another needful thing. 
But slothful was the youngest one, 
A loiterer in the spring-tide sun, 
A do-naught by the fireside 
From end to end of winter-tide, 
And wont in summer heats to go 
About the garden to and fro, 
Plucking the ilowers from bough and stalk ; 
And muttering oft amid his walk 
Old rhymes that few men understood. 

" Now is he neither harm nor good," 
His father said, " there, let him go 
And do what he has lust to do." 

Now so it chanced the goodman had 
A meadow meet to make him glad 
Full oft because of its sweet grass, 
Whereto an ill thing came to pass, 
When else the days were drawing nigh 



30 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

To hay-harvest, and certainly 

Our goodman thought all would be won 

Before the morrow of St. John. 

For as he walked thereto one day 

He fell to thinking on the way, 

" A fair east wind, and cloudless sky 

In scythes before two days go by." 

But yet befell a grievous slip 

Betwixt that fair cup and the lip, 

For when he reached the wattled fence, 

And looked across his meadow thence, 

His broad face drew into a frown, 

For there he saw all trodden down 

A full third of the ripening grass, 

So that no scythe might through it pass ; 

Then in a rage he turned away 

And was a moody man that day. 

But when that eve he sat at home 
And his two eldest sons had come 
Back from the field, he spake and said : 

" Ill-doers, sons, by likelihood 
Be here about, or envious men ; 
I thought the last had left us, when 
Skeggi's two sons put off to sea, 
Yet is there left some enemy 
Not bold enough on field or way 
To draw the sword his debt to pay ; 
Therefore, son Thorolf, shall thou go 
And bear with thee the great cross-bow, 
And hide within the white-thorn brake 
And lie there all this night awake 
Watching the great south meadow well ; 
Because last night it so befell 
This gangrel thief thought fit to tread 
The grass to mammocks by my head ! " 

So Thorolf rose unwillingly, 
And round about his waist did tie 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 31 

The case of bolts, and took adown 
The mighty cross-bow tough and brown, 
And in his strong belt set a knife 
Lest he should come to closer strife, 
And thereon, having drunk full well, 
Went on his way, and thought to tell, 
A goodly tale at break of day ; 
Thus to the mead he gat and lay 
Close hidden in the hawthorn brake, 
And kept but little time awake, 
But on the sorrel slept as soft 
As on his truckle in the loft, 
Nor woke until the sun was high, 
When looking thence full sleepily 
He saw yet more of that fair field, 
So dealt with, that it scarce would yield 
Much fodder to his father's neat 
That summer-tide, of sour or sweet. 

Then home he turned with hanging head, 
And right few words that tide he said, 
In answer to his father's scoff, 
But toward the middenstead went off. 

So that same night the vexed carle sent 
His next son Thord with like intent ; 
But ere the yellow moon was down 
Asleep and snoring lay our clown, 
And waking at the dawn could see 
The meadow trodden grievously. 

Now when unto the house he came, 
Speaking no word for very shame, 
The good man 'gan to gibe and jeer, 
Saying that many a groat too dear 
Such sleepy-headed fools he bought, 
That tide when he their mother sought 
With Flemish cloth and silver rings 
And chains, and far-fetched, dear-bought things 
The mariners had sold to him, 
For which had many a man to swim 



32 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Head downward to the porpoises 
All to get gluttons like to these ! 

The third son John, who on the floor 
Was lying kicking at the door, 
Turned round and yawned, and stretched, and said, 
" Alas, then, all my rest is sped, 
For now thou wilt be sending me, 
O father, the third watch to be. 
Well, keep thy heart up, I shall know 
To-morrow, what thing grieves thee so." 

" Yea, yea," his father said, " truly 
A noble son thou art to me ! 
Thou fool, thou thinkest then to win 
The game when these have failed therein ! 
Truly a mighty mind I have 
Thy bread and beer henceforth to save, 
And send thee with some skipper forth, 
Who brings back stockfish from the north ; 
Then no more dreaming wouldst thou spend 
Thy days, but learn to know rope's-end 
And stumble on the icy decks 
To no sweet music of rebecks. 
Yet since indeed a fool may do 
What no wise man may come unto, 
Go thou, if thou hast any will, 
Because thou canst not do me ill ; 
And lo, thou ! if thou dost me good 
Then will I fill thy biggest hood 
With silver pennies for thine own, 
To squander in the market-town." 

Naught answered John, but turned away, 
And underneath the trees all day 
He slept, but with the moon arose ; 
Nor did he arm himself like those, 
His brethren, for he thought, '" Indeed, 
Of bolt and bow have I no need, 
For if ill-doers there should be, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 33 

Then will they slay me certainly, 

If I should draw on them a bolt ; 

And, though my brethren call me dolt, 

Yet have I no such foolish thought 

For a shaft's whistle to be brought 

To death withal I shall not see 

Men-folk belike, but faerie, 

And all the arms within the seas 

Should help me naught to deal with these ; 

Rather of such lore were I fain 

As fell to Sigurd Fafnir's-bane 

When of the dragon's heart he ate. 

Well, whatso hap I gain of fate, 

I know I will not sleep this night, 

But wake to see a marvellous sight." 

Therewith he came unto the mead, 
And looked around with utmost heed 
About the remnant of the hay ; 
Then in the hawthorn brake he lay 
And watched night-long 'midst many a thought 
Of what might be, and yet saw naught 
As slowly the short night went by, 
'Midst bittern's boom and fern-owl's cry ; 
Then the moon sank, the stars grew pale, 
And the first dawn 'gan show the veil 
The night had drawn from tree to tree, 
A light wind rose, and suddenly 
A thrush drew head from under wing, 
And through the cold dawn 'gan to sing, 
And one by one about him woke 
The minstrels of the. feathered folk, 
Long ere the first gleam of the sun. 
Then, though his watch was but begun, 
E'en at that tide, as well he knew, 
O'er John a drowsiness there drew, 
And nothing seemed so good as sleep, 
And sweet dreams o'er his eyes 'gan creep 
That made him smile, then wake again 
In terror that his watch was vain ; 
3 



34 THE EARTPILY PARADISE. 

But in the midst of one of these 

He started up, for through the trees 

A mighty rushing sound he heard, 

As of the wings of many a bird ; 

And, stark awake, with beating heart, 

He put the hawthorn twigs apart, 

And yet saw no more wondrous thing 

Than seven white swans, who on wide wing 

Went circling round, till one by one 

They dropped the dewy grass upon. 

He smiled thereat, and thought to shout 

And scare them off; but yet a doubt 

Clung to him, as he gazed on those, 

And in the brake he held him close, 

And watched them bridle there, and preen 

Their snowy feathers well beseen ; 

So near they were, that he a stone 

Might have cast o'er the furthest one 

With his left hand, as there he lay. 



Apace came on the summer day, 
Though the sun lingered, and more near 
The swans drew, and began to peer 
About in strange wise, and John deemed, 
In after days, he must have dreamed 
Again, if for the shortest space ; 
For a cloud seemed to dull the place 
And silence of the birds there was ; 
And when he next looked o'er the grass, 
Six swan-skins lay anigh his hand, 
And near by on the grass did stand 
Seven white-skinned damsels, wrought so fair 
That John must sit and tremble there, 
And flush blood-red, and cast his eyes 
Down on the ground in shamefast wise, 
Then look again with longings sweet 
Piercing his heart ; because their feet 
Moved through the long gray-seeded grass 
But some two yards from where he was. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 35 

Awhile in gentle wise they went, 
Among the ripe long grass that bent 
Before their beauty ; then there ran 
A thrill through him as they began, 
In musical sweet speech and low, 
To talk a tongue he did not know ; 
But when at last one spake alone, 
It was to him as he had known 
That heavenly voice for many years, 
His heart swelled, till through rising tears 
He saw them now, nor would that voice 
Suffer his hot heart to rejoice, 
In all that erst his eyes did bless 
With unimagined loveliness : 
Because her face, that yet had been 
Alone among those girls unseen, 
He longed for with such strong desire, 
That his heart sickened, and quick-fire 
Within his parched throat seemed to burn. 



Awhile she stood and did not turn, 
While still the music of her voice 
Made the birds' song seem tuneless noise ; 
And she alone of all did stand, 
Holding within her down-drooped hand 
The swan-skin like a pink-tinged rose 
Plucked from amidst a July close, 
And laid on January snow, 
Her fingers on the plumes did show : 
A rosy flame of inner love 
Seemed glowing through her ; she did move 
Lightly at whiles, or the soft wind 
Played in her hair no coif did bind. 
Then did he fear to draw his breath 
Lest he should find the hand of Death 
Was showing him vain images ; 
Then did he deem the morning breeze 
Blew from the flowery fields of heaven, 
Such fragrance to the morn was given. 



36 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And now across the long dawn's gray 
The climbing sun's first level ray, 
Long hoped, yet sudden when it came, 
Over the trembling grass did flame 
And made the world alive once more ; 
And therewithal a pause came o'er 
The earth and heaven, because she turned 
And with such longing his heart burned 
That there he thought he needs must die, 
And, breathless, opened mouth to cry. 
And yet how soft and kind she seemed ; 
What a sweet helpful smile there gleamed 
Over the perfect loveliness 
That now his feeble eyes did bless ! 

Now fell the swan-skin from her hand, 
And silent all a space did stand, 
And then again she turned away, 
And seemed some whispered word to say 
Unto her fellows ; and therewith 
Their delicate round limbs and lithe 
Began to sway in measured time 
Unto a sweet-voiced outland rhyme 
As they cleft through the morning air 
Hither and thither : fresh and fair 
Beyond all words indeed were these, 
Yet unto him but images 
Well wrought, fair colored : while she moved 
Amid them all, a thing beloved 
By earth and heaven : could she be 
Made for his sole felicity? 
Yet if she were not, earth and heaven 
Belike for naught to men were given 
But to torment his weary heart. 
He put the thorny twigs apart 
A little more to gaze his fill ; 
And as he gazed a thought of ill 
Shot through him : close unto his hand, 
Nigher than where she erst did stand, 
Nigher than where her unkissed feet 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 37 

Had kissed the clover-blossoms sweet, 
The snowy swan-skin lay cast down. 
His heart thought, '' She will get her gone 
E'en as she came, unless I take 
This snow-white thing for her sweet sake ; 
Then whether death or life shall be, 
She needs must speak one word to me 
Before I die." 

And therewithal 
His hand upon the skin did fall 
Almost without his will, while yet 
His eyes upon her form were set. 
He drew it to him, and there lay 
Until the first dance died away, 
And from amid the rest thereof 
Another sprang, whose rhythm did move 
Light foot, long hair, and supple limb, 
As the wind moves the poplars slim; 
Then as the wind dies out again, 
Like to the end of summer-rain 
Amid their leaves, and quivering now 
No more their June-clad heads they bow, 
So sank the rippling song and sweet, 
And gently upon level feet 
They swayed and circle-wise did stand, 
Each scarcely touching each with hand, 
Until at last all motion ceased. 

Still as the dewy shade decreased, 
Panting John lay, and did not move, 
Sunk in the wonder of his love, 
Though fear weighed on him ; for he knew 
That short his time of pleasance grew 
Though none had told him. 

Now the one 

His heart was set on spake alone, 
And therewith hand and arm down-dropped, 
Their scarce-heard murmuring wholly stopped, 
And softly in long line they passed 
Unto the thorn-brake, she the last. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then unto agony arose 

John's fear, as once again all close 

She was to him. The wind ran by 

The notched green leaves, the sun was high, , 

Dappling the grass whereon he lay : 

Fresh, fair, and cheery was the day, 

And naught like guile or wizardry 

Could one have thought there was anigh, 

Till, suddenly, did all things change, 

E'en as his heart, and dim and strange 

The old familiar world had grown, 

That blithe and rough he erst had known, 

And racked and ruined time did seem. 

A sudden, sharp cry pierced his dream, 
And then his cleared eyes could behold 
His love, half hid with hair of gold, 
Her slim hands covering up her face, 
Standing amid the grassy place, 
Shaken with sobs, and round her woe, 
With long caressing necks of snow 
And ruffling plumes, the others stood 
Bird-like again. Chilled to the blood, 
Yet close he lay and did not move, 
Strengthening his heart with thoughts of love, 
Wild as a morning dream. Withal 
Some murmured word from her did fall, 
Closer awhile the swans did press 
Around her woful loveliness, 
As though a loath farewell they bade ; 
And she one fair hand softly laid 
Upon their heads in wandering wise, 
Nor drew the other from her eyes, 
As one by one her body fair 
They left, and rose into the air 
With clangorous cries, and circled wide 
Above her, till the blue did hide 
Their soaring wings, and all were gone- 

As scarce she knew that she was lone, 
She stood there for a little space, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 39 

One hand still covering up her face, 

The other drooped down, half stretched out, 

As if her lone heart yet did doubt 

Somewhat was left her to caress. 

Yet soon all sound of her distress 

Was silent, though thought held her fast 

And naught she moved ; the field-mouse passed 

Close to her feet, the dragon-fly, 

A thin blue needle, flickered by, 

The bee whirled past her as the morn 

Grew later, and strange thoughts were born 

Within her. 

So she raised her head 
At last, and, gazing round, she said : 
"Is pitying love all dead on earth ? 
Is no heart left that holds of worth 
Love that hands touch not, and that eyes 
Behold not ? Is none left so wise 
As not to know the smart of bliss 
That dieth out 'twixt kiss and kiss ? " 

She stopped and trembled, for she heard 
The hawthorn brake beside her stirred, 
Then turned round, half unwittingly, 
Across the meadow-grass to flee, 
And knew not whither, as, half blind, 
She heard the rustling twigs behind, 
And therewithal a breathless cry 
And eager footsteps drawing nigh. 
With streaming hair, a little way 
She fled across the trodden hay, 
Then failed her feet, and, turning round, 
She cowered low upon the ground, 
With wild eyes turned to meet her fate, 
E'en as the partridge doth await, 
With half-dead breast and broken wing, 
The winged death the hawk doth bring. 

Dim with the horror of that race, 
Wild eyes her eyes met, and pale face, 



40 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And trembling outstretched hands that moved 
No nigher to her body loved, 
Whereto they had been brought so near, 
For very fear of her wild fear. 
So each of other sore afraid, 
There fleer and pursuer stayed, 
Each gathering breath and heart to speak 
And he too hopeless, she too weak, 
For a long space to say a word. 

Yet first her own faint voice she heard, 
For in his hand she saw the skin, 
And deemed she knew what he would win, 
And how that morning's deed had gone : 

" What have I done ? what have I done ? 
Did I work ever harm to thee, 
That thou this day my bane should be ? 
Why is there such hate in thine eyes 
Against me ? " 

From his breast did rise 
A dumb sound, but no word came forth ; 
She shrank aback yet more : 

" What worth, 

What worth in all that thou hast done ? 
For say my body thou hast won, 
Art thou God, then, to keep alive, 
Unless my will therewith I give ? " 
E'en as she spake, a look of pain 
Twitched at his face ; she spoke again : 

" For now I see thou hat'st me not, 
But thinkest thou a prize hast got 
Thou wilt not lightly cast away : 
O hearken, hearken ! a poor prey 
Thy toils shall take, a thing of stone 
Amid your folk to dwell alone 
And hide a heart that hateth thee." 

He shrank back from her wretchedly, 
And dropped his hand and hung his head ; 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 41 

" Nay, now I hate thee not," she said 
" And who knows what may come to be 
If thou but give mine own to me, 
And free this trembling body here? 
Wouldst thou rejoice if thou wert dear, 
Dear unto me though far away, 
And hope still fed thee day by day ? " 

She deemed he wept now, as he turned 
Away from her, and her heart yearned 
Somewhat toward him as she spake : 

" And if thou dost this for my sake, 
Wilt thou, for all that, deem this morn 
Has made thee utterly forlorn? 
Hast thou not cast thine arms round Love 
At least, thy weary heart to move, 
To make thy wakening strange and new, 
And dull life false and old tales true ; 
Yea, and a tale to make thy life 
To speed the others in the strife, 
To quicken thee with wondrous fire, 
And make thee fairer with desire ? 
Wilt thou, then, think it all in vain, 
The restless longing and the pain, 
Lightened by hope that shall not die ? 
For thou shalt hope still certainly, 
And well mayst deem that thou hast part, 
Somewhat, at least, in this my heart, 
Whatever else therein may be." 

He turned about most eagerly 
And gazed upon her for a while. 
Wild fear had left her, and a smile 
Had lit up now her softened face, 
Sweet pleading kindness gave new grace 
To all her beauty ; fresh again 
Her cheeks grew, haggard erst with pain. 
She saw the deep love in his eyes, 
And slowly therewithal 'gan rise, 



42 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

While something in her heart there moved, 
Some pleasure to be well beloved, 
Some pain because of doubt and fear, 
Of once-loved things grown scarce so dear ; 
Less clear all things she seemed to see, 
Her wisdom in life's mystery 
Seemed fleeting, and for very shame 
A tingling flush across her came. 

But close unto him did she stand, 
And, reaching out her little hand, 
Took his, and in strange searching wise 
Gazed on him with imploring eyes ; 
And with the sweetness of that touch 
And look, wrought fear and hope o'ermuch 
Within him, and his eyes waxed dim, 
And trembling sore in every limb, 
He slid adown, and knelt, and said : 

" O sweetly certes hast thou prayed, 
Nor used vain words, but smitten me 
With all the greater agony 
For all thy sweetness : so, indeed, 
If thou art holpen well at need 
By this thy prayer, yet meet it is 
Ere this one moment of great bliss 
Has turned to naught all life to come, 
That thou shouldst hear me ere my doom, 

And yet indeed what prayer to make 
Thy heart amid its calm to shake, 

When thou art gone when thou art gone, 
And I and woe are left alone ! 

What fiercest word shall yet avail 
If this my first and last one fail 
Wherewith shall the hard heart be moved 
If this move not, that it is loved ? " 

His eager hand her hand did press, 
His eyes devoured her loveliness. 
But silent she a short while stood, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 43 

Her face now pale, now red as blood, 
While her lip trembled, and her eyes 
Grew wet to see his miseries, 
At last she spake with downcast head ; 

" Alas, what shall I do ? " she said, 
" Thy prayer shall make me sorrow more 
Whenas I go to that far shore 
I needs must go to ; for I know, 
Poor soul ! that thou wilt let me go, 
Since thou art grown too wise and kind 
My helpless soul with force to bind 

Would thou might'st have some part in me ! " 

She shrank aback afraid, for he 
Now sprang up with a bitter cry : 
" Thou knowest not my agony ! 
Thou knowest not the words thou say'st, 
Or what a wretched, empty waste 
This remnant of my life is grown, 
Or how I need thee all alone 
To heal the wound this morn has made ! 

Why tremblest thou ? be not afraid ; 
I will not leave thee any more : 

Come near to me ! My mother bore 
No dreadful thing when I was born. 
Fear not, thou art not yet forlorn, 
As I, as I, as I shall be 
If ever thou shouldst go from me." 

She shrank no more, but looked adown 
And said, " Alas ! why dost thou frown ? 
Wilt thou be ever angry thus ? " 

Her voice was weak and piteous 
As thus she spake, and in her breast 
A sob there moved, yet hard she pressed 
The hand she held : too sweet was love 
For any word his lips to move ; 
Too sweet was hope that lips might dare 



44 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

To touch her sweet cheek smooth and fair. 
Yet with her downcast eyes she knew 
That nigher ever his face drew 
To hers, and new-born love did flame 
Out from her heart, as now there came 
A sound half sigh, half moan from him ; 
She trembled sore, all things 'gan swim 
Before her eyes, nor felt her feet 
The firm earth foi all over-sweet 
For sight or hearing life 'gan grow, 
As panting, and with changed eyes now, 
She raised her parted lips to his. 

But ere their fair young mouths might kiss, 
While hand stole unto hand, and breath 
Met breath, the image of cold death, 
With his estranging agonies, 
Smote on her heart that once was wise ; 
As touched by some sharp sudden sting, 
Back from her love's arms did she spring, 
And stood there trembling ; and her cry 
Rang through the morn : 

" Why shouldst thou die 
Amidst thy just-won joy ? " she said, 
" And must I see thee stark and dead 
Who have beheld thy gathering bliss ? 
Touch me no more yet so it is 
That thy fierce heart hath conquered me, 
That I no more may look on thee 
Without desire for such an end 
I hitherward, belike, did wend, 
Led on by fate, and knew it not 
But if thy love is e'en as hot 
As thine eyes say, what wilt thou do ? 
Loved or loved not, still is it so, 
That in thy land I may not live. 
Too strong thou art that I should strive 
With thee and love Yet what say'st thou ? 
Art thou content thy love to throw 
Unto the waste of time, and dwell 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 45 

Here in thy land, and fare right well, 
Feared, hated maybe, yet through all 
A conquering man, whate'er shall fall 

Or, in mine own land be mine own, 
Live long, perchance, yet all unknown, 
Love for thy master and thy law, 
Nor hope another lot to draw 

From out life's urn ? Think of it, then ! 
Be great among the sons of men 
Because I love thee, and forget 
That here amid the hay we met 
Or else be loved and love, the while 
Life's vision doth thine eyes beguile ? " 

He fell upon his knees, and cried : 
"Ah, wilt thou go? the world is wide 
And waste ; we were together here 
Awhile ago, and I grew dear 
To thee, I deemed what hast thou said ? 
Behold, behold, the world is dead, 
And I must die, or ere I deal 
With its dead follies more, or feel 
The dead men's dreams that move men there. 

Alas, how shall I make my prayer 
To thee, who loved me time agone, 
No more to leave my heart alone ? " 

Musing, his passionate speech she heard, 
And with a strange look, half afeard, 
Half pitying, did she gaze on him, 
Until through tears that sight waxed dim ; 
At last she spake : 

"No need to pray 
Lest I thy love, O love, betray ; 
But many a thought there is in me 
If I through love might clearly see ; 

But the morn wanes fast, dear, arise 
And let me hence, lest eviler eyes 
Than thine behold my body here, 

And thou shouldst buy thy bliss too dear ; 



46 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So bring me to some place anigh 
Amid thick trees, where thou and I 
May be alone a little space, 
To make us ready for the place 
Where love may still be happiness 
Unmixed with change and ill distress." 

He gazed on her, but durst not speak, 
Nor noted how a sigh did break 
The sweetness of her speech, but took 
Her white hand with a hand that shook 
For very love, and o'er the grass, 
Scarce knowing where his feet did pass, 
He led her, till they came at last 
Unto a beech-wood, where the mast 
And dry leaves made a carpet meet, 
Sun-speckled, underneath their feet. 
She stopped him, grown all grave and calm, 
And laid lips like a healing balm 
Upon his brow and spake : 

" Ah, would 

That I who know of ill and good, 
And thou who mayst learn e'en as much 
By misery, might deem this touch 
Of calm lips, joy enough to last 
Till life with all its whirl were past 
This kiss, and memory of the morn 
Whereon the sweet desire was born." 

He trembled, and beseechingly 
Gazed on her : " Ah, no, no," said she, 
" No more with thee this day I strive, 
E'en as thou prayedst will I give ; 
Belike because I may not choose, 
Nay, nor may let my own soul loose. 
Is it enow?" 

Once more he strove 
With some sweet word to bless his love, 
And might not ; but she smiled and said : 
" The lovers of old time are dead, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 47 

And so too shall it be with thee. 

Yea, hast thou heard no history 

Of lovers who outlived the love 

That once they deemed the world would move ? 

And so too may it be with thee. 

Nay, stretch thy right hand out to me, . 

Poor soul, and all shall soon be done." 

A gold ring with a dark green stone 

Upon his finger then she set, 

And said : " Thou mayst repent thee yet 

The giving of this gift to-day ; 

Be wise then ! Cast the ring away, 

Give me my own and get thee gone ; 

For all the past, not so alone 

Shall thou and I then be, as erst ; 

Sad, longing, loving, not accurst. ' r 

She trembled as she spake, and turned 
Unto his eyes a face that yearned 
With great desire, although her eyes 
Seemed wonderful and overwise. 
But pain of anger changed his face, 
He said : " I have compelled thy grace, 
But not thy love then ; do to me 
E'en as thou wiliest, and go free." 

She murmured : " Nay, what wilt thou have ? 

Thou prayedst and the gift I gave, 

Giving what I might not withhold, 

In spite of wisdom clear and cold. 

Alas, poor heart unsatisfied, 

Why wilt thou love ? the world is wide 

And holdeth many a joyous thing : 

Why wilt thou for thy misery cling 

To that desire that resteth not 

What part soever thou hast got 

Of that whose whole thou ne'er shall gain ? 

Alas for thee and me, most vain, 

Most vain to wrangle more of this ! 



48 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Come then, where waits us woe and bliss, 
Give me the swan-skin, lay thee down, 
Naught doubting, on the beech-leaves brown ! " 

What spell weighed on his heart but love 
I know not, but naught might he move 
Except to do her whole command ; 
He lay adown, and on his hand 
Rested his cheek ; his eyes grew dim, 
Yet saw he the white beech-trunks slim 
At first ; and his fair-footed love 
He saw 'twixt sun and shadow move 
Close unto him, and languidly 
Her rosy fingers did he see 
About the ruffled swan-skin white, 
Even as when that strange delight 
First maddened him ; then dimmer grew 
His sight, and yet withal he knew 
That over him she hung, and blessed 
His face with her sweet eyes, till rest, 
As deep as death, as soft as sleep, 
Across his troubled heart did creep ; 
And then a long time seemed gone by 
And 'mid soft herbage did he lie 
With shut eyes, half awake, and seemed 
Some dream forgotten to have dreamed, 
So sweet, he fain would dream again ; 
Then came back memory with a pain, 
Like death first heard of, with a cry 
And fear swift born of memory 
He oped his eyes, that, dazed with light 
Long kept from them, saw naught aright ; 
But something kind, and something fair, 
Seemed yet to be anigh him there, 
Whereto he stretched his arms, that met 
Soft hands, and his own hands were set 
On a smooth cheek, he seemed to know 
From days agone ; 

" Sweet, sweet doth blow 
The gentle wind," he said, " whereas 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN, 49 

Surely o'er blossoms it doth pass 
If any there be made so sweet." 

And as he spake, his lips did meet 
In one unhoped, undreamed-of kiss, 
The very heart of all his bliss. 

Like waking from an ecstasy, 
Too sweet for truth it seemed to be, 
Waking to life full satisfied 
When he arose, and side by side, 
Cheek touching cheek, hand laid in hand, 
They stood within a marvellous land, 
Fruitful, and summer-like, and fair. 
The light wind sported with her hair, 
Crowned with a leaf-like crown of gold, 
Or round her limbs drave lap and fold 
Of her light raiment strange of hue 
That earthly shuttle never knew ; 
From overhead the blossoms sweet 
Fell soft, pink-edged upon her feet, 
That moved the grass now, as her voice 
Made the soft scented air rejoice 
And made him tremble ; murmuring : 

" Come, 

These are the meadows of my home, 
My home and thine ; much have I now 
To tell thee of, and much to show. 
Is it with thee, love, as with me 
That too much of felicity 
Maketh thee sad ? yet sweet it is 
That little sadness born of bliss 
And thought of death, and memory 
That even this perchance goes by." 

Too glad his eyes now made his heart 
To let his tongue take any part 
In all his joy : afraid he felt, 
As though but for a while he dwelt 
Upon the outer ledge of heaven., 
4 



50 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And scarce he knew how much was given 

Of all his heart had asked, as she 

Led softly on from tree to tree. 

He shut his eyes that he might gain 

Some image of the world of pain, 

Some roughness of the world cast by, 

The more his heart to satisfy, 

The more to sound the depths of bliss 

That now belike was ever his. 



T)UT therewithal the dream did break, 
*-' And Gregory sat up, stark awake, 
A nd gazing at the surf-line white, 
Sore yearning for some lost delight, 
Some pleasure gone, he knew not what j 
For all that dream was clean forgot. 
So rising with a smile and sigh, 
He gat him backward pensively 
Unto the tent, and passed between 
The sturdy sleepers, all unseen 
Of sleep-bound eyes, sore troubled yet 
That he must needs his dream forget. 
Sff on his rough bed down he lay, 
A nd thought to wake until the day, 
But scarce had time to turn him round 
Ere the lost wonder was well found 
By sleep j again he dreamed that he 
Sat at the Kings festivity, 
Again did that sweet tale go on, 
But now the stranger-guest was gone 
As though he had not been, and he 
Himself, Star-gazing Gregory, 
Sat by King Magnus, clad in gold, 
And in such wise the sequel told. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 51 



MIDST all that bliss, and part thereof, 
Full fed with choicest gifts of love, 
The happy lover lived right long 
Till e'en the names of woe and wrong 
Had he forgotten Of his bliss 
Naught may we tell, for so it is 
That verse for battle-song is meet, 
And sings of sorrow piercing-sweet, 
And weaves the tale of heavy years 
And hopeless grief that knows no tears 
Into a smooth song sweet enow, 
For fear the winter pass too slow : 
Yet hath no voice to tell of Heaven 
Or heavenly joys for long years given, 
Themselves an unmatched melody, 
Where fear is slain of victory, 
And hope, held fast in arms of love, 
No more the happy heart may move. 
Sweet souls, grudge not our drearihead, 
But let the dying mourn their dead 
With what melodious wail they will ! 
Even as we through good and ill 
Grudge not your soundless happiness, 
Through hope whereof alone, we bless 
Our woe with music and with tears. 

Now deems the tale that three long years 
John in that marvellous land abode, 
Till something like a growing load 
Of unacknowledged longing came 
Upon him, mingled with a shame, 
Which happiness slew not, that he 
Apart from his own kind must be, 
Nor share their hopes and fears : withal 
A gloom upon his face did fall, 
His love failed not to note, and knew 
Whither his heart, unwitting, drew. 



52 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And so it fell that, on a day, 
As musing by her side he lay, 
She spake out suddenly, and said : 
" What burden on thy soul is laid, 
What veil through which thou canst not see, 
Think'st thou that I hide aught from thee ? " 

He caugnt her in his arms, and cried, 
" What is it that from love can hide ? 
Thou knowest this, thou knowest this ! " 

'' Alas," she said, " yet so it is 
That never have I told to thee 
What danger crept toward thee and me ! 
How could I spoil the lovesome years 
With telling thee of slow-foot fears, 
Or shade the sweetness of our home 
With what perchance might never come ? 
But now we may not turn aside 
From the sharp thorn the rose did hide." 

He turned on her a troubled face, 
And said, " What is it, from what place 
Comes trouble on us ? " 

She flushed red 

As one who lies, and stammering said : 
" In thine own land, where while ago 
Thou dwelled'st, doth the danger grow. 
How think'st thou ? hast thou such a heart, 
That thou and I awhile may part 
To make joy greater in a while ? " 

She smiled, but something in her smile 
Was like the heralding of tears, 
When lonely pain the grieved heart bears. 
But he sprang up unto his feet, 
Glad 'gainst his will, and cried : " O sweet, 
Fear naught at all, for certainly 
Thy fated fellow still am I ; 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 53 

Tell me the tale, and let me go 
The nighest way to meet the foe." 

Something there was, that for a while 
Made her keep silence ; with a smile 
His bright flushed visage did she note, 
And put her hand unto her throat 
As though she found it hard to breathe ; 
At last she spake : 

" The long years seethe 
With many things, until at last 
From out their caldron is there cast 
Somewhat like poison mixed with food ; 
To leave the ill, and take the good 
Were sweet indeed, but nowise life, 
Where all things ever are at strife. 
Thou, knowing not beHke, and I, 
Wide-eyed indeed and wilfully, 
Through these three years have ever striven 
To take the s.weet of what was given 
And cast the bitter half aside ; 
But fate his own time well can bide, 
And so it fares with us to-day. 
Bear this too, that I may not say 
What danger threatens ; thou must go 
Unto thy land and nothing know 
Of what shall be a hard, hard part 
For such as thee, with patient heart 
To sit alone, and hope and wait, 
Nor strive in any wise with fate, 
Whatever doubt on thee may fall, 
Unless by certain sign I call 
On thee to help me : to this end 
Each day at nightfall shalt thou wend 
Unto that place, where thou and I 
First met ; there let an hour gone by, 
And if thereby naught hap to thee 
Of strange, then deem thou certainly 
All goeth or too well or ill 
For thee to help, and bide thou still." 



54 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

She had arisen, side by side 
They stood now, and all red had died 
From out his face, most wan he grew, 
He faltered forth : 

" Would that I knew, 
If thou hadst ever loved me, sweet ! 
Then surely all things would I meet 
With good heart." 

Such a trouble came 
Across his face, that she, for shame 
Of something hidden, blushed blood-red, 
Then turned all pale again, and said : 

"Thou knowest that I love thee well ! 
What shall I do then ? can I tell 
In one short moment all the love 
That through these years my heart did move ? 
Come nigher, love, and look at me, 
That thou in these mine eyes mayst see 
If long enow this troubled dream, 
That men call life, mine 'heart may deem 
To love thee in." 

His arms he cast 
About her and his tears fell fast, 
Nor was she dry-eyed ; slowly there 
Did their lips part, her fingers fair 
Sought for his hand: 

" Come, love," she said, 
"Time wears " ; withal the way she led 
Unto the place where first he woke 
Betwixt a hawthorn and an oak, 
And said : " Lie down, and dream a dream, 
That naught real, wasted then may seem 
When next we meet ! yet hear a word 
Ere sleep comes : thou mayst well be stirred 
By idle talk, or longings vain 
To wish me in thine arms again ; 
Long then, but let no least word slip 
Of such a longing past thy lip ; 
For if thou dost, so strangely now 
Are we twain wedded, I and thou, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 55 

And that same golden green-stoned ring 
Is token of so great a thing 
That at thy word I needs must come 
Whereso I be unto thine home ; 
And so were both of us undone : 
Because the great-eyed glaring sun 
That lights your world, too mighty is 
To look upon our secret bliss. 
What more to say or e'er thou sleep ? 
I would I yet had time to weep 
All that I would, then many a day 
Would pass, or thou shouldst go away. 
But time wears, and the hand of fate, 
For all our weeping, will not wait. 
Yet speak, before sleep wrap thee round, 
That I once more may hear the sound 
Of thy sweet voice, if never more." 

For all her words she wept right sore. 
" What wouldest thou ? " he said in turn, 
" Thou know'st for thee and peace I yearn 
Past words but now thy lips have sealed 
My lips with mysteries unrevealed ; 
How shall I pray, this bitter morn 
That joy and me atwain hath torn ? 
While yet as in a dream it is 
Both bliss and this strange end of bliss. 
Ah, what more can I say thereof ? 
That never any end of love 
I know, though all my bliss hath end ; 
That where thou wiliest I will wend, 
Abide where thou wouldst have me stay, 
Pass bitter day on bitter day 
Silent of thee, and make no sign 
Of all the love and life divine, 
That is my life and knowledge now." 

And with that w$rd he lay a-low 
And by his side she knelt, and took 
His last kiss with a lovely look, 



56 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Mingled of utmost love and ruth 

And knowledge of the hidden truth. 

And then he heard her sing again 

Unknown words to a soft, low strain, 

Till dim his senses waxed, nor knew 

What things were false, and what were true, 

'Mid all the things he saw and heard, 

But still among strange-plumaged bird, 

Strange- fruited tree, and strange-clad maid, 

And horrors making not afraid 

Of changing man, and dim-eyed beast, 

Through all he deemed he knew at least 

That over him his true-love hung, 

And 'twixt her sobs in sweet voice sung 

That mystic song, until at last 

Into the dreamless land he passed 

Of deep, dark sleep without a flaw 

Where naught he heard and naught he saw. 

Amidst unreasoning huge surprise, 
Remembering naught, he oped his eyes 
And leapt up swiftly, and there stood 
Blinking upon a close beech-wood 
As one who knew not aught of it ; 
Yet in a while 'gan memory flit 
Across him, and he muttered low 
Unwitting words said long ago 
When he was yet a child ; then turned 
To where the autumn noon-sun burned 
Bright on a cleared space of the wood, 
Where midst rank grass a spruce-tree stood, 
Tall, gray-trunked, leafless a long way, 
And memory of another day, 
Like to a dream within a dream, 
Therewith across his heart 'gan gleam, 
And gazing up into the tree, 
He raised his right arm suddenly, 
E'en as he fain would climb^the same ; 
Then, as his vision clearer came, 
He muttered, " Nay, gone is the nest, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 57 

Nor is it spring-tide ; it were best 
Unto the stead to hurry back, 
Or else my dinner may I lack, 
For father's grip is close enow." 

And therewithal, with head hung low, 
Even as one who needs not sight, 
And looking nor to left nor right, 
Through blind ways of the wood he went, 
Seeming as he were right intent 
On heavy thoughts, as well might be, 
But scarcely waked yet verily, 
Or knowing in what place he was. 

In such wise swiftly did he pass 
Without a check straight through the wood, 
Until on the slope-side he stood, 
Where all its tangles were clean done ; 
There staying, while the unclouded sun 
Gleamed on the golden braveries 
That clad him, did he raise his eyes, 
And 'neath his shading hand looked thence, 
And saw o'er well-tilled close and fence 
A little knot of roofs between 
Dark leaves, their ridges bright and green 
With spiky house-leek ; and withal 
Man unto man did he hear call 
Afar amid the fields below ; 
And then a hoarse loud horn 'gan blow 
No point of war, but peasant-call 
To hurry toward the steaming hall. 
Then as a red spark lights a flame 
Among light straw all memory came 
Back-rushing on his heart, and he 
'Gan think of joy and misery, 
Trouble and hope, in tangled wise 
Till longing in his heart 'gan rise 
Fretting with troublous ecstasy 
All else to naught. 

So pensively 

Down the hillside he slipped, and saw 
All folk unto the homestead draw, 



58 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And noted how a homeman there 
Turned round unto the hillside bare 
Whereas amid the sun he went, 
Then sidelong to his fellow bent 
And pointed, and all turned about 
And stood a while, as if in doubt 
Whether for him they should not stay, 
Yet went at last upon their way. 
Now thereat somewhat did he smile 
And walked the slower for a while, 
As though with something of a care 
To meet outside no loiterer, 
Then went on at swifter pace : 
And all things with familiar face 
Gazed on him ; till again the shame 
Of not being of them o'er him came. 

Most fair to peaceful heart was all, 
Windless the ripe fruit down did fall, 
The shadows of the large gray leaves 
Lay gray upon the oaten sheaves 
By the garth wall as he past by ; 
The startled ousel-cock did cry 
As from the yew-tree by the gate 
He flew ; the speckled hen did wait 
With outstretched neck his coming in ; 
The March-hatched cockerel gaunt and thin 
Crowed shrilly, while his elder thrust 
His stiff wing-feathers in the dust 
That grew aweary of the sun : 
The old and one-eyed cart-horse dun 
The middenstead went hobbling round 
Blowing the light straw from the ground ; 
With curious eyes the drake peered in 
O'er the barn's dusk, where dust and din 
Were silent now a little space. 

There for a while with anxious face, 
Yet smiling therewithal, John stood, 
Then toward the porch of carven wood 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 59 

He turned, and hearkened to the hum 
Of mingled speech that thence did come 
Through the dumb clatter of the hall, 
Lest any word perchance might fall 
Upon his ears to tell of aught 
That change or death thereto had brought, 
And, listening so, deemed he could hear 
His father's voice, but nothing clear, 
And then a pause, and then again 
The mingled speech of maids and men. 
Again some word remembered 
From old days half aloud he said, 
And pulled his hood about his brow, 
And went with doubtful steps and slow 
Unto the door, and took the horn, 
His own hand time past did adorn, 
And blew a loud, clear blast thereon, 
And pushed the door, then like a sun 
New come to a dull world he stood, 
Gleaming with gold from shoes to hood, 
In the dusk doorway of the place 
Whence toward him now turned every face. 

From 'neath his hood he gazed around, 
And soothly there few gaps he found ; 
Amidmost of the upper board 
His brethren sat, Thorolf and Thord ; 
He saw his sire, half risen up 
From the high-seat, a silver cup 
In his brown hand ; and by his side 
His mother o'er her barm-cloth wide 
Gazed forward somewhat timidly 
The new-comer's bright weed to see. 
Small change in these indeed, John thought, 
By lapse of days had yet been wrought ; 
And for the rest, but one or two 
There were, he deemed, of faces new. 
There open-eyed, beer-can in hand, 
And staring, did the damsels stand 
As he had known them ; there he saw 
Haldor the Icelander half draw 



60 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

His heavy short-sword forth, as he 
The gleam of gold and steel did see 
Flash suddenly across the door 
An old man skilled in ancient lore, 
And John's own foster sire withal. 

But on one face did John's eyes fall 
He needs must note a woman leaned . 
O'er Thord, and though her face was screened 
By his wide bush of light red hair 
Yet might he see that she was fair, 
And deemed his brother newly wed. 

And now, as thoughts ran through his head 
About the tale that he should tell, 
His sire, as one who knew right well 
What manners unto men were meet, 
Rose up and cried from out his seat : 

" Knight, or fair lord, whatso thou be'st, 
If thou mayst share a bonder's feast, 
Sit by me, eat and drink thy fill ; 
For this my hall is open still 
To peaceful men of all degree." 

Strange seemed his own voice there to be 
To John, as he in feigned speech said : 
" Thanks have thou for thy goodlihead 
And welcome, goodman ; certainly 
Hungry and weary-foot am I, 
And fain of rest, and strange withal 
To this your land, for it did fall, 
That e'en now as I. chanced to ride 
I lighted by a waterside 
To slake my thirst ; and just as I 
Was drinking therefrom eagerly, 
A blue-winged jay, new-hatched in spring, 
Must needs start forth and fall to sing 
His villain plain-song o'er my head ; 
And like a ghost come from the dead 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 61 

Was that unto my horse, I trow, 

Who swerved and went off quick enow 

To leave me as a gangrel churl." 

" Thou seemest liker to an Earl," 
His father said ; " but come to meat, 
To hungry men are bannocks sweet." 

So by his father's side he sat 
And of that homely cheer he ate, 
Remembered well ; and oft he sighed 
To think how far away and wide 
The years had set him from all this, 
And how that all-devouring bliss 
Had made the simple life of old 
As a dull tale too often told. 
But as he sat thereby, full oft 
The goodwife's eyes waxed sad and soft, 
Beholding him ; she muttered low : 

" Alas ! fair lips, I ought to know, 
Like unto lips that once hung here ; 
Eyes like to eyes that once were dear 
When all that body I could hold, 
And flaxen-white was hair of gold." 

So muttered she, but said not aught 
Aloud. Now the fair damsel brought 
Mead to the gay-clad man, and he 
Beheld her beauty thoughtfully, 
As she shook back her cloud of hair, 
And swung aside her figure fair, 
And clasped the cup with fingers slim, 
And poured and reached it forth to him ; 
Then his heart changed again with shame 
As cold cup and warm fingers came 
Into his hand, the while his eyes 
A look in hers must needs surprise 
That made him flush, and she the red 
O'er face and neck and bosom spread 



62 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And her hand trembled ; Thord the while 

Gazed on her with a foolish smile 

Across his wide face. So went by 

The hour of that festivity, 

And then the boards were set aside, 

But the host prayed his guest to bide 

As long as he had will thereto, 

And then unto the field did go 

With sons and homemen, leaving John 

Among the women-folk alone. 

So these being set to rock and wool, 
John sat him down upon a stool 
And 'gan to ponder dreamily, 
'Mid longings, on the days gone by, 
And many a glance did Thord's wife steal 
Upon him as she plied the reel 
Not noted much, though once or twice 
His pensive eyes did meet her eyes, 
And troubled and abashed thereat 
He reddened. But the good wife sat 
Meanwhile, and ever span and span 
With steady fingers, and yet wan 
Her face was grown ; her mouth and eyes 
Seemed troubled with deep memories. 
At last to Thord's wife did she turn 
And said : 

"If honey we would earn 
Against Yule-tide, the weaving room 
Must hear the clatter of the loom ; 
Ere the long web is fully done ; 
So, Thorgerd, thither get thee gone ; 
Thou, Asa, to the cloth-room go 
And wait me there ; and for you two, 
Mary and Kirstin, best were ye 
Sitting in Thorgerd's company, 
To give her help with reel and thread 
And shuttle." 

Therewith, as she said, 
So did they, and went, one and all ; 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 63 

But in the doorway of the hall 

Did Thorgerd for a moment stand, 

Holding her gownskirt in her hand, 

Her body swaying daintily, 

Nor cared to hold aback a sigh. 

Nor son, nor mother noted her, 

A little time the twain sat there 

Nor spake, though twice the goodwife strove, 

But fear forbade her tongue to move ; 

Nor had he noted much forsooth 

'Midst his own longing and self-ruth, 

Her looks of loving and of doubt. 

So from the hall did she pass out, 

And left him there alone, and soon 

So longing dealt that afternoon 

That, fallen to musing pensively, 

In the lone hall, now scarce might he 

Know if his heart were glad or sad ; 

And tunes within his head he had 

Of ancient songs learnt long ago, 

Remembered well through bliss and woe, 

And now withal a lovesome stave 

He murmured to a measure grave, 

Scarce thinking of its sense the while. 

But as he sat there, with a smile 

Came handmaid Asa back, who bare 

Heaped in her arms embroidered gear, 

Which by his feet did she let fall, 

Then gat her gone from out the hall ; 

John, startled, ceased awhile his drone 

To gaze upon the gear cast down, 

And saw a dark blue cloak and hood 

Wrought with strange needlework and rude 

That showed the sun and stars and moon ; 

Then, gazing, John remembered soon 

How for Yule sport four years agone 

That selfsame raiment he did on, 

And thinking on that bygone mirth 

His own rich cloak he cast to earth, 

And did on him half wittingly 



64 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That long-forgotten bravery" ; 
And though the sun was warm that day 
He hugged himself in his old way 
Within the warmth of fold on fold 
As though he came from out the cold, 
And 'gan the hall to pace about ; 
And at the last must needs break out 
Into a song remembered well, 
That of the Christmas joy did tell. 



Outlanders, whence come ye last ? 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 
Through what green seas and great have ye past ? 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

From far away, O masters mine, 

The snow in the street and the 'wind on the door. 
We come to bear you goodly wine, 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

From far away we come to you, 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 
To tell of great tidings strange and true. 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

News, news of the Trinity 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 
And Mary and Joseph from over the sea. 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

For as we wandered far and wide 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 
What hap do ye deem there should us betide ! 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

Under a bent when the night was deep, 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 

There lay three shepherds tending their sheep. 
Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 65 

" O ye shepherds, what have ye seen 
The snow in the street and the wind on the door 

To slay your sorrow, and heal your teen ? " 
Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

" In an ox-stall this night we saw 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 
A babe and a maid without a flaw, 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

" There was an old man there beside, 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 

His hair was white and his hood was wide. 
Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

" And as we gazed this thing upon, 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 
Those twain knelt down to the Little One. 

Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor- 

" And a marvellous song we straight did hear 
The snow in the street and the wind on the door. 

That slew our sorrow and healed our care." 
Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor. 

News of a fair and a marvellous thing 

The snow in the street and the wind on the door, 

Nowell, nowell, nowell, we sing 
Minstrels and maids, stand forth on the floor* 



So sang he, and in pensive wise 
He sighed, but lifting up his eyes 
Beheld his mother standing nigh, 
Looking upon him pitifully. 
He ran to her, for now he knew 
Her yearning love, round her he threw 
Strong arms, and cried out : 

" So it is, 

O mother, that some days of bliss 
5 



66 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

I still may give thee ; yet since I 
To thee at least will never lie 
Of what I am, and what I hope, 
And what with ill things I must cope, 
Sit thou aside, and look not strange 
When of my glory and great change 
I shall tell even such a tale 
As best for all things may avail. 
And if thou wouldst know verily 
Meanwhile, how matters fare with me, 
This thing of all things may I tell ; 
I have been happy and fared well, 
But now with blind eyes must await 
Some unseen, half-guessed turn of fate, 
Before the dropping of the scale 
Shall make an ending to the tale, 
Or blithe or sad : think not meanwhile 
That fear my heart shall now beguile 
Of all the joy I have in thee." 

She wept about him tenderly 
A long while, ere she might say aught ; 
Then she drew back, and some strange thought 
Stirred in her heart belike, for she 
Gazed at his splendor timidly, , 

For the rude cloak to earth was cast, 
And whispered trembling at the last 

" Fair art thou come again, sweet son, 
And sure a long way hast thou gone, 
I durst not ask thee where ; but this 
I ask thee by the first sweet kiss, 
Wherewith 1 kissed thy new-born face 
Long since within the groaning place 
If thou hast been so far that thou 
Canst tell to me grown old, son, now, 
Through weary life, unsatisfied 
Desires, and lingering hope untried 
If thou canst tell me of thy ruth, 
What thing there is of lies or truth, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 67 

In what the new faith saith of those 
Great glories of the heavenly close, 
And how that poor folk twinned on earth 
Shall meet therein in joy and mirth." 

Smiling with pity and surprise, 
He looked into her wistful eyes, 
And kissed her brow therewith and said : 

" Naught know I, mother, of the dead, 
More than thou dost let be we live 
This day at least, great joy to give 
Each unto other : but the tale 
Must come from thee about the dale, 
And what has happed therein, since I 
That summer eve went off to try 
What thing by folly might be wrought 
When strength and wisdom came to naught." 

She smiled amid her tears, and there 
She told him all he fain would hear, 
And happily they talked till eve, 
When the men-folk the field did leave 
And gat them to the hall, and then 
Was great rejoicing of all men 
Within a while, for, cloak and hood 
Thrown off, in glittering gear John stood 
And named himself ; yet scarcely now 
His father durst his arms to throw 
Round his son's neck, remembering 
How he had thought him such a thing 
As scarce was meet his bread to win. 
Small thought had John of that old sin, 
Yea, scarce had heart to think of aught, 
But when again he should be brought 
Face to face with his love ; and slow 
The leaden minutes lingered now ; 
Nor could he fail to hope that he 
That very hour her face would see ; 
Needs must he hope that his strong love, 



68 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So sore the heart in her must move, 
That she no more might bear his pain. 

That very hour, he thought again 
That very hour ; woe worth the while, 
Why should his heart not feel her smile 
Now, now ? O weary time, O life, 
Consumed in endless, useless strife, 
To wash from out the hopeless clay 
Of heavy day and heavy day 
Some specks of golden love, to keep 
Our hearts from madness ere we sleep ! 

Good welcome if of clownish kind 
Did John from both his brethren find, 
And from the homemen ; Thorgerd seemed 
As somewhat less of him she deemed 
Than heretofore, and smiled, as she 
Put up her fair cheek daintily 
To take his kiss. So went the night 
'Midst mirth and manifold delight, 
Till John at last was left alone 
To think upon the strange day gone, 
Scarce knowing yet, if nearer drew 
His bliss because it was gone through. 

Now in such wise, day passed by day, 
Till heavier on him longing lay, 
As still less strange it was to wake 
And no kind kiss of welcome take, 
And welcome with no loving kiss 
Kind eyes to a new day of bliss ; 
And as the days passed o'er his head 
Sometimes he needs must wake in dread, 
That all the welfare, that did seem 
To be his life, was but a dream, 
Or all at least slipped swiftly by 
Into a wretched memory. 
Yet would hope leave him not, yea, whiles 
Wrapped round about by her strange guiles 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 69 

All seemed to go right well, and oft 
Would memory grow so sweet and soft, 
That scarce the thing it imaged had 
More might in it to make him glad. 

Well may ye deem that mid all this 
His brooding face would cloud the bliss 
Of many a boisterous night; his sire 
Would mutter, " He has clomb up higher. 
But still is moonstruck as before" ; 
His brethren ill his silence bore, 
Yet feared him ; such a tale he told 
That in that mead he did behold 
Strange outland people come that morn, 
By whom afar he had been borne 
Into a fair land, where, he said, 
Thriving, the king's child did he wed 
Within a while ; " Now, when once more 
Their keels shall leave their noble shore, 
At Norway will they touch, and then 
Back go I with those goodly men, 
Now I have seen my land and kin." 

Fair Thorgerd ever sought to win 
Kind looks of him, and many a day 
She from the hall would go away 
To rage within some secret place, 
That all the sweetness of her face, 
Her lingering fingers, her soft word, 
'Twixt red, half-opened lips scarce heard, 
Had bought for her so little ruth ; 
Although there seemed sometimes, in sooth, 
When John, grown weary of the strife 
Within him between dreams and life, 
Must think it not so over ill 
To watch her hand the shuttle fill, 
While on her cheek the red and white 
Flickered and changed with new delight 
And hope of being a thing to move 
That dreamy man to earthly love. 



70 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So autumn fell to winter-tide, 
And ever there did John abide, 
Mid hope deferred and longing fierce, 
That strove the heavy veil to pierce ; 
And howso strong his love might be, 
Yet were there tides of misery, 
When, in his helpless, hopeless rage, 
He felt himself as in a cage 
Shown to the gaping world ; again 
Would heavy languor dull his pain, 
And make it possible to live, 
And wait to see if fate would give 
Some pleasure yet ere all was done. 

Meantime, with every setting sun, 
Unto the meadow as she bade 
He went, and often, half afraid, 
Half hopeful, did he watch the night 
Suck slowly in the lingering light ; 
But of the homefolk, though all knew 
Whither his feet at evening drew, 
Yet now so great a man he was, 
None asked him why he needs must pass 
Each eve along the self-same way, 
Save Thorgerd, who would oft waylay 
His feet returning, and would watch 
Some gesture or some word to catch 
From his unwariness ; and whiles 
Her tender looks and words and smiles 
Would seem to move him now, and she 
Laughed to herself delightedly ; 
And as the days grew heavier 
To John, he oft would gaze on her, 
At such times as she tripped along, 
And wonder where would be the wrong 
If he should tell her of his tale ; 
Withal he deemed her cheek grew pale, 
As unto Yule-tide drew the days, 
And oft into her eyes would gaze 
In such kind wise, that she awhile 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 71 

Forgot her foolishness and guile 
Surprised by sparks of inner love. 

Yet nothing a long while did move 
His mouth to fatal speech, until 
When the snow lay on moor and hill 
And it was Yule-day, he did go 
'Twixt the high drift o'er beaten snow 
Unto the meadow, as the day 
Short, wind-bewildered, died away, 
And so, being come unto the thorn 
Where first that bitter love was born, 
He gazed around, but nothing saw 
But endless waste of gray clouds draw 
O'er the white waste, while cold and blind 
The earth looked ; e'en the northwest wind 
Found there no long abiding-place, 
But ever the low clouds did chase 
Nor let them weep their frozen tears. 

Strange is it how the grieved heart bears 
Long hours and days and months of woe, 
As dull and leaden as they go, 
And makes no sign, yea, and knows not 
How great a burden it hath got 
Upon it, till all suddenly 
Some thought scarce heeded shall flit by, 
That tears the veil as by it goes 
With seeming careless hand, and shows 
The shrinking soul that deep abyss 
Of days to come all bare of bliss. 
And now with John e'en so it fared. 
He saw his woe and longing bared 
Before his eye3, as slow and slow 
The twilight crept across the snow, 
Like to the dying out of hope ; 
And suddenly he needs must cope 
With that in-rushing of despair 
Long held aback, till all things there 
Seemed grown his foes, his prison-wall ; 



72 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And, whatso good things might befall 

To others of the wide world, he 

Was left alone with misery. 

Why should he hold his peace or strive 

Amid these men as man to live 

Who recked not of him ? Then he cried : 

" Would God, would God, that I had died 
Before the accursed name of Love 
My miserable heart did move ! 
Why did I leave thee in such wise, 
False heart, with lovesome, patient eyes, 
And soul intent to do thy will ? 
And why, why must I love thee still, 
And long for thee, and cast on thee 
Blessings wrung out of misery, 
That will not bless thee, if in sooth 
On my wrecked heart thou hast no ruth ? 
O come, come, come to me, my love, 
If aught my heart thy heart may move, 
For I am wretched and alone, 
With head grown wild, heart turned to stone, 
Come, if there yet be truth in thee ! " 

He gazed about him timorously 
While thus he spake, as though he thought 
To see some sudden marvel wrought 
In earth and heaven ; some dreadful death, 
Some sight, as when God threateneth 
The world with speedy end ; but still 
Unchanged, o'er mead and wold and hill 
Drave on the dull low twilight rack, 
Till all light seemed the sky to lack. 
And the snow-shrouded earth to gain 
What it had lost 

" In vain, in vain ! " 
He cried, " and I was well bewrayed ; 
She wept o'er me when I was laid 
Upon the grass beside her feet, 
Because a pleasure somewhat sweet 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 73 

She needs must lay aside, while I 
What tears shall help my misery ? " 

Then back he turned in e'en such mood 
As when one thing seems no more good 
Than is another, and will seerns 
To move the body but by dreanfs 
Of ancient life and energy. 
But as he wandered listlessly 
'Midst the wind's howling, and the drift 
Of light snow that its force did lift, 
And gained at last the garth's great gate, 
He started back, for there did wait 
A gray form in the dull gray night, 
Yea, and a woman's ; strange affright, 
Strange hope possessed him, and he strove 
To cry aloud some word of love, 
But his voice failed him ; she came nigh 
And drew up to him quietly, 
Not speaking; when she reached his side 
Her hand unto his hand did glide 
And thrilled him with its soft warm touch, 
He stammered : 

" Have I loved too much, 
Have I done wrong ? I called thee, dear ; 
Speak, love, and take away my fear ! " 

A soft voice answered, " O speak not ! 
I cannot bear my joy, o'er hot 
Waxeth my heart, when in such wise 
Thou art changed to me O thine eyes, 
I see them through the darksome night 
Gazing upon me ! sweet delight. 
How shall I deal with all my bliss 
So that the world know naught of this, 
When scarce now I may breathe or stand 
Holding thy lovesome clinging hand." 

Now therewith Thorgerd's voice he knew, 
And from her hand his hand he drew, 



74 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

While o'er his heart there swept again 
The bitter blast of doubting pain, 
And scarce he knew who by his side 
Was going, as aloud he cried : 



" In vain I call ; thou comest not 
And all our love is quite forgot ; 
What new world hast thou got to rule ? 
What mockeries mak'st thou of the fool 
Who trusted thee ? Alas, alas ! 
Whatever ill may come to pass 
Still must I love thee." 

Now by him 

Went Thorgerd silent, every limb 
Tingling with madness and desire ; 
Love lit within her such a fire 
As e'en that eve in no wise cooled, 
As of her sweet, fresh hope befooled 
She strove to speak, and found no word 
To tell wherewith her heart was stirred. 
So on they went, she knowing naught 
The bitterness of his ill thought, 
He heeding not in any wise 
The wretchedness of her surprise, 
Until, thus far estranged, they came 
To where the hall's bright light did flame 
Over a space of trodden snow. 
Faster a space then did she go, 
But, as they drew anigh the door, 
Stopped suddenly, and stood before 
The musing, downcast man, and laid 
A hand upon his breast, and said, 
In a low smothered voice : 

" Wait now, 

And tell me straightly what didst thou 
To call me love, and then to cry 
Thy love came not ? I am anigh, 
What wouldst thou have, did I not move 
Thy cold heart ? am I not thy love ? " 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 75 

Then, trembling as those words she spoke, 
She cast to earth her heavy cloak ; 
From head to foot clad daintily, 
Meet for that merry tide was she ; 
A silver girdle clasped around 
Her well-wrought loins, her fair hair crowned 
With silver, and her gown enwrought 
With flowers whereof that tide knows naught ; 
Nor needed she that rich attire 
To set a young man's heart afire, 
For she was delicately made 
As is the lily ; there she swayed, 
Leaned forward to the strenuous wind 
That her gay raiment intertwined 
About her light limbs. Gazing there, 
Bewildered with a strange despair, 
John saw her beauty, yet in sooth 
Something within him slew all ruth 
If for a moment : 

" Ah, what love, 

What love," he cried, " my heart should move, 
But mine own love, my worshipped sweet ? 
Would God that her beloved feet 
Would bless our threshold this same night ! " 

Then, even as a sudden light 
Shows to some wretch the murderer's knife 
Drawing anear his outworn life, 
Knowledge rushed o'er him, and too late 
Did he bethink him of the fate 
That threatened, and, grown wild and blind, 
He turned to meet the western wind 
That hurried past him, thinking, " Now 
At least the formless sky will show 
Some sign of my undoing swift ; 
Surely the sightless rack will lift 
To show some dreadful misery, 
Some image of the summer sky 
Defaced by the red lightning's sword." 
So spake he, and the fierce wind roared 



76 THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

Amid the firs in sullen wise, 
But nothing met his fearful eyes 
Save the gray waste of night Withal 
He turned round slowly to the hall, 
Trembling, yet doubtful of his heart, 
Doubtful of love. But for her part 
Thorgerd, half mad with love, had turned 
And fled from him ; a red spot burned 
Amidst each smooth cheek, and her eyes 
Afire with furious jealousies, 
Followed him down the hall, as he 
Went toward the da'is listlessly, 
And the loud horns blew up to meat, 
And restless were her fevered feet 
Throughout the feast that now befell. 

Now thereat men were served right well, 
And most were merry, and the horn 
Full oft from board to beard was borne ; 
But no mead brewed of mortal man 
Could make John's face less wild and wan ; 
For a long while he trembled sore 
Whene'er the west-wind shook the door 
More than its wont ; nor heeded he 
The curse of Thorgerd's misery 
Wild-gleaming from her eyes ; and when 
She fell to talk with the young men 
With hapless haggard merriment, 
No pang throughout his heart there went : 
For clear across it were there borne 
Pictures of all the life forlorn 
That should be, yea, his life he saw, 
Unhelped and heavy-burdened, draw 
Through the dull joyless years, until 
The bitter measure they should fill, 
And he, unloved, unsatisfied, 
Unkissed, from foolish hope should hide 
In some dark corner of death's house. 

Yet, as the feast grew clamorous 
About him, and the night went past, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 77 

The respite wrought on him at last, 

And from its midst did he begin 

A little rest from fear to win, 

And in the feast he joined and seemed 

No more as in their midst he dreamed. 

So passed a space, till presently 
As with a beaker raised on high 
He stood, and called on some great name 
Writ in the book of northern fame, 
Across the wind there came a sound 
As though afar a horn were wound, 
A dreadful sound to him ; the men 
Sat hearkening, till it came again 
Nigher and sharper now, and John, 
Grown white, laid his left hand upon 
His beating heart ; and then once more 
Loud rang the horn close by the door, 
And men began in haste to take 
Their weapons for their safety's sake ; 
But John, the cup in his right hand, 
His left upon his heart, did stand, 
And might not either move nor speak. 

Then cried the goodman, " Not so weak 
Are we, but these may well come in 
Unmet with weapons ; they shall win 
All good things on this stormy night ; 
Go welcome them to our delight ; 
For on this merry tide of Yule 
Shall Christ the Lord all matters rule." 

Then opened they the door, and strong 
The wild wind swept the hall along 
Driving the hangings here and there, 
Making the torches ruddier, 
Darkening the fires. But therewithal 
An utter hush came o'er the hall, 
And no man spake of bad or good ; 
For in the midst of them there stood 



78 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A white-clad woman, white as though 
A piece of fair moonlitten snow 
Had entered the red smoky hall. 
Then sweet speech on their ears did fall 
Thrilling all hearts through : 

" Joy and peace 

Be on this house, and all increase 
Of all good things ! and thou, my love, 
I knew how sore desire must move 
Thy longing heart, and I am come 
To look upon thee in thy home : 
Come to me, give me welcome here ! " 

He stepped adown, and shame and fear 
Mixed with the joyful agony 
Of love and longing, as anigh 
He drew unto her loveliness. 
A moment, and his arms did press 
His own love to his heaving breast, 
And for an instant of sweet rest 
'Midst clinging hands and trembling kiss 
Did he forget all things but bliss ; 
And still she murmured : 

" Now rejoice 

That far away I heard thy voice 
And came ! rejoice this night at least, 
And make good ending to the feast ! " 

Therewith from out his arms she drew, 
Yet held his hand still ; scarce he knew 
Of where he was, and who were round, 
And strange and flat his voice did sound 
Unto himself, as now he spake : 

" Kinsmen, see her, who for my sake 
Has left her mighty state and home, 
Fair beyond words, that she might come 
With you a little to abide ! 
How say ye, are ye satisfied 
Her sweet face in your midst to see ?" 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 79 

Therewith, though somewhat timidly, 
Folk shouted ; sooth, they deemed her such 
As mortal man might scarcely touch 
Or dare to love ; with fear fulfilled, 
With shame of their rough joyance chilled, 
They sat, scarce moving: but to John 
Some sweet familiar thing seemed won 
Despite his fear, as down the hall 
He led her : if his eyes did fall 
On Thorgerd's face, how might he heed 
The anguish of unholpen need, 
That filled her heart with all despair, 
As on the twain her eyes did glare ? 

Now softly to the fair high-seat 
With trembling hand he led his sweet, 
Who kissed the goodman and gooclwife, 
And wished them fair and happy life, 
Then like the earth's and heaven's queen, 
She sat there beauteous and serene, 
Till, as men gazed upon her there, 
Joy of her beauty slew their fear ; 
Hot grew their hearts now, as they turned 
Eyes on her that with strange light burned ; 
And wild and eager grew the speech 
Wherewith they praised her each to each, 
As 'neath her eyes they sat. 

If he 

Who knew the full felicity 
Of all they longed for, hushed at whiles, 
Might answer not her healing smiles 
With aught but sad imploring eyes, 
When he bethought him in what wise 
She there was come yet none the less 
Amid bewildered happiness 
The time went by ; until at last 
Night waned, and slowly all folk passed 
From out the hall, and the soft sleep 
O'er all the marvelling house did creep, 
Bearing to folk that night, such dreams, 



8o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

As showed, through wild things, very gleams 
Of heaven and perfect love, to last 
Till gray light o'er the world was cast 

But, midst the other folk, she too 
His mazed and doubtful footsteps drew 
Unto the chamber ; when alone 
They were, and his warm heart seemed one 
With her and bliss, without a word 
She gazed on him, and like a sword, 
Cleaving the very heart atwain 
That look was, laden with all pain, 
All love and ruth that she might feeL 

So through the dark the hours did steal 
Slow toward the rising of the sun ; 
But long or ere the night was done 
He slept within her arms, nor heard 
The sobs wherewith her breast was stirred, 
Nor felt the tears and kisses sweet 
That round his set calm face did beat, 
As round its dead mate "beats a bird 
With useless flutter no more heard : 
Nor did he move when she unwound 
The arms that clasped her breast around, 
And, weeping sore, the gold ring drew 
From off his hand : and naught he knew 
When from the bed at last she slid, 
And, with her body all unhid, 
Stood gazing on him till a sigh 
Burst from her heart ; and wearily 
From her sad tear-stained troubled face 
She swept her hair back : 

" O the days, 

Thy weary days, love ! Dream not then 
Of named lands, and abodes of men ! 
Alas, alas, the loneliest 
Of all such were a land of rest 
When set against the land where I 
Unhelped must note the hours go by ! 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 8l 

Ah, that my hope thy dream might pierce ! 
That mid the dreadful grief and tears, 
Which presently shall rend thine heart, 
This word the cloud might draw apart 
My feet, lost Love, shall wander soon 
East of the SUM, West of the Moon ! 
Tell not old tales of love, so strong, 
That all the world with all its wrong 
And heedlessness was weak to part 
The loving heart from loving heart ? " 

Therewith she turned about, and now 
She wept no more ; her cheeks 'gan glow, 
And her eyes glittered, and no more 
Sorrow her kind mouth brooded o'er, 
And strange, unearthly beauty shone 
O'er all her face, whence ruth was gone, 
Till the dim-litten place was glad 
That in the midst thereof it had 
Her loveliness grown dangerous ; 
Softly she gat her through the house 
Where here and there a dying light 
Shone on her wondrous limbs and white 
As through the rough place dreamily 
She moved : yet was the night wind high 
And its rude hand, as it did shake 
Window and door, served but to make 
The inner stillness yet more still. 
The clouds were riven ; o'er the hill 
The white moon shone out, yet its light 
Made the deep night so much more night, 
That now it seemed as ne'er again 
The sun would bless the eyes of men ; 
That all the world had fallen to death. 

So on she passed, her odorous breath 
Seen now amidst the moonlit hall, 
Her unshod foot's light steady fall, 
The waving of her gust-moved hair, 
Wellnigh the lonely place might hear 
6 



82 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Despite the rush and stir without, 

As, slowly, yet all void of doubt 

She raised the latchet of the door, 

And let the wind and moonlight pour 

Wild clamor and strange light therethrough. 

She paused not ; the wild west-wind blew 

Her hair straight out from her ; her feet 

The bitter, beaten snow did meet 

And shrank not ; slowly forth she passed 

Nor backward any look she cast, 

Nor gazed to right or left, but went 

With eyes on the far sky intent 

Into the howling doubtful night, 

Until at last her body white 

And its black shadow on the snow, 

No more the drift-edged way did know. 



AGAIN the thread snapped '; Gregory lay 
** Awake ; nor what had passed away 
Of the short night could tell, till he 
Through the tent's opening seemed to see 
A change creep o'er the moonlit skyj 
So there a short while did he lie 
Striving to think what he had dreamed, 
Till iitterly awake he seemed; 
And then, since no more on that night 
He thought to sleep, and lost delight 
Of the past dream grown more than dim, 
With causeless longing wearied him, 
He rose and left the tent once more, 
And passed down slowly toward the shore 
Until the boat he came unto : 
And there he set himself to do 
What things were needed to the gear, 
Until he saw the dawn draw near 
Across the sea : then, e'en as one 
Who through a marvellous land hath gone 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 83 

In sleep, and knowing naught thereof 
To tell, yet knows strange things did move 
About his sightless journeying, 
So felt he; and yet seemed to bring, 
Now and again., some things anigh 
Unto the wavering boundary 
' Twixt sight and blindness, that awhile 
Our troubled waking will beguile 
When happy dreams have just gone try, 
And left us without remedy 
Within the unpitying hands of life. 

At last, amid perplexing strife 
With things half seen, drowsy he grew 
Once more, and ever slower drew 
The tough brown lines from hand to hand, 
Until he sank upon the sand 
Beside the boat, and, staring out 
O'er the gray sea, lost hope and doubt 
In little while, nor noted now 
The dawn's line wide and wider grow, 
Nor waning of the shadow deep 
The moon cast from the boat ; till sleep 
Had closed his eyes, and in the cold 
Of the first dawn the ending told 
Of that swzct tale. Yet so it was, 
That the Kings hall and feast did pass 
Clean from his mind ; and now it seemed 
That of no tale-telling he dreamed, 
But of his own life grown to be 
A new and marvellous history. 

Midst hope and fear and wretchedness, 
And Love, that all things doth redress, 
A down the stream of fate he moved 
As the carle's son, the well-beloved, 
The fool of longing ; in such wise 
He dealt with his own miseries. 



84 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



THE winter night was on the wane 
When the poor wretch woke up again ; 
The lone strange sound of cock-crow moved 
His heart to dream of his beloved 
'Twixt sleep and waking, and he turned 
A face with utmost love that yearned 
And sighed, as his hot hand stole forth 
To touch a body of more worth 
To him than Heaven's unmeasured years ; 
Upon his face were undried tears 
Left by some dream, and yet he smiled 
To think of deep joy so beguiled 
By sadness dreamed ; his lips began 
To speak a name unknown to man. 
A little while in bliss he lay 
And gathered thoughts of day on day 
More joyful each than each, until 
Sweet thankful love his soul did fill 
With utter ecstasy of bliss, 
And low he murmured : 

" Kind she is 

Beyond all kindness ever told ! 
Thou wilt not leave me more, a-cold 
In the rough world ; thou knowest how 
My weak and clinging heart will grow 
Unto the strength of thy great heart. 
O surely no more shall we part, 
And never canst thou hurt me more 
Till all the world and time is o'er ! " 

The moonlight -waned, on drew the morn, 
The lessened west-wind moaned forlorn 
In the garth nooks ; the eaves dripped now 
Beneath the thaw, the faint cock-crow 
Through the dull dawn, and no sound more 
He heard. Awake, and yearning sore, 
He turned about and cried : 

" Wake, wake ! 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 85 

Day cometh, and my heart doth ache 
To think how sleep still takes from me 
Some minutes of felicity, 
From me and thee, my love, my sweet! 
O think of Death's forgotten feet, 
That somewhere surely drawn anigh, 
And let no minute more pass by 
With our lips parted each from each ! " 

Wildly the ending of his speech 
Rang from his lips, all strange, as though 
The thought once thought needs thence must go 
In words, though all the world were changed. 
Wildly his opened eyes now ranged 
The twilight chamber void of her, 
And through his heart shot such a fear 
As words may tell not nay indeed 
No fear for now he knew the meed 
Of his fool's word, and for a while 
No hope was left that might beguile 
His misery and his loneliness, 
No eager sight, born of distress, 
Might pierce the cloud that o'er him spread. 
Such wild thoughts filled his 'wildered head, 
As once or twice may men endure 
Yet live ; for the earth seemed not sure, 
Or the air fleeting ; fire burned not, 
Nor water moved ; the snow was hot, 
The dark hid naught ; the coming day 
No longer sober seemed and gray, 
But full of flashing light and blue. 
Yet all things round him well he knew, 
More real they seemed than e'er before, 
They would not change, nor would pass o'er 
One instant of his agony. 
It was as he had seen time die, 
And good turn evil 'neath his eyes, 
And God live to forge miseries 
For him alone, for him alone, 
For all the world beside seemed gone. 



86 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

A short while, risen in his bed, 
He hung his wretched brooding head 
Above the place her limbs had warmed, 
And shrieked not,, though strange curses swarmed 
About his heart, and wild and fierce 
Strove hard his dead despair to pierce, 
And might not : naught his heart might ease 
Or for a moment gain him peace. 
Yet in that time of utter ill, 
Some reflex of the guiding will 
That moved his limbs in happier days 
Still wrought in him ; round did he gaze 
With set eyes, and arose withal ; 
And e'en therewith a thought did fall 
Upon him that some succor brought, 
" How can I meet their eyes ? " he thought, 
" How can I bear to hear again 
The voices of the sons of men ? " 

And, nigh unwitting, at that word, 
Hearkening the while if any stirred, 
He clad himself and gazed around 
The place once more, and on the ground 
There lay her raiment : then he turned 
His head away, for wild-fire burned 
Within it, and he strove to speak ; 
But, lest his wretched heart should break 
And torment end on that first day 
A new pain did his pain allay, 
And bitter tears and wailing came 
To dull the fierceness of the flame 
That so consumed him ; and withal 
Desire of wandering forth 'gan fall 
Upon him, though he knew not where 
In all the world to seek for her. 

So, ere his burning tears were spent, 
Through the unwakened hall he went, 
And kissed the threshold of the door 
Her well-loved feet had touched before, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 87 

Yet saw no signs upon the snow 

Of those departing feet to show. 

Cold blew the wind upon his face, 

As now he left behind the place 

Where he was born, nor turned again 

To look farewell ; for naught and vain 

Seemed all things but his misery, 

That now had grown his life to be, 

Not to be given away for aught 

That earth might hold ; nor had he thought 

That anything his lot could change, 

That anything could more be strange, 

Lovesome or fearful to his heart, 

Or in his life have any part. 

So he went on from that abode, 
Along a well-known, oft-trod road, 
He knew not why or where, until 
Clean hidden by a bare waste hill, 
Were the snow-covered roofs wherein 
His outward life did first begin. 
Then as he wandered on forlorn, 
From out his unrest was there born 
Some faint half-memory, that did seem 
To be the remnant of a dream ; 
Some image to his mind there clung, 
Some speech upon his lips yet hung 
He might not utter. 

And now he 

Had gone so long that the wide sea 
He saw afar, when the dull day 
Toward eve again had passed away, 
Amidst the utter solitude 
Of his time-slaying weary mood. 
But weak and wayworn was he now, 
Though greater did his longing grow 
To wander ever on and on, 
Until the unknown rest were won. 
And when he gazed from the hillside, 
And saw the great sea spreading wide, 



88 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

All black and empty from the shore, 
So sharp a longing then came o'er 
His dull despair, such wild desire, 
That stung, as when a coal of fire 
Is laid upon an aching wound, 
He cast himself upon the ground, 
And in the cold snow writhed and wailed, 
While over him the sea-mew sailed, 
Not silent, and the wind wailed too, 
As though his bitter grief they knew, 
And mocked him. 

Yet or fell the night 
He rose, and on the waste of white 
Stood a black speck, then went until 
The black night mingled sea and hill 
And hurrying rack in nothingness. 
Yet, kept alive by his distress, 
He fainted not, nor went astray, 
For as in dreams he knew the way 
At last, and whitherward he went, 
Since round the heart of strong intent 
His woe was wrapped. 

So o'er the down 
He went, until a haven-town 
Shone like a patch of stars on earth, 
And something like a hope had birth 
Within him, and somewhat he knew 
His will, now that his body grew 
Wellnigh too weak to bear him on. 
Yet to the town at last he won, 
So heartened now unto the task 
That he for food and rest might ask ; 
And, since no lack of wealth he had, 
Soon did he make a goodman glad 
With gift of gold, and, all outworn, 
Forgot his grief, and life forlorn 
In long deep sleep most like to death. 

Now at that town, my story saith, 
Long must he bide, for so it was 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 

That then no good ship well might pass 
From land to land, for winter-tide 
Still made the narrow seas full wide. 
Each morn did John wake there, to gaze 
With dead eyes on the waste of days, 
Each eve he laid him down to sleep, 
Much marvelling what his life did keep 
From passing : still the memory 
Of some faint, dreamlike thing gone by 
Perplexed his heart, and still he strove, 
Amid the anguish of his love, 
To speak that half-remembered word, 
Amidst a dream, belike, once heard. 

This helped him through his dull-eyed woe, 
That the time passed, and he should go 
To other lands ere many days, 
Seeming to seek for that lost face. 

At last the day desired came 
When o'er the land the Spring did flame 
With love and flowers ; and on an eve 
John's good ship did the haven leave, 
And pale he stood upon the prow, 
And to the weary place, left now 
Behind with all its patience dead, 
No more had will to turn his head, 
But thinking of the future still, 
Amid the shipman's tangled skill, 
Stood looking toward the flaming West, 
With eyes made strange by love's unrest. 

Upon the deck that night he lay, 
And naught he slept until the day 
Began to dawn, and woke again 
In short space, feeling little pain, 
And with his pale lips murmuring 
Some word half dreamed, some fleeting thing. 
Then on his arm he rose, and saw 
The waste of waters seem to draw 



90 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Unto him as the black prow clave 

With steady heart green wave on wave ; 

None save the watch were on the deck, 

Who, sleepy-eyed, no whit did reck 

Of him and all his woe and love, 

But 'twixt the bulwarks slow did move, 

With little purpose, as it seemed ; 

The helmsman steered as though he dreamed 

Of seafolk's marvels vaguely told 

By firesides in the days of old ; 

The light wind waxed and waned ; the ship 

Still through the babbling waves did slip 

As though their talk she hearkened to : 

And midst it all John scarcely knew 

Whether he lived still, or was dead : 

Wellnigh it came into his head, 

That he by ghosts of men was borne 

From out his wasted life forlorn 

O'er a strange sea to some strange place 

Of unknown punishment or grace. 

Skyward he looked, and o'er the mast 

He saw the moon with all light passed 

From out of her, and as he gazed 

The great sun o'er the green sea blazed, 

And smote his head with sudden light. 

Then in his heart the flame burned bright 
That long had smouldered there, he cried : 
" Ah, woe betide, ah, woe betide, 
East of the Sun, West of the Moon ! 
A land that no man findeth soon, 
The grave of greedy love that cries 
To all folk of its agonies : 
The prison of untrustful love, 
That thinketh a light word can move 
The heart of kindness, deep and wise. 
O love, love, would thy once-kissed eyes 
Were glad to-day, that thy sweet smile 
Forgat a wretch so base and vile, 
That he but lived to make thee sad, 
To weep the days that once were glad ! " 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 91 

But now the dreamlike sight that wrapped 
His soul, all suddenly was snapped. 
He heard the watch cry out their cry, 
The helmsman answer cheerily, 
And 'mid the homely noise of these 
Freshened awhile the morning breeze, 
The ship leaned o'er the highway green, 
That led to England's meads unseen. 

At Dunwich, in the east country, 
John landed from the weary sea, 
Not recking where on earth he was ; 
But quickly therefrom did he pass, 
Driven by growing hope ; that word 
In some old dream belike half heard, 
East of the Sun^ West of the Moon, 
Seemed unto him a heaven-sent boon, 
Yet made the merry world around 
A dreary cage, a narrow round 
Of dreamlike pain, a hollow place, 
Filled with a blind and dying race. 

That town and country-side, indeed, 
Seemed all the less to help his need, 
Whereas for common homely things 
That well he knew, with Easterlings 
And his own country-folk they dealt, 
And scarce knew aught of what folk dwelt 
Southward beyond the narrow seas ; 
So giving few farewells to these, 
Towards London did he take his way, 
And, journeying on, at hostels lay 
Benights, or whiles at abbeys fair ; 
And as his hope grew, would he dare, 
In manner of a tale, to tell 
In what wise woe upon him fell ; 
And most men praised the tale enow, 
And said no minstrel-wight might show 
A merrier tale to feasting hall. 
And so at last it did befall 



92 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That at a holy house he lay, 

A noble house, forsooth, to-day, 

Men call St. Alban's ; there he told 

Once more, as a thing known of old, 

The story of his hapless love : 

Such passion there his tongue did move, 

That in that Abbey's guest-chamber 

It was a better thing to hear 

Than many a history nobly writ, 

And much were all folk moved by it. 

But when his speech was fully done, 

From the board's end there rose up one, 

A little dry old monk, right wise 

Of semblance, with small glittering eyes, 

Who came to John, and said : 

" Thy tale, 

Fair son, shall much my need avail, 
For I have many such-like things 
Writ out for sport of lords and kings ; 
Bide thou with us to-morn, I pray, 
And hearken some for half a day ; 
For certes shall their memory 
Help thee to pass the dull days by, 
When thou growest old." 

Wide-eyed John stared, 
For scarce the old man's speech he heard, 
Or any speech of men, for still 
One thought his whole sad heart did fill. 
Howbeit constrained, he knew not why, 
He heard full many a history 
Like to his own next morn, and went 
Yet more upon his love intent ; 
Yet more the world seemed naught but this, 
Longing for bliss and losing bliss. 
And yet, of those fresh tales withal 
Some endings on his heart did fall 
As scarcely new ; he 'gan to make 
Tales to himself, how for his sake 
She wept and waited ; how some way 
To Love fulfilled yet open lay ; 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 93 

The gray morn often would beguile 
With dreams his sad lips to a smile, 
While still his shut eyes did behold 
Once more her sweetness manifold, 
And if the waking from delight 
Unto the real day void and white, 
Were wellnigh more than man could bear, 
Yet his own sad voice would he hear 
Muttering as o'erword to the tune, 
East of the Sun, West of the Moon. 

Now come to London at the last, 
Among the chapmen there he passed, 
And many a tale of them he had 
Concerning outlands good and bad 
That they had journeyed through, but still 
He heard none speak for good or ill 
Of any way unto the place 
Whereto for him still led all ways. 
But his hope lived, nor might his heart 
In any life of man have part, 
And forth he wandered once again 
As merchant among chaffering men, 
And strange he seemed among them all ; 
His face changed not, whate'er might fall 
Of good or ill ; he won, he lost, 
He gave, as counting not the cost ; 
Fell sick, grew well, and heeded naught 
What the days took or what they brought ; 
Nowhere he strove great deeds to do, 
Scarce spoke he save when spoken to ; 
Hither and thither still-he went 
As the winds blow, never content, 
Never complaining ; resting naught, 
And yet scarce asking what he sought. 
A strange waif in the tide of life, 
With naught he seemed to be at strife, 
To nothing earthly to belong. 
Still burned his longing bright and strong, 
As when upon that bitter morn 



94 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

He hung with his white face forlorn, 
Over the bed yet scarcely cold, 
That erst her loveliness did hold. 

So chasing dreams, so dreamlike chased, 
Through lapse of years his life did waste ; 
His body changed, and old he grew 
Before his time : his face none knew, 
When, on a time, from journeyings vain 
In southlands, wandering back again, 
He heard his father welcome call 
Across the smoke-wreaths of his hall. 
O lonely heart ! the yearning shame 
That erst, when back thereto he came, 
He felt at being so all alone 
Among his own folk, was clean gone ; 
No lingering kindness of old days 
Clung now to the familiar place ; 
With unmoved mouth he wandered there, 
And saw his mother's empty chair, 
For she was dead : with unchanged eyes 
Thorgerd he saw from spinning rise, 
Fair still and young, though he was old. 
His father's face he did behold 
With no faint smile of memory, 
No pang for wasted youth gone by; 
Betwixt his brethren twain he sat, 
And heard them talk of this and that 
'Mid stories of a bygone day, 
Scarce thinking how they used to play 
Fair children once, and innocent, 
With the next minute well content- 

No good-will from his kith and kin, 
And things kind once, he now might win 
From out the well-loved wasting fire 
Of unfulfilled scarce-touched desire. 
One place was as another place, 
Haunted by memories of one face, 
Vocal with one remembered voice, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 95 

Sad with one time's swift fleeting joys. 
Yet as he passed the time-worn door 
The last time, said farewell once more, 
Scarce 'mid his outward calm could he 
Stay quivering lip and trembling knee, 
That on the threshold longed to lie, 
Where surely had her feet gone by. 

Through what wild lands he wandered wide, 
Among what folk he did abide 
Thereafter, naught my story saith. 
Suffice it, that no outbraved death 
Might end him ; no chain of delay 
His feet from his wild wanderings stay ; 
That every help he strove to gain 
From wise or fools was still but vain ; 
Until, my story saith, at last 
The second time in ship he passed 
The wild waves of the Indian Sea, 
And with a chaffering company 
Long time abode, and ever heard 
And saw great marvels, but no word, 
No sight of what alone might give 
A heart unto the dead-alive. 

At last from the strange city there 
He set sail in a dromond fair, 
With chapmen for his fellows, bound 
To such a land, that there the ground 
Bears gems and gold, but nourisheth 
Little besides save fear and death. 
So long they sailed, that at the last 
The skipper's face grew overcast, 
And the stout chapmen 'gan to fear, 
Because no signs of land drew near, 
And all the days were fully done 
When with fair wind they should have won 
Unto the shore for which they made ; 
But of no death was John afraid 



96 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

While o'er some space as yet untried 
He bore his love unsatisfied ; 
With -hate they eyed his calm face now, 
For greater still their fear did grow. 

Anigh the prow one eve he stood, 
And something new so stirred his blood 
With hope, that he at last might say, 
A thing unsaid for many a day, 
That he was happy ; round about 
The shipmen stood, and gazed in doubt 
Upon a long gray bank of cloud 
The eastern sky-line that did shroud. 
He saw it not, grown soft with rest 
His face was turned unto the west ; 
The low sun lit his golden hair 
Changed now with years of toil and care, 
The light wind stirred it as the prow 
The babbling ripple soft did throw 
From its black shining side ; the sail 
Flapped o'erhead as the wind did fail 
Fitful that eve ; the western sky 
Was bright and clear as night drew nigh 
Beyond all words to tell ; at last 
He shivered ; to the tall white mast 
He raised his eyes just as the sun 
Blazed at his lowest : day was done, 
But yet night lingered, as o'erhead, 
With a new-kindled hope and dread, 
The thin, curved moon, all white and cold, 
'Twixt day, and night did he behold. 

No need now of that word to think, 
Or where he heard it ; he did shrink 
Back 'mid his fellows, for he strove 
This first time to forget his love 
Lest hope should slay him ; therewith now 
He heard the shipmen speaking low 
With anxious puckered brows, and saw 
The merchants each to other draw 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 97 

As men who feared to be alone ; 

And knew that a fresh fear had grown 

Beside their old fear, natheless naught 

To such things might he turn his thought. 

All watched that night but he, who slept 

While lovesome visions o'er him crept, 

Making night happy with the sight 

Of kind hands, and soft eyes and bright. 

At last within a flowery mead 

He seemed to be, clad in such weed 

As fellows of the angels wear : 

Alone a while he wandered there 

Right glad at heart, until at last 

By a fair-blossomed brake he passed, 

And o'er his shoulder gazed as he 

Went by it ; and lo, suddenly, 

The odorous boughs were thrust apart, 

And with all heaven within his heart 

He turned, and saw his love, his sweet, 

Clad in green raiment to the feet, 

Her feet upon the blossoms bare, 

A rose-wreath round her golden hair ; 

Her arms reached out to him, her mouth 

Trembling to quench his lifelong drouth, 

Yet smiling 'neath her deep kind eyes 

Upon his trembling glad surprise. 

But when he would have gone to her 

Him seemed a cry of deadly fear 

Rang through the fair and lonely close, 

A cold thick mist betwixt them rose, 

And then all sight from him did pass, 

And darkness a long while there was. 

Then all at once he woke up, cast 
With mighty force against the mast, 
Whereto with desperate hands he clung 
Unwitting, while the storm-wind sung 
Its song of death about his ears. 
But he, though grief had long slain fears, 
Shouted midst clash of wind and sea, 
7 



98 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Unheard shrieks, unseen misery 
Of the black night, 

" All come to naught ! 
Yestreen I deemed that rest was brought 
Anigh me, and I thought I knew 
That toward my Love at last I drew. 
The loveless rest comes, all deceit 
Death treads to nothing with his feet ! 
O idle Maker of the world, 
Art thou content to see me hurled 
To naught, from longing and from tears, 
When thou through all these weary years 
With love my helpless soul hast bound, 
And fed me in that narrow round 
With no delight thy fair world knows ? 
Come close, my love, come close, come close, 
Why wilt thou let me die alone ? " 

Howso he deemed his days were done, 
Yet there still clung he desperately, 
Mid wash of the in-rushing sea, 
Mid the storm's night, for no least whit 
Might he see through the rage of it, 
Nor know which unseen hill of wave 
The rash frail wooden toy would stave, 
Or if another man did cling 
Unto the hopeless shivering thing ; 
Yea, or if day had dawned, and light 
High up serene now mocked the night 
Of waves and winds. How long he drave 
From windless trough to wind-sheared wave, 
No whit he knew, although it seemed 
So long, that all before was dreamed, 
That there was neither heaven nor earth, 
Before that turmoil had its birth. 

And yet at last, as on and on 
He swept, and still death was not won ; 
A pleasure in his heart 'gan rise ; 
Love blossomed fresh mid fantasies, 
Mid dreams born of the overthrow 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 99 

Of sense and sight ; he did not know 
If yet he lived, yet wrong and pain 
Were words, that hindered not the gain, 
Of sweet peace, whatso wild unrest 
Were round about ; and all the best 
Seemed won, nor was one day of bliss 
Forgotten ; all was once more his, 
That while agone he deemed so lost. 
How long in sooth the ship was tost 
From hill to hill of unseen sea 
The tale tells not ; but suddenly, 
Amid the sweetest dream of all, 
A long way down John seemed to fall, 
Losing all sense of sight and sound ; 
Then brake a sudden light around, 
Wherethrough he none-the-less saw naught, 
And as it waned, waned sense and thought, 
The peace of dull unconsciousness 
His wild torn heart at last did bless. 

He woke again upon the sand 
Of a wide bay's curved shell-strewn strand, 
And long belike had he lain there ; 
For morn it was, and fresh and fair, 
And no least sign was on the sea 
Of storm or wrack, but peacefully 
On the low strand its last wave broke. 

Scarce might John, dream when thus he woke 
Of what had happed or where he was ; 
Soft thoughts of bygone days did pass 
Across his mind at first, and when 
His later memory came again, 
It was but with great toil that he 
Could think about his misery 
And all his latter wretched years ; 
And if the thought to unused tears 
Did move him now, yet none the less 
A strange content and happiness 
Wrapped him around. 



loo THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So to his feet 

He rose now, and most fresh and sweet 
The air was round him, and the sun 
As of the time when morn begun 
In early summer of the north, 
Maketh the world seem wondrous worth, 
And death and pain awhile doth hide. 
He gazed across the ocean wide 
With puzzled look ; then up and down 
Sought curiously the sea-sand brown 
And at the last 'gan marvel how 
No sign the smooth sea-strand might show 
Of his lost ship and company; 
Then closer to that summer sea 
He went, and surely now it seemed 
That he of India had but dreamed, 
Because the sand beneath his feet 
Washed smooth and flat by the sea's beat, 
Or wrinkled by the ripple low, 
Such shells and creeping things did show 
As in the northland well he knew, 
And round about o'erhead there flew 
Such sea-fowl as in days of old, 
Their unknown tales unto him told. 
He gave a deep sigh, yet his heart 
From that new bliss would nowise part, 
Or battle with its strange content ; 
And no more midst his wonderment, 
Rather for more of pain, he yearned, 
Than any rest save one : he turned 
From the green sea his dreamy eyes, 
And saw soft slopes and lowly, rise 
Green and unburnt from the smooth strand, 
And further, in the rising land, 
Besprent with trees of no such clime 
As he had known for weary time ; 
From slope and thicket then there grew 
High grassy, treeless hillsides, blue 
With the light haze of that fair tide. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 

A little while did he abide 
Gazing upon that pleasant place, 
Then o'er his shoulder turned his face 
Seaward, yet once more 'gan to go 
Unto the hills, and felt as though 
He bade unto the weltering flood 
A last farewell ; and sweet and good 
His life seemed grown, e'en when he said, 
"It may be that my love is dead ; 
Or living, still more like that I 
Shall see her not before I die ; 
Fool am I then to feel my feet, 
Drawn on some happiness to meet ! " 

So went his words, but e'en as erst 
When most he felt forlorn and cursed, 
The words of hope seemed words and air, 
So now seemed all his words of care 
Empty of meaning. Forth he went 
Light-hearted, till his firm feet bent 
The daisies of the flowery grass, 
And swiftly onward did he pass 
From slope to slope : the land was fair, 
Yet saw he no house anywhere, 
No hedge or garden-close or corn ; 
Nor heard he halloo there or horn, 
To make the dappled deer afraid, 
That here and there about him strayed 
Scarce heeding him ; no arms he bare, 
His raiment that had once been fair, 
Was sorely stained, and worn, and rent, 
And thirst and hunger as he went 
Pressed on him ; till he came at last 
To where a spreading fruit-tree cast 
Its shadows round deliciously ; 
John stayed there, for that friendly tree 
Had load of apples ; so he ate 
And found them sweet and delicate, 
As ever monk in garden grew, 
Though little care belike they knew. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But now, when he had had his fill 
Thereof, there marvelling stood he still, 
Because to one bough blossoms clung 
As it were May, but ripe fruit hung 
Upon the other : then he smiled, 
As one by a strange dream beguiled, 
Then slowly on the grass sank down, 
For sorely sweet had longing grown 
With gathering languor of the day. 
But looking round, as there he lay, 
Upon the flowers besprent about, 
Still more was love confused with doubt 
If still he lived : 

" Red roses fair 

To wreathe my love that wanders here, 
Gold-hearted lilies for her hand ! 
And yet withal that she may stand 
On something other folk think sweet, 
March violets for her rosy feet ; 
The black-heart amorous poppy, fain 
Death from her passing knee to gain, 
Bows to the gilliflower there : 
The fiery tulip stands to stare 
Upon her perfect loveliness, 
That 'gainst the corn-cockle will press 
Its fainting leaves : further afield 
The untended vine black fruit doth yield, 
That bore long torment of the heat, 
At last in bliss her lips to meet ; 
The wind-flowers wotting of the thing 
Must gather round there in the Spring, 
And live and die and live again, 
That they might feel the joyous pain 
At last, of lying crushed and rent 
Beneath her feet, while well content 
Above their soft leaves she doth sing. 
What marvel, love, that everything 
That far apart the troubled year, 
Midst toil and doubt, gives otherwhere, 
Must gather in this land round thee, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 103 

Living and dying-, still to see 

A wonder God shall not make twice. 

Come swiftly, love, because mine eyes 

Grow dim with love ; a little while 

Shall hope my fainting heart beguile 

To think me strong ; yet well I know 

That naught of strength is in me now, 

Save wasting fire of love alone 

Come to me then, ere all is gone ! 

And let it not be all for naught 

That ever one heart have I sought 

Of all the world, and cast aside 

All thought that any bliss might hide 

In aught save in thy love ; thy love 

That even yet perchance might move 

The Great God not all utterly 

To slay me, casting my soul by 

As void henceforth forevermore, 

What love soever once it bore, ' 

That nothing mortal satisfied ! " 

He sprang up, o'er the country-side 
He gazed long, and down ran the tears, 
At thought of all the pain of years, 
When he beheld its emptiness ; 
Yet presently on did he press, 
With longing grown not all a-pain. 

The higher slopes now did he gain, 
Through flowers and blooming trees, until 
He 'gan to breast a steeper hill, 
And coming out of a close wood, 
High up above the lowlands stood, 
And far away beheld the sea 
Guarding the sweet land patiently, 
Then turning, clomb on, till the sun 
Sank low adown and day was done, 
Before the hill's top he might gain ; 
Then e'en his restlessness was fain 
There to abide the next day's light. 



104 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So down he lay, and the short night 

Went by in dreams of that past day 

When in the hawthorn-brake he lay ; 

How many lifetimes now agone 

That day seemed, when once more alone 

In the dawn's shiver he awoke ! 

Natheless with sturdy heart he broke 

Through the morn's hopelessness, and still 

Pressed up the last steep of the hill, 

Until together with the sun 

Its gray and rugged brow he won. 

Then down into the vale he gazed, 
And held his breath, as if amazed 
By all its wondrous loveliness ; 
For as the sun its depths did bless, 
It lighted up from side to side, 
A close-shut valley, nothing wide, 
But ever full of all things fair. 
A little way the hill was bare, 
Then clung to it a deep green wood 
That guarded many a fertile rood 
Of terraced vine and slopes of wheat ; 
A white way wound about its feet, 
Beset with heavy-fruited trees 
And cleaving orchards through ; midst these. 
Each hemmed round with its flowery close, 
The cottages and homesteads rose ; 
But the hillside sprang suddenly 
From level meadows that did lie 
On either side a noble stream, 
O'er which the morning haze did steam 
Made golden now ; then rose again 
The further hillsides, bright with grain, 
And fair with orchard and close wood, 
From whence at last the scarped cliffs stood, 
And clear now, golden in the morn, 
Against the western sky upborne, 
Seemed like a guarded wall, lest care 
Or unrest yet should creep in there. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 105 

At John's back now bright the sun shone 
Once more, once more with all light gone, 
Above the further hills hung high, 
The pale thin moon was in the sky ; 
Then he cried out, 

" Ah, end the strife, 

Twin lights of God ; give death or life ! 
Surely shall I be lying soon 
East of the Sun, West of the Moon ; 
What matter if alive or dead, 
If so once more our lips are wed ! " 

And now he 'gan to look around, 
To see how he the lower ground 
Might gain, for there the hill had end 
In shear rocks, so he needs must wend 
Along its rugged brow ; at last, 
When he a little way had passed, 
The hill's crest lowered, and 'gan draw 
Back from the vale, and then he saw 
How it grew wide, and 'neath his eyes 
The river wound now circle-wise, 
And at the furthest curve thereof 
There lay, half hid by close and grove, 
A marvellous house, that jewel-like 
Gleamed, where the sun its roofs did strike, 
Or strange-wrought walls ; down-gazing now 
With fluttering heart, he wondered how 
Its white walls, and its roofs that burned, 
Should seem e'en like a dream returned 
From the forgotten land ; then down 
The hillside, soft and easy grown, 
He slipped, and when he reached the way 
Folk- stirred about the morn of day 
In field and house : fair folk were all 
He saw, and yet a chill did fall 
Upon him when he noted them ; 
White linen, well-embroidered hem, 
Round clean-made limbs he saw, above 
Were faces sweet, well wrought for love ; 



106 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet man and maid, young folk and old, 
With sad eyes, lonely, strange, and cold, 
Still seemed to go upon their ways. 
Moreover, none on him did gaze ; 
And if their eyes met his, as though 
They saw him not, past did they go ; 
Nor heard he any spoken word 
. Amongst them, nor saw any stirred 
To laugh or smile by anything. 
But fearful, yet his hope did cling 
Unto his heart, nay, more, he thought 
Once more that surely not for naught 
Among such marvels he was come. 

So forth he passed by house and home 
E'en like a ghost ; the open door 
Of one fair house he stood before, 
Where folk got ready for their meal, 
With little sign of woe or weal ; 
And as he stood before their eyes, 
They looked his way with no surprise, 
Nor seemed to see him : naught they spake, 
Neither durst he the silence break, 
But went his ways. 

A tall man stood 
By the wayside a-hewing wood, 
And close by was a fair-haired child, 
Who watched him, but spake not nor smiled, 
Nor looked up at the wayfarer ; 
John strove to make this goodman hear, 
Crying out to him cheerily 
What land of all lands this might be ; 
But nowise did he turn him round, 
Nor did the youngling heed the sound. 
Next, as he turned therefrom, there came 
Along the road an ancient dame, 
High-perched upon a mule, a lad 
Of fifteen springs his left hand had 
Upon the bell-hung bridle-rein 
And still with these were all words vain. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 107 

So on he went, and no more speech, 
Had heart to try till he did reach 
The delicate house ; and in the square 
Before it was a conduit fair, 
Where to and fro the girls did pass, 
Bearing their jars of earth or brass ; 
Shrill sounded there the gray doves' wings, 
The steep roof knew their murmurings, 
The sparrows chirped, the brass did clash, 
The water on the stones did plash, 
The damsels wind-blown raiment fair 
And tinkling gold toys sounded there, 
But not their voices : unto one 
Who stood and watched the water run 
Over her jar's lip pensively 
John turned, for kind she seemed to be : 
But when with soft beseeching eyes 
He spake, still in no other wise 
She dealt with him than had the rest ; 
So when with growing fear oppressed 
He spake more earnestly, and she 
Still answered naught, then timidly 
Upon her hand his hand he laid ; 
Warm was it, but no heed she paid 
Unto the touch, and he fell back, 
Wondering what thing those folk did lack 
That yet they died not : but still burned 
Hope amid great fear, and he turned 
Unto the palace door, wherethrough 
Passed fair-clad people to and fro. 

When he essayed to enter in 
None stayed or heeded ; he did win 
Into a fair porch, set around 
With images of maidens crowned 
And kings all armed ; through this he gained 
A pillared court, where waxed and waned 
A babbling fountain, maidens fair 
And slim youths saw he loitering there 
As lovers loiter ; but their eyes, 



io8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Listless and sad, changed in no wise 

As past he brushed with hurrying feet 

And glittering eyes : then did he meet 

The all-armed clashing guard, and then 

The long line of the serving-men 

Bearing up victuals to the hall, 

And, without bell or trumpet-call 

Thither folk streamed. He went with them, 

And many a wrought cloak, and rich hem 

Brushed past him, many a jewelled sword 

Clinked at the side of knight or lord, 

And no word spoken yet at last 

Into the mighty hall he passed, 

And thought no greatest king on earth, 

E'en were it he of Micklegarth, 

Or the great lord of Babylon, 

So fair a place as that had won. 

Now there he stood, till every place 
Was filled, save midmost of the dais 
The high-seat lacked a man ; so then 
He laughed loud mid those silent men, 
Grown reckless in that kingdom cold, 
And clad in rags mid silk and gold, 
Barefooted in that dainty hall, 
He strode up to the ivory stall, 
And sat him down, and laughed once more 
Unheeded, while the servers bore 
Unto the guests rich meats and drink ; 
Nor from the victuals did he shrink, 
But well his hunger satisfied, 
Though not long there might he abide, 
For still his lovesome restlessness 
Midst all upon his heart did press. 

So rising ere the feast was done, 
He paced the echoing hall alone, 
And passed the door, and wandered now, 
Unchecked by any, high and low, 
And saw strange things and fair ; at last 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 109 

A silent maid his side brushed past, 

And to a carven door did wend, 

At a long cloister's nether end, 

Passed in and shut it to again. 

Then John stood still and strove in vain, 

With a new hope and gathering fear, 

And weakly drew the door anear, 

And laid his hand upon the latch, 

And with a sob his breath must catch 

Because of thronging memories. 

He opened the door now, with eyes 

Cast down for fear, and therewith heard, 

As heretofore, no spoken word ; 

But rustling as of women's gear 

And gentle breathing did he hear 

And the dull noise upon the ground 

Of restless spindles ; all around 

Floated a delicate sweet scent, 

As though the wind o'er blossoms went. 

His breath came fast, his fevered blood 
Tingled and changed, as there he stood, 
And each 'gainst each now smote his knees ; 
E'en as a world of images 
The past was grown to him ; he knew 
What in those days he used to do, 
But knew not what it meant ; and yet 
Would she the past days quite forget, 
And was she like these dead-alive ? 

None came, sore trembling did he strive 
To search the strange place through, but still 
His hope, fear-tangled, and the ill 
That might be, bound his eyes full fast 
A long while crying out at last 
E'en ere his eyes had left the ground, 
As one who some lost thing has found, 
He stepped forth, and with all surprise 
Made naught by love, his mortal eyes, 
His weary eyes, beheld indeed, 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

His heart's desire, his life, his need, 

Still on the earth, still there for him ; 

And as he gazed, most weak and dim, 

Seemed all the visions wherewith he 

Was wont to feed his misery, 

To dull the pain unsatisfied, 

That still for death or presence cried. 

Round the World's Love, the glorious one, 
My tale says, many maidens spun, 
Hovvso John's eyes beheld them not, 
And she upon her knees had got 
Some broidery fair, and whiles her hand 
Moved by her half-dead will's command 
Would raise it up, and whiles again, 
As too much all in all grew pain, 
Would let it fall adown : her face 
Was altered nothing from the grace 
That he remembered, save that erst 
A sad smile even at the worst 
Would gleam across her pity, but now 
Betwixt her round chin and smooth brow 
Lay bound the sorrow of the years, 
Too sharp for smiles, too hard for tears : 
Sometimes as some sweet memory 
Pierced the dull present, wearily 
She writhed her neck, and raised her head; 
Sometimes her hands, as feebly led 
By ghosts of her old longings, moved 
As though toward some one long time loved, 
And long time lost ; then from her seat 
Whiles she half rose as if to meet 
Loved footfalls half-remembered ; then 
The dull pain swallowed all again, 
Its child, dull patience, death-in-life, 
Choked down the rising rest of strife. 

Scarcely his feet might bear him o'er 
The smoothness of the marble floor 
Unto her feet ; scarce might he raise 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN, 

His wild eyes to her weary face, 
Scarcely his hand had strength to touch 
The open hand he loved so much ; 
And yet his thirsting lips love drew 
Unto dear eyes that nothing knew 
What closed their lids, to lips still warm, 
But all forgetful of the harm 
Their fruitful sweetness erst had wrought, 
To feet desired, that erewhile brought 
Love's grief on the sad moaning man, 
Who fawned on them with lips grown wan, 
And cheeks grown thin for lack of love. 

How might he tell if aught could move 
Her grief-chilled heart ; yet love slew fear, 
Lulled speech to sleep sweet to be near ; 
Yea, even if all were changed, if all 
Into this dumb, strange life must fall, 
And all the longing and the pain 
For signs of love were spent in vain ; 
If, in strange wise together brought, 
They were apart still, and still naught 
Might tell of better hope ! O sweet 
Beyond all words, there at her feet 
To lie and watch her ! By what word 
Might his deep love be better heard 
Than by that silence. 

Naught he said 

A long while, and her weary head 
Hung low, and still she saw him not. 
At last the heart in him waxed hot, 
And he cried out : 

" Time long ago, 

How long, how long, I know not now, 
I sinned and lost thee : scarce a hope 
Was left with the dull years to cope ; 
Yet this my hand now touches thee, 
My cheek is laid upon thy knee ; 
I am thy love, beloved, come, 
I know not how, to thy new home ! " 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

She moved not, but a rush of tears 
Blinded his eyes^JBS all the years 
With all their pain rose up to him ; 
Her head moved then, through foot and limb 
A tremor ran, as the tears fell 
Upon her hands : 

" O Love, scarce well," 
He sobbed, " That we should be apart, 
My sorrow laid upon thy heart, 
And my heart worn with thine, my love 
No word 'twixt lips and lips, to move 
The double burden found at last, 
What chain is it that binds thee fast ? 
Was my great grief so hard to bear 
That thou art grown cold ? Sweet and dear 
I bore thy grief yet love and live ! " 

He trembled, for she seemed to strive 
To grasp strange thoughts that flitted round, 
She clenched her delicate hands, and frowned, 
And her feet moved uncertainly, 
The while the maidens sitting by 
Spun and spun on, nor changed at all. 

Then a strange thought on him did fall, 
To choke his tears back and tell o'er 
The story of his longing sore, 
E'en from that well-remembered day 
When in the hawthorn-brake he lay. 
God wot, if his hand trembled oft 
As he recalled words sweet and soft, 
And tender touches, all the bliss 
Of clinging hand and lingering kiss ! 
God wot if he stayed tremblingly 
As from her breast brake forth a sigh 
And she fell trembling ! And at last, 
Amid his tale of how she passed 
Away from him, and left him bare 
In the rough world of hate and care, 
Her fingers tightened round his own, 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 113 

And a sound like a tender moan 
Parted her lips ; he stayed awhile, 
And on his face a quivering smile 
Masked the unshed tears, as he told 
How in that morning drear and cold 
He found her gone : and therewith she 
Raised up her head, and eagerly 
Gazed round, and yet looked not on him : 

" No hope," he said, " however dim, 
At first, sweet love, abode with me ; 
I know not how I lived ; the sea, 
The earth, and sky, that day had grown 
A heavy burden all mine own ; 
As if mine hand all things had wrought 
To find their strength come all to naught, 
Their beauty perished, all made vain, 
Unnoticed parts of the huge pain 
That filled the world and crushed my heart 
Then first, the heavy veil to part, 
Came memory of thy mouth divine, 
Some image of a word of thine 
Is it not so that thou saidst this, 
That morn that parted me and bliss, 
' Ah, couldst thou know, I go too soon 
East of the Sttn, West of the Moon ? ' " 

With a great sigh, as one who throws 
A burden off, that sweet arose, 
And stood before him, trembling sore 
With love and joy ; ah, me ! once more 
Fulfilled of love their kind eyes met, 
Although apart they stood as yet, 
Helpless with pain of ecstasy ; 
Till from her lips a joyful cry, 
Ringing and sweet, burst forth, and he, 
Strong no more with love's misery, 
Faint, changed with this new joyful love, 
His wandering hands toward her did move 
E'en but a little way. But round 



114 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

His fluttering heart her arms she wound, 
And kissed his pale cheeks red again, 
And hung above his lovesome pain, 
Desiring him as the spring yearns 
For the young summer sun, that burns 
His soft heart into fruitful death. 
His parched mouth felt her odorous breath, 
His weary burning head did rest 
Upon the heaven of her sweet breast, 
His mazed ears heard her tender speech ; 
His eyes, his silence did beseech 
For more and more and more of love. 

How this their joy fulfilled might move 
The world around I know not well ; 
But yet this idle dream doth tell 
That no more silent was the place, 
That new joy lit up every face, 
That joyous lovers kissed and clung. 
E'en as these twain, that songs were sung 
From mouth to mouth in rose-bowers, 
Where hand in hand and crowned with flowers, 
Folk praised the Lover and Beloved 
That such long years, such pain had proved ; 
But soft, they say, their joyance was 
When midst them soon the twain did pass, 
Hand locked in hand, heart kissing heart, 
No more this side of death to part 
No more, no more Full soft I say 
Their greetings were that happy day, 
As though in pensive semblance clad ; 
For fear their faces over-glad 
This certain thing should seem to hide, 
That love can ne'er be satisfied. 



THE LAND EAST OF THE SUN. 115 



O'ER Gregory's eyes the pain of morn 
Flashed suddenly, and all forlorn 
Of late-gained clean forgot delight, 
He sat up, scowling on the bright 
Broad day that lit the hurrying crowd 
Of white-head waves, while shrill and loud 
About him cried the gulls ; but he 
Lay still with eyes turned toward the sea. 
And yet beholding naught at all, 
Till into ill thoughts did he fall, 
Of what a rtide and friendless place 
The world was, through what empty days 
Men were pushed slowly down to death. 

Then o'er the fresh morrfs breezy breath 
Was borne his fellows' cheery cry j 
He rose up, sighing heavily, 
A nd turned round to the steep gray bent, 
Whereunder had been pitched their tent 
Upon the odorous thymy grass. 
And down the slope he saw them pass, 
A nd heard their voices blithe enough : 
But loathsome unto him, and rough 
Must all men seem upon that morn, 
Their speech a hard thing to be borne. 

He stood by as they launched the boat, 
And little did their labor note. 
And set no hand thereto at all ; 
Until an awe on these did fall ; 
They muttered, " Ah, the Stargazer 
Beholdeth strange things drawing near ! " 

So somewhat silently they sailed 
In up the firth, till the wind failed, 
Betwixt the high cliffs, and with oars 
They swept midmost the rocky shores 
A nd spake few words. 

But smoother now 
Was grown the Stargazer' s brow, 



Ii6 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And his thin Hps were less close-set^ 
For wellnigh now did he forget 
Fellows and boat and land and sea, 
And, waking, seemed no less to be 
East of the Sun, West of the Moon, 
And when they landed at high-noon, 
From all men "would he go apart 
In woods and meads, and deal by art 

With his returning memory ; 

And, some things gained, and some slipped by, 

His weary heart awhile to soothe, 

He wove all into verses smooth, 

As tells the tale : that wotteth not 

How much within it it hath got 

That his hand writ : for soothly he 

Was deemed a craftsmaster to be 
In those most noble days of old, 

Whose words were e'en as kingly gold 

To our thin brass, or drossy lead : 
Well, e'en so all the tale is said 
How twain grew one and came to bliss 

Woe's me an idle dream it is ! 



SEPTEMBER. 117 



THE autumn day, the strange and dreamy tale 
Were soft as far-off bells adown a vale, 
Borne to the hill-top on the fitful wind ; 
And like their music past, they left behind 
Sad thoughts of old desires unsatisfied, 
And pain and joy that long ago had died, 
Yea, long been buried 'neath the strife of days, 
Too hard and hapless any woe to raise 
And crown it with the flowery, fleeting crown 
Of that strange rest, whose seed is all unknown, 
That withereth while reproachfully we say : 
" Why grow'st thou unsought 'neath my hand to-day, 
Whose longed-for scent through many an ill day sought, 
Swift healing to my sickening soul had brought 
And kept me young. Fair rest, what dost thou here ? " 

The wind dealt with the autumn haze, and clear 
The afternoon was, though the great clouds drew 
In piled-up hills across the faint-streaked blue, 
And 'gainst them showed the wind-hover's dark spot, 
Nor yet midst trembling peace was change forgot. 



Ii8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



OCTOBER. 

LOVE, turn from the unchanging sea, and gaze 
Down these gray slopes upon the year grown old, 
A-dying mid the autumn-scented haze, 
That hangeth o'er the hollow in the wold, 
Where the wind-bitten ancient elms infold 
Gray church, long barn, orchard, and red-roofed stead, 
Wrought in dead days for men a long while dead. 

Come down, O love ; may not our hands still meet, 
Since still we live to-day, forgetting June, 
Forgetting May, deeming October sweet 

O hearken, hearken ! through the afternoon, 
The gray tower sings a strange old tinkling tune ! 
Sweet, sweet, and sad, the toiling year's last breath, 
Too satiate of life to strive with death. 

And we too will it not be soft and kind, 
That rest from life, from patience and from pain, 
That rest from bliss we know not when we find, 
That rest from Love which ne'er the end can gain ? 

Hark, how the tune swells, that erewhile did wane ! 
Look up, love ! ah, cling close and never move ! 
How can I have enough of life and love ? 



OCTOBER. 119 



OCTOBER drew our elders to a house, 
That mid the tangled vines, and clamorous 
Glad vintagers, stood calm, slim-pillared, white, 
As though it fain would hide away from sight 
The joy that through the sad lost autumn rung. 
As hot the day was, as when summer hung, 
With worn feet, on the last step of July, 
Ashamed to cast its flowery raiment by : 
Round the old men the white porch-pillars stood, 
Gold-stained, as with the sun, streaked as with blood, 
Blood of the earth, at least, and to and fro, 
Before them did the high-girt maidens go, 
Eager, bright-eyed, and careless of to-morn ; 
And young men with them, nowise made forlorn 
By love and autumn-tide ; and in no wise 
Content to pray for love with hopeless eyes, 
Close lips, and timid hands ; rather, indeed, 
Lest youth and life should fail them at their need, 
At what light joyous semblance of him ran 
Amidst the vines, 'twixt eyes of maid and man, 
Wilfully blind they caught. 

But now at last, 

As in the apple-gathering tide late past, 
So would the elders do now ; in a while, 
He who should tell the tale, with a grave smile, 
And eyes fixed on the fairest damsel there, 
Began to say : " Ye blithe folk well might bear 
To hearken to a sad tale, yet to-day 
No heart I have to cast all hope away 
From out my history : so be warned hereby, 
Nor wait unto the end, deliciously 
To nurse your pity ; for the end is good 
And peaceful, howso buffeting and rude 
Winds, waves, and men were, ere the end was done." 

The sweet eyes that his eyes were set upon 
Were hid by shamefast lids as he did speak, 
And redder color burned on her fresh cheek, 
And her lips smiled, as, with a half-sad sigh, 
He 'gan to tell this lovesome history. 



THE STORY OF ACCONTIUS AND CY- 
DIPPE. 

ARGUMENT. 

A CERTAIN man coming to Delos beheld a noble damsel there, and was 
smitten with the love of her, and made all things of no account but the 
winning of her, which at last he brought about in strange wise. 

A CERTAIN island-man of old, 
/x Well fashioned, young, and wise and bold, 
Voyaged awhile in Greekish seas, 
Till Delos of the Cyclades 
His keel made, and ashore he went ; 
And, wandering with no fixed intent, 
With others of the shipmen there, 
They came into a garden fair, 
Too s.weet for sea-tossed men, I deem, 
If they would scape the lovesome dream 
That youth and May cast o'er the earth, 
If they would keep their careless mirth 
For hands of eld to deal withal. 

So in that close did it befall 
That 'neath the trees well wrought of May 
These sat amidmost of the day 
Not dry-lipped, and belike a-strain, 
All gifts of that sweet time to gain, 
And yet not finding all enow 
That at their feet the May did throw, 
But longing, half-expecting still 
Some new delight their cup to fill 
Yea, overfill, to make all strange 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 121 

Their lazy joy with piercing change. 

Therewith their youngest, even he 

I told of first, all suddenly 

'Gan sing a song that fitted well 

The thoughts that each man's heart did tell 

Unto itself, and as his throat 

Moved with the music, did he note 

Through half-shut eyes a company 

Of white-armed maidens drawing nigh, 

Well marshalled, as if there they went 

Upon some serious work intent. 



SONG. 

FAIR is the night and fair the day, 
Now April is forgot of May, 
Now into June May falls away ; 
Fair day, fair night, O give me back, 
The tide that all fair things did lack 
Except my love, except my sweet ! 

Blow back, O wind! thou art not kind, 
Though thou art sweet ; thou hast no mind 
Her hair about my sweet to wind; 

flowery sward, though thou art bright, 

1 praise th'ee not for thy delight, 
Thou hast not kissed her silver feet. 

Thou know'st her not, O rustling tree, 
What dost thou then to shadow me, 
Whose shade her breast did never see ? 
O flowers, in vain ye bow adown ! 
Ye have not felt her odorous gown 
Brush past your heads my lips to meet. 

Flow on, great river thou mayst deem 
That far away, a summer stream, 
Thou sawest her limbs amidst the gleam, 
A nd kissed her foot, and kissed her knee, 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet get thee swift unto the sea ! 

With naught of true thou wilt me greet. 

And thou that men call by my name, 
O helpless one, hast thou no shame 
That thou must even look the same, 
As while agone, as while agone, 
When thou and she were left alone, 
And hands, and lips, and tears did meet. 

Grow weak and pine, lie down to die, 
O body in thy misery, 
Because short time and sweet goes by j 
O foolish heart, how weak thou art / 
Break, break, because thou needs must part 
From thine own love, from thine own sweet ! 



What was it that through half-shut eyes 
Pierced to his heart, and made him rise 
As one the July storm awakes 
When through the dawn the thunder breaks ? 
What was it that the languor clove, 
Wherewith unhurt he sang of love ? 
How was it that his eyes had caught 
Her eyes alone of all ; that naught 
The others were but images, 
While she, while she amidst of these 
Not first or last when she was gone, 
Why must he feel so left alone ? 
An image in his heart there was 
Of how amidst them one did pass 
Kind-eyed and soft, and looked at him ; 
And now the world was waxen dim 
About him, and of little worth, 
Seemed all the wondrous things of earth, 
And fain would he be all alone, 
To wonder why his mirth was gone ; 
To wonder why it seemed so strange 
That in naught else was any change, 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 123 

When his old life seemed passed away, 

And joy in narrow compass lay, 

He scarce knew where. With laugh and song 

His fellows mocked the dim world's wrong, 

Nor noted him as changed o'ermuch ; 

Or if their jests his mood did touch, 

To his great wonder lightly they 

By stammering word were turned away. 

Well, from the close they went at last, 
And through the noble town they passed, 
And saw the wonders wrought of old 
Therein, and heard famed stories told 
Of many a thing ; and as a dream 
Did all things to Accontius seem. 
But when night's wings came o'er that place, 
And men slept, piteous seemed his case 
And wonderful, that therewithal 
Night helped him not. From wall to wall 
Night-long his weary eyes he turned, 
Till in the east the daylight burned. 
And then the pang he would not name, 
Stung by the world's change, fiercer came 
Across him, and in haste he rose, 
Driven unto that flowery close 
By restless longing, knowing not 
What part therein his heart had got, 
Nor why he thitherward must wend. 

And now had night's last hope an end, 
When to the garden-gate he came. 
In gray light did the tulip flame 
Over the sward made gray with dew, 
And as unto the place he drew 
Where yesterday he sang that 'song 
The ousel-cock sang sweet and strong, 
Though almost ere the sky grew gray 
Had he begun to greet the day. 
There now, as by some strong spell bound, 
Accontius paced that spot of ground, 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Restless, with wild thoughts in his head ; 
While round about the white-thorn shed 
Sweet fragrance, and the lovely place, 
Lonely of mankind, lacked no grace 
That love for his own home would have. 
Well sang the birds, the light wind drave 
Through the fresh leaves, untouched as yet 
By summer and its vain regret ; 
Well piped the wind, and as it swept 
The garden through, no sweet thing slept, 
Nor might the scent of blossoms hide 
The fresh smell of the country side 
It bore with it ; and the green bav^ 
Whose breast it kissed so far away, 
Spake sometimes yet amid the noise 
Of rustling leaves and song-birds' voice. 

So there awhile our man did pace, 
Still wondering at his piteous case 
That, certes, not to any one 
Had happed before awhile agone 
So pleased to watch the world pass by 
With all its changing imagery ; 
So hot to play his part therein, 
From each day's death good life to win ; 
And now, with a great sigh, he saw 
The yellow level sunbeams draw 
Across the wet grass, as the sun 
First smote the trees, and day begun 
Smiled on the world, whose summer bliss 
In no wise seemed to better his. 
Then, as he thought thereof, he said : 
" Surely all wisdom is clean dead 
Within me. * Naught I lack that I, 
By striving, may" not come anigh 
Among the things that men desire ; 
And why, then, like a burnt-out fire, 
Is my life grown?" 

E'en as he spoke 
A throstle-cock beside him broke 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 125 

Into the sweetest of his song, 

Yet with his sweet note seemed to wrong 

The unknown trouble of that morn, 

And made him feel yet more forlorn. 

Then he cried out, " O fool, go forth ! 

The world is grown of- no less worth 

Than yester morn it was ; go then 

And play thy part among brave men 

As thou hadst will to do before 

Thy feet first touched this charmed shore 

Where all is changed." 

But now the bird 

Flew from beside him, and he heard 
A rustling nigh, although the breeze 
Had died out mid the thick-leaved trees. 
Therewith he raised his eyes and turned, 
And a great fire within him burned, 
And his heart stopped awhile, for there, 
Against a flowering thorn-bush fair, 
Hidden by tulips to the knee, 
His heart's desire his eyes did see. 
Clad was she e'en as is the dove, 
Who makes the summer sad with love ; 
High-girded as one hastening 
In swift search for some longed-for thing ; 
Her hair drawn by a silken band 
From her white neck, and in her hand 
A myrtle-spray. Panting she was 
As from the daisies of the grass 
She raised her eyes, and looked around 
Till the astonished eyes she found 
That saw not aught but even her. 

There in a silence hard to bear, 
Impossible to break, they stood, 
With faces changed by love, and blood 
So stirred, that many a year of life 
Had been made eager with that strife 
Of minutes ; and so nigh she was 
He saw the little blue veins pass 



126 7^HE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Over her heaving breast ; and she 
The trembling of his lips might see, 
The rising tears within his eyes. 

Then standing there in mazed wise 
He saw the black-heart tulips bow 
Before her knees, as wavering now 
A half-step unto him she made. 
With a glad cry, though half afraid, 
He stretched his arms out, and the twain, 
E'en at the birth of love's great pain, 
Each unto each so nigh were grown, 
That little lacked to make them one 
That little lacked but they should be 
Wedded that hour ; knee touching knee, 
Cheek laid to cheek. So seldom fare 
Love's tales, that men are wise to dare ; 
Rather, dull hours must pass away, 
And heavy day succeed to day, 
And much be changed by misery, 
Ere two that love may draw anigh 
And so with these. What fear or shame 
'Twixt longing heart and body came 
'T were hard to tell they lingered yet 
Wellnigh they deemed that they had met, 
And that the worst was o'er ; e'en then 
There drew anigh the sound of men 
Loud laugh, harsh talk. With ill surprise 
He saw fear change her lovesome eyes ; 
He knew her heart bethought it now 
Of other folk, and ills that grow 
From overmuch of love ; but he 
Cried out amidst his agony, 
Yet stood there helpless, and withal 
A mist across his eyes did fall, 
And all seemed lost indeed, as now 
Slim tulip-stem and hawthorn bough 
Slipped rustling back into their place, 
And all the glory of her face 
Had left the world, at least awhile, 
And once more all was base and vile. 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 127 

And yet, indeed, when that sharp pain 
Was something dulled, and once again 
Thought helped him, then to him it seemed 
That she had dreamed as he had dreamed, 
And, hoping not for any sight 
Of love, had come made soft by night, 
Made kind by longings unconfessed, 
To give him good hope of the best. 
Then pity came to help his love, 
For now, indeed, he knew whereof 
He sickened ; pity came, and then 
The fear of the rough sons of men, 
Sore hate of things that needs must part 
The loving heart from loving heart ; 
And at each turn it seemed as though 
Fate some huge net round both did throw 
To stay their feet and dim their sight 
Till they were clutched by endless night ; 
And then he fain had torn his hair, 
And cried aloud in his despair, 
But stayed himself as still he thought 
How even that should help him naught, 
That helpless patience needs must be 
His loathed fellow. Wearily 
He got him then from out the place, 
Made lovely by her scarce-seen face, 
And knew that day what longing meant. 

But when the restless daylight went 
From earth's face, through the weary night 
He lay again in just such plight 
As on the last night he had lain ; 
But deemed that he would go again 
At daylight to that place of flowers^ 
So passed the night through all its hours, 
But ere the dawn came, weak and worn 
He fell asleep, nor woke that morn 
Till all the city was astir ; 
And waking must he think of her 
Stolen to that place to find, to find him not 



128 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Her parted lips, her face flushed hot, 
Her panting breast and girt-up gown, 
Her sleeve ill-fastened, fallen ado\vn 
From one white shoulder, her gray eyes 
Fixed in their misery of surprise, 
As naught they saw but birds and trees ; 
Her woful lingering, as the breeze 
Died 'neath the growing sun, and folk 
Fresh silence of the morning broke ; 
And then, the death of hope confessed, 
The quivering lip and heaving breast, 
The burst of tears, the homeward way 
Made hateful by joy past away, 
The dreary day made dull and long 
By hope deferred and gathering wrong. 
All this for him ! and thinking thus 
Their twinlife seemed so piteous 
That all his manhood from him fled, 
And cast adown upon the bed 
He sobbed and wept full sore, until 
When he of grief had had his fill 
He 'gan to think that he might see 
His love, and cure her misery 
If she should be in that same place 
At that same hour when first her face 
Shone on him. 

So time wore away 
Till on the world the high noon lay, 
And then at the due place he stood, 
Wondering amid his love-sick mood 
Which blades of grass her foot had bent ; 
And there, as to and fro he went, 
A certain man who seemed to be 
A fisher on the troubled sea, 
An old man and a poor, came nigh 
And greeted him and said : 

" Hereby 

Thou doest well to stand, my son, 
Since thy stay here will soon be done, 
If of that ship of Crete thou be, 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 129 

As well I deem. Here shalt thou see 
Each day at noon a company 
Of all our fairest maids draw nigh ; 
To such an one each day they go 
As best can tell them how to do 
In serving of the dreadful queen, 
Whose servant long years hath she been, 
And dwelleth by her chapel fair 
Within this close ; they shall be here, 
E'en while I speak. Wot well, fair son, 
Good need it is this should be done, 
For whatso hasty word is said 
That day unto the moon-crowned maid, 
For such an oath is held, as though 
The whole heart into it did go 
Behold, they come ! A goodly sight 
Shalt thou have seen, e'en if to-night 
Thou diest ! " 

Grew Accontius wan 
As the sea-cliffs, for the old man 
Now pointed to the gate, wherethrough 
The company of maidens drew 
Toward where they stood ; Accontius, 
With trembling lips, and piteous 
Drawn brow, turned toward them, and afar 
Beheld her like the morning-star 
Amid the weary stars of night. 
Midmost the band went his delight, 
Clad in a gown of blue, whereon 
Were wrought fresh flowers, as newly won 
From the May fields ; with one hand she 
Touched a fair fellow lovingly, 
The other, hung adown, did hold 
An ivory harp well strung with gold ; 
Gayly she went, nor seemed as though 
One troublous thought her heart did know. 
Accontius sickened as she came 
Anigh him, and with heart aflame 
For very rage of jealousy, 
He heard her talking merrily 
9 



130 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Unto her fellow the first word 

From those sweet lips he yet had heard, 

Nor might he know what thing she said ; 

Yet presently she turned her head 

And saw him, and her talk she stopped 

E'en therewith, and her lips down dropped. 

And trembling amid love and shame 

Over her face a bright flush came ; 

Nathless without another look 

She passed him by, whose whole frame shook 

With passion as an aspen leaf. 

But she being gone, all blind with grief, 
He stood there long, and muttered : 

Why 

Would she not note my misery ? 
Had it been then so hard to turn 
And show me that her heart did yearn 
For something nigher like mine own ? 
O well content to leave me lone, 
O well content to stand apart, 
And nurse a pleasure in thine heart, 
The joy of being so well beloved, 
Still taking care thou art not moved 
By aught like trouble ! yet beware, 
For thou mayst fall for all thy care ! " 

So from the place he turned away ; 
Some secret spell he deemed there lay, 
Some bar unseen athwart that grass, 
O'er which his feet might never pass 
Whatso his heart bade. Hour by hour 
Passed of the day, and ever slower 
They seemed to pass, and ever he 
Thought of her last look wearily 
Now meant it that, now meant it this ; 
Now bliss, and now the death of bliss. 
" But O, if once again," he thought, 
" Face unto face we might be brought, 
Then doubt I not but I should read 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 131 

What at her hands would be my meed, 

And in such wise my life would guide ; 

Either the weary end to bide 

E'en as I might, or strengthen me 

To take the sweet felicity, 

Casting by thought of fear or death 

But now when I must hold my breath, 

Who knows how long, while scale mocks scale 

With trembling joy, and trembling bale 

O hard to bear ! O hard to bear ! " 

So spake he, knowing bitter fear 
And hopeful longing's sharp distress, 
But not the weight of hopelessness. 

And now there passed by three days more, 
And to the flowery place that bore 
The sharp and sweet of his desire 
Each day he went, his heart afire 
With foolish hope. Each day he saw 
The band of damsels toward him draw, 
And trembling said, " Now, now at last 
Surely her white arms will be cast 
About my neck before them all ; 
Or at the worst her eyes will call 
My feet to follow. Can it be 
That she can bear my misery, 
When of my heart she surely knows ? " 

And every day midmost the close 
They met, and on the first day she 
Did look upon him furtively 
In loving wise ; and through his heart 
Love sent a pleasure-pointed dart 
A minute, and away she went, 
And left him nowise more content 
Than erst he had been. 

The next day 

Needs must she flush and turn away 
Before their eyes met, and he stood 



132 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

When she was gone in wretched mood, 
Faint with desire. 

The third hope came, 
And then his hungry eyes, aflame 
With longing wild, beheld her pass 
As though amidst a dream she was ; 
Then e'en ere she had left the place 
With his clenched hand he smote his face, 
And void of everything but pain, 
Through the thronged streets the sea did gain, 
Not recking aught, and there at last 
His body on the sand he cast, 
Nigh the green waves, till in the end 
Some thought the crushing cloud did rend, 
And down the tears rushed from his eyes 
For ruth of his own miseries ; 
And with the tears came thought again 
To mingle with his formless pain 
And hope withal but yet more fear, 
For he bethought him now that near 
The time drew for his ship to sail. 
Yet was the thought of some avail 
To heal the unreason of his heart, 
For now he needs must play a part 
Wherein was something to be done, 
If he would not be left alone 
Lifelong, with love unsatisfied. 

So now he rose, and looking wide 
Along the edges of the bay, 
Saw where his fellows' tall ship lay 
Anigh the haven, and a boat 
'Twixt shore and ship-side did there float 
With balanced oars ; but on the shroud 
A shipman stood, and shouted loud 
Unto the boat words lost, in sooth, 
But which no less the trembling youth 
Deemed certainly of him must be 
And where he was ; then suddenly 
He turned, though none pursued, and fled 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 133 

Along the sands, nor turned his head 

Till round a headland he did reach 

A long cove with a sandy beach ; 

Then looking landward he saw where 

A streamlet cleft the sea-cliffs bare, 

Making a little valley green, 

Beset with thorn-trees ; and between 

The yellow strand and cliff's gray brow 

Was built a cottage white and low 

Within a little close, upon 

The green slope that the stream had won 

From rock and sea ; and thereby stood 

A fisher, whose gray homespun hood 

Covered white locks ; so presently 

Accontius to that man drew nigh, 

Because he seemed the man to be 

Who told of that fair company, 

Deeming that more might there be learned 

About the flame wherewith he burned. 

Withal he found it even so, 

And that the old man him did know, 

And greeted him, and fell to talk, 

As such folk will of things that balk 

The poor man's fortune, waves and winds, 

And changing days and great men's minds ; 

And at the last it so befell 

That this Accontius came to tell 

A tale unto the man how he 

Was fain to 'scape the uneasy sea, 

And those his fellows, and would give 

Gold unto him, that he might live 

In hiding there, till they had sailed. 

Not strange it was if he prevailed 

In few words, though the elder smiled 

As not all utterly beguiled, 

Nor curious therewithal to know 

Such things as he cared not to show. 

So there alone awhile he dwelt, 
And lonely there, all torment felt, 



134 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

As still his longing grew and grew ; 
And ever as hot noontide drew 
From dewy dawn and sunny morn, 
He felt himself the most forlorn ; 
For then the best he pictured her : 

" Now the noon wind, the scent-bearer 
Is busy midst her gown," he said, 
" The fresh-plucked flowers about her head 
Are drooping now with their desire ; 
The grass with unconsuming fire 
Faints 'neath the pressure of her feet ; 
The honey-bees her lips would meet, 
But fail for fear ; the swift's bright eyes 
Are eager round the mysteries 
Of the fair hidden fragrant breast, 
Where now alone may I know rest 
Ah, pity me, thou pitiless ! 
Bless me who know'st not how to bless ; 
Fall from thy height, thou highest of all, 
On me a very wretch to call ! 
Thou, to whom all things fate doth give, 
Find without me thou canst not live ! 
Desire me, O thou world's desire, 
Light thy pure heart at this base fire ! 
Save me, save me, thou knowest naught, 
Of whom thou never hadst a thought ! 
O queen of all the world, stoop down, 
Before my feet cast thou thy crown ! 
Speak to me, as I speak to thee ! " 

He walked beside the summer sea 
As thus he spake, at eventide ; 
Across the waste of waters wide ; 
The dead sun's light a wonder cast, 
That into gray night faded fast ; 
And ever as the shadows fell, 
More formless grew the unbreaking swell 
Far out to sea ; more strange and white, 
More vocal through the hushing night, 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 135 

The narrow line of changing foam, 
That 'twixt the sand and fishes' home, 
Writhed, driven onward by the tide 
So slowly by the ocean's side 
He paced, till dreamy passion grew ; 
The soft wind o'er the sea that blew, 
Dried the cold tears upon his face, 
Kindly if sad seemed that lone place, 
Yea, in a while it scarce seemed lone, 
When now at last the white moon shone 
Upon the sea, and showed that still 
It quivered, though a moveless hill 
A little while ago it seemed. 

So, turning Jiomeward now, he dreamed 
Of many a help and miracle, 
That in the olden time befell 
Unto love's servants ; e'en when he 
Had clomb the hill anigh the sea, 
And reached the hut now litten bright, 
Not utterly with food and light 
And common talk his dream passed by. 
Yea, and with all this, presently 
'Gan tell the old man when it was 
That the great feast should come to pass 
Unto Diana : Yea, and then 
He, among all the sons of men, 
E'en of that very love must speak ; 
Then grew Accontius faint and weak, 
And his mouth twitched, and tears began 
To pain his eyes ; for the old man, 
As one possessed, went on to tell 
Of all the loveliness that well 
Accontius wotted of, and now 
For the first time he came to know 
What name among her folk she had, 
And, half in cruel pain, half glad, 
He heard the old man say : 

" Indeed 
This sweet Cydippe hath great need 



136 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Of one to save her life from woe, 
Because or ere the brook shall flow 
Narrow with August 'twixt its banks, 
Her folk, to win Diana's thanks, 
Shall make her hers, and she shall be 
Honored of all folk certainly, 
But unwed, shrunk as time goes on 
Into a sour-hearted crone." 

Accontius 'gan the room to pace 
Ere he had done ; with curious face 
The old man gazed, but uttered naught ; 
Then in his heart Accontius thought, 
" Ah, when her image passeth by 
Like a sweet breath, the blinded eye 
Gains sight, the deaf man heareth well, 
The dumb man lovesome tales can tell, 
Hopes dead for long rise from their tombs, 
The barren like a garden blooms ; 
And I alone I sit and wait, 
With deedless hands, on black-winged fate." 

And so, when men had done with day, 
Sleepless upon his bed he lay, 
Striving to think if aught might move 
Hard fate to give him his own love ; 
And thought of what would do belike, 
And said, " To-morrow will I strike 
Before the iron groweth dull." 
And so, with mind of strange things full, 
Just at the dawn he fell asleep, 
Yet as the shadows 'gan to creep 
Up the long slope before the sun, 
His blinking, troubled sleep was done ; 
And with a start he sat upright, 
Now deeming that the glowing light 
Was autumn's very sun, that all 
Of ill had happed that could befall ; 
Yet fully waked up at the last, 
From out the cottage door he passed, 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 137 

And saw how the old fisherman 

His coble through the low surf ran 

And shouted greeting from the sea ; 

Then 'neath an ancient apple-tree, 

That on the little grassy slope 

Stood speckled with the autumn's hope 

He cast him down, and slept again ; 

And sleeping dreamed about his pain, 

Yet in the same place seemed to be, 

Beneath the ancient apple-tree. 

So in his dream he heard a sound 

Of singing fill the air around, 

And yet saw naught ; till in a while 

The twinkling sea's uncounted smile 

Was hidden by a rosy cloud, 

That seemed some wondrous thing to shroud, 

For in its midst a bright spot grew 

Brighter and brighter, and still drew 

Unto Accontius, till at last 

A woman from amidst it passed, 

And, wonderful in nakedness, 

With rosy feet the grass did press, 

And drew anigh ; he durst not move 

Or speak, because the Oueen of Love 

He deemed he knew ; she smiled on him, 

And, even as his dream waxed dim, 

Upon the tree-trunk gnarled and gray 

A slim hand for a while did lay ; 

Then all waxed dark, and then once more 

He lay there as he lay before, 

But all burnt up the green-sward was, 

And songless did the throstle pass 

'Twixt dark green leaf and golden fruit, 

And at the old tree's knotted root 

The basket of the gatherer 

Lay, as though autumn-tide were there. 

Then in his dream he thought he strove 

To speak that sweet name of his love 

Late learned, but could not ; for away 

Sleep passed, and now in sooth he lay 



138 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Awake within the shadow sweet, 
The sunlight creeping o'er his feet 

Then he arose to think upon 
The plans that he from night had won, 
And still in each day found a flaw 
That night's half-dreaming eyes ne'er saw, 
And far away all good hope seemed, 
And the strange dream he late had dreamed 
Of no account he made, but thought 
That it had come and gone for naught. 

And now the time went by till he 
Knew that his keel had put to sea, 
Yet after that a day or two 
He waited, ere he dared to do 
The thing he longed for most, and meet 
His love within the garden sweet. 
He saw her there, he saw a smile 
The paleness of her face beguile 
Before she saw him ; then his heart 
With pity and remorse 'gan smart ; 
But when at last she turned her head, 
And he beheld the bright flush spread 
Over her face, and once again 
The pallor come, 'twixt joy and pain 
His heart was torn ; he turned away, 
Thinking : " Long time ere that worst day 
That unto her a misery 
Will be, yea even as unto me, 
And many a thing ere then may fall, 
Or peaceful death may end it all." 

The host that night his heart did bless 
With praises of her loveliness 
Once more, and said : "Fools men are 
Who work themselves such bitter care 
That they may live when they are dead ; 
Her mother's stern cold hardihead 
Shall make this sweet but dead-alive ; 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 139 

For who in all the world shall strive 
With such an oath as she shall make ? " 

Accontius, for self-pity's sake, 
Must steal forth to the night to cry 
Some wordless prayer of agony ; 
And yet, when he was come again, 
Of more of such-like speech was fain, 
And needs must stammer forth some word, 
That once more the old fisher stirred 
To speech ; who now began to tell 
Tales of that oath as things known well, 
To wise men from the days of old, 
Of how a mere chance-word would hold 
Some poor wretch as a lifelong slave ; 
Nay, or the very wind that drave 
Some garment's hem, some lock of hair 
Against the dreadful altar there, 
Had turned a whole sweet life to ill ; 
So needfully must all fulfil 
Their vows unto the dreadful maid. 
Accontius heard the words he said 
As through a thin sleep fraught with dreams, 
Yet afterward would fleeting gleams 
Of what the old man said confuse 
His weary heart, that ne'er was loose 
A minute from the bonds of love, 
And still of all, strange dreams he wove. 

So the time passed ; a brooding life 
That with his love might hold no strife 
Accontius led ; he did not spare 
With torment vain his soul to tear 
By meeting her in that same place : 
No fickle hope now changed her face, 
No hot desire therein did burn, 
Rather it seemed her heart did yearn 
With constant sorrow, and such love 
As surely might the hard world move. 
Ah ! shall it ? Love shall go its ways, 
And sometimes gather useless praise 



140 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

From joyful hearts, when now at rest 
The lover lies, but oftenest 
To hate thereby the world is moved, 
But oftenest the well-beloved 
Shall pay the kiss back with a blow, 
Shall smile to see the hot tears flow, 
Shall answer with scarce-hidden scorn 
The bitter words by anguish torn 
From such a heart, as fain would rest 
Silent until death brings the best. 

So drew the time on to the day 
When all hope must be cast away ; 
Late summer now was come, and still 
As heeding neither good nor ill 
Of living men, the stream ran down 
The green slope to the sea-side brown, 
Singing its changeless song ; still there 
Accontius dwelt 'twixt slope-side fair 
And changing murmur of the sea. 

The night before all misery 
Should be accomplished, red-eyed, wan, 
He gave unto the ancient man 
What wealth he had, and bade farewell 
In such a voice as tale doth tell 
Unto the wise ; then to his bed 
He crept, and still his weary head 
Tossed on the pillow, till the dawn 
The fruitful mist from earth had drawn. 
Once more with coming light he slept, 
Once more from out his bed he leapt, 
Thinking that he had slept too fast, 
And that all hope was overpast ; 
And with that thought he knew indeed 
How good is hope to man at need, 
Yea, even the least ray thereof. 
Then dizzy with the pain of love 
He went from out the door, and stood 
Silent within the fruitful rood. 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 141 

Still was the sunny morn and fair, 
A scented haze was in the air ; 
So soft it was, it seemed as spring 
Had come once more her arms to fling 
About the dying year, and kiss 
The lost world into dreams of bliss. 

Now 'neath the tree he sank adown, 
Parched was the sward thereby and brown, 
Save where about the knotted root 
A green place spread. The golden fruit 
Hung on the boughs, lay on the ground ; 
The spring-born thrushes lurked around, 
But sang not, yet the stream sang well, 
And gentle tales the sea could tell. 
Ere sunrise was the fisher gone, 
And now his brown-sailed boat alone, 
Some league or so from off the shore, 
Moved slowly 'neath the sweeping oar. 
So soothed by sights and sounds that day, 
Sore weary, soon Accontius lay 
In deep sleep as he erst had done, 
And dreamed once more, nor yet had gone 
E'en this time from that spot of ground ; 
And once more dreaming heard the sound 
Of unseen singers, and once more 
A pink-tinged cloud spread thwart the shore, 
And a vague memory touched him now 
Amid his sleep ; his knitted brow 
'Gan to unfold, a happy smile 
His long love-languor did beguile 
As from the cloud the naked one 
Came smiling forth but not alone ; 
For now the image of his love, 
Clad like the murmuring summer dove, 
She held by the slim trembling hand, 
And soon he deemed the twain did stand 
Anigh his head. Round Venus' feet 
Outbroke the changing spring-flowers sweet 
From the parched earth of autumn-tide ; 



142 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The long locks round her naked side 

The sea-wind drave ; lily and rose, 

Plucked from the heart of her own close, 

Were girdle to her, and did cling, 

Mixed with some marvellous golden thing, 

About her neck and bosom white, 

Sweeter than they ; with eyes that bliss 

Changed not, her doves brushed past to kiss 

The marvel of her limbs ; yet bright, 

Fair beyond words as she might be, 

So fell it by love's mystery 

That open-mouthed Accontius lay 

In that sweet dream, nor drew away 

His eyes from his love's pitying eyes ; 

And at the last he strode to rise, 

And dreamed that touch of hand in hand 

Made his heart faint ; alas ! the band 

Of soft sleep, overstrained therewith,. 

Snapped short, and left him there to writhe 

In helpless woe. 

Yet in a while 

Strange thoughts anew did him beguile ; 
Wellnigh he dreamed again, and saw 
The naked goddess toward him draw, 
Until the sunshine touched his face, 
And stark awake in that same place 
He sighed, and rose unto his knee, 
And saw beneath the ancient tree, 
Close by his hand, an apple lie, 
Great, smooth, and golden. Dreamily 
He turned it o'er, and in like mood 
A long sharp thorn, as red as blood, 
He took into his hand, and then, 
In language of the Grecian men, 
Slowly upon its side he wrote, 
As one who thereof took no note, 
Accontius will I wed to-day ; 
Then stealthily across the bay 
He glanced, and trembling gat him down 
With hurried steps unto the town, 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 143 

Where for the high-tide folk were dight, 
And all looked joyous there and bright, 
As toward the fane their steps they bent. 
And thither, too, Accontius went, 
Scarce knowing if on earth or air 
His feet were set ; he coming there, 
Gat nigh the altar standing-place, 
And there with haggard eyes 'gan gaze 
Upon the image of the maid 
Whose wrath makes man and beast afraid. 

So in a while the rites began, 
And many a warrior and great man 
Served the hard-hearted one, until 
Of everything she had her fill 
That Gods desire ; and, trembling now, 
Accontius heard the curved horns blow 
That heralded the damsels' band ; 
And scarce for faintness might he stand, 
W T hen now, the minstrels' gowns of gold 
Being past, he could withal behold 
White raiment fluttering, and he saw 
The fellows of his own love draw 
Unto the altar ; here and there 
The mothers of those maidens fair 
Went by them, proud belike, and fain 
To note the honor they should gain. 

Now scarce with hungry eyes might he 
Gaze on those fair folk steadily, 
As one by one they passed by him ; 
His limbs shook, and his eyes did swim, 
And if he heard the words they said, 
As outstretched hand and humble head 
Strengthened the trembling maiden's vow, 
Naught of their meaning did he know 
And still she came not what was this ? 
Had the dull death of hope of bliss 
Been her death too ah, was she dead ? 
Or did she lie upon her bed, 
With panting mouth and fixed bright eyes, 



144 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Waiting the new life's great surprise, 
All longings past, amid the hush 
Of life departing ? 

.A great rush 

Of fearful pain stopped all his blood 
As thus he thought ; awhile he stood 
Blinded and tottering, then the air 
A great change on it seemed to bear, 
A heavenly scent ; and fear was gone, 
Hope but a name ; as if alone 
Mid images of men he was, 
Alone with her who now did pass 
With fluttering hem and light footfall 
The corner of the precinct wall. 
Time passed, she drew nigh to the place, 
Where he was standing, and her face 
Turned to him, and her steadfast eyes 
Met his, with no more of surprise 
Than if in words she had been told 
That each the other should behold 
E'en in such wise Pale was she grown 
Her sweet breath, that ah unheard moan 
Seemed to her lover, scarce might win 
Through her half-opened lips ; most thin 
The veil seemed 'twixt her mournful eyes, 
And death's long-looked-for mysteries ; 
Frail were her blue-veined hands ; her feet 
The pink-tinged marble steps did meet 
As though all will were gone from her. 
There went a matron, tall and fair, 
Noble to look on, by her side, 
Like unto her, but for cold pride 
And passing by of twenty years, 
And all their putting back of tears ; 
Her mother, certes, and a glow 
Of pleasure lit her stern face now 
At what that day should see well done. 

But now, as the long train swept on, 
There on the last step of the fane 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 145 

She stood, so loved, so loved in vain ; 
Her mother fallen aback from her, 
Yet eager the first word to hear 
Of that her dreadful oath so nigh 
Were misery to misery, 
That each might hear the other's breath ; 
That they this side of fair hope's death 
Might yet have clung breast unto breast, 
And snatched from life a little rest, 
And snatched a little joy from pain. 



O weary hearts, shall all be vain, 
Shall all be naught, this strife and love ? 
Once more with slow foot did she move 
Unto the last step, with no sound 
Unto Accontius turning round, 
Who spake not, but, as moved at last 
By some kind God, the apple cast 
Into her bosom's folds once more 
She stayed, while a great flush came o'er 
Her sweet face erst half-dead and wan ; 
Then went a sound from man to man 
So fair she seemed, and some withal 
Failed not to note the apple fall 
Into her breast. 

Now while with fear 
And hope Accontius trembled there 
And to her side her mother came, 
She cast aside both fear and shame 
From out her noble heart, and laid 
Upon the altar of the maid 
Her fair right hand, clasped firm around 
The golden fruit, and with no sound 
Her lips moved, and her eyes upraised 
Upon the marble image gazed, 
With such a fervor as if she 
Would give the thing humanity 
And love and pity then a space 
Unto her love she turned her face 
10 



146 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

All full of love, as if to say, 

" So ends our trouble from to-day, 

Either with happy life or death." 

Yet anxious still, with held-back breath, 
He saw her mother come to her 
With troubled eyes. " What hast thou there ? " 
He heard her say. "Is the vow made ? 
I heard no word that thou hast said ? " 

Then through him did her sweet voice thrill : 
"No word I spake for good or ill ; 
But this spake for me ; so say ye 
What oath in written words may be ; 
Although, indeed, I wrote them naught ; 
And in my heart had got no thought, 
When first I came hereto this morn, 
But here to swear myself forlorn 
Of love and hope because the days 
Of life seemed but a weary maze, 
Begun without leave asked of me, 
Whose ending 1 might never see, 
Or what came after them but now 
Backward my life I will not throw 
Into your deep-dug, spice-strewn grave, 
But either all things will I save 
This day, or make an end of all." 

Then silence on the place did fall ; 
With frowning face, yet hand that shook, 
The fated fruit her mother took 
From out her hand, and pale she grew, 
When the few written words she knew, 
And what they meant ; but speech'ly 
She brushed the holy altar by, 
Unto the wondering priests to tell 
What things there in their midst befell. 

There, in low words, they spoke awhile, 
How they must deal with such a guile, 
Cast by the goddess of desire 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 147 

Into the holy maiden's fire. 

And to the priests it seemed withal, 

That a full oath they needs must call 

That writing on the altar laid : 

Then, wroth and fearful, some there bade 

To seek a death for these to die, 

If even so they might put by 

The maid's dread anger ; crueller 

They grew as still they gathered fear, 

And shameful things the dusk fane heard, 

As gray beard wagged against gray beard, 

And fiercer grew the ancient eyes. 

But from the crowd, meanwhile, did rise 
Great murmuring, for from man to man 
The rumor of the story ran, 
I know not how ; and therewithal 
Some god-sent lovesome joy did fall 
On all hearts there, until it seemed 
That each one of his own soul dreamed, 
Beloved, and loving well ; and when 
Some cried out that the ancient men 
Had mind to slay the lovers there, 
A fierce shout rent the autumn air : 
" Nay, wed the twain ; love willeth it ! " 
But silent did the elders sit, 
With death and fear on either hand, 
Till one said, " Fear not, the whole land, 
Not we, take back what they did give ; 
With many scarce can one man strive ; 
Let be, themselves shall make amends." 

" Yea, let be," said the next ; " all ends, 
Despite the talk of mortal men, 
Who deem themselves undying, when, 
Urged by some unknown God's commands, 
They snatch at love with eager hands, 
And gather death that grows thereby, 
Yet swear that love shall never die 
Let be in their own hearts they bear 



148 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The seeds of pangs to pierce and tear. 
What need, White-armed, to follow them, 
With well-strung bow and fluttering hem, 
Adown the tangle of life's wood ? 
Thou knowest what the fates deem good 
For wretches that love overmuch 
One mad desire for sight and touch ; 
One spot alone of all the earth 
That seems to them of any worth ; 
One sound alone that they may bear 
Amidst earth's joyful sounds to hear ; 
And sight, and sound, and dwelling-place, 
And soft caressing of one face, 
Forbidden, and forbidden still, 
Or granted e'en for greater ill, 
But for a while, that they may be 
Sunk deeper into misery 

Great things are granted unto those 
That love not far-off things brought close, 
Things of great seeming brought to naught, 
And miracles for them are wrought ; 

All earth and heaven lie underneath 
The hand of him who wastes not breath 
In striving for another's love, 
In hoping one more heart to move. 

A light thing and a little thing, 

Ye deem it, that two hearts should cling 

Each unto each, till two are one, 

And neither now can be alone ? 

O fools who know not all has sworn 

That those shall ever be forlorn 

Who strive to bring this thing to pass 

So is it now, as so it was, 

And so it shall be evermore, 

Till the world's fashion is passed o'er." 

White-bearded was the ancient man 
Who spoke, with wrinkled face and wan ; 
But as unto the porch he turned 
A red spot in his cheek there burned, 



ACCONTIUS AND CYDIPPE. 149 

And his eyes glittered, for, behold 1 

Close by the altar's horns of gold, 

There stood the weary ones at last, 

Their arms about each other cast, 

Twain no more now, they said no more 

What things soe'er fate had in store. 

Careless of life, careless of death ; 

Now, when each felt the other's breath 

On lip and cheek, and many a word 

By all the world beside unheard, 

Or heard and little understood, 

Each spake to each, and all seemed good ; 

Yea, though amid the world's great wrong, 

Their space of life should not be long ; 

O bitter sweet if they must die ! 

O sweet, too sweet, if time passed by ; 

If time made naught for them, should find 

Their arms in such wise intertwined 

Years hence, with no change drawing near ! 

Nor says the tale, nor might I hear, 
That aught of evil on them fell. 
Few folk there were but thought it well, 
When saffron-robed, fair-wreathed, loose-haired 
Cydippe through the city fared 
Well won at last ; when lingering shame 
Somewhat upon the lovers came, 
Now that all fear was quite bygone, 
And yet they were not all alone, 
Because from men the sun was fain 
A little more of toil to gain 
Awhile in prison of his light, 
To hold aback the close-lipped night. 



150 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



SILENCE a little when the tale was told, 
Soon broken by the merry-voiced and bold 
Among the youths, though some belike were fain 
For more of silence yet, that their sweet pain 
Might be made sweeter still by hope and thought 
Amid the words of the old story caught 
Might be made keener by the pensive eyes 
That half-confessed love made so kind and wise ; 
Yet these too, mid the others, went their way, 
To get them through the short October day 
'Twixt toil and toilsome love, e'en as they might ; 
If so, perchance, the kind and silent night 
Might yet reward their reverent love with dreams 
Less full of care. 

But round the must's red streams, 
'Twixt the stripped vines the elders wandered slow, 
And unto them, e'en as a soothing show 
Was the hid longing, wild desire, blithe hope, 
That seethed there on the tangled sun-worn slope 
'Twixt noon and moonrise. Resolute were they 
To let no pang of memory mar their day, 
And long had fear, before the coming rest 
Been set aside. And so the changed west, 
Forgotten of the sun, was gray with haze ; 
The moon was high and bright, when through the maze 
Of draggled tendrils back at last they turned, 
And red the lights within the fair house burned 
Through the gray night ; strained string, and measured 

voice 

Of minstrels, mingled with the varying noise 
Of those who through the deep-cut misty roads 
Went slowly homeward now to their abodes. 
A short space more of that short space was gone, 
Wherein each deemed himself not quite alone. 



OCTOBER. 151 

IN late October, when the failing year 
But little pleasure more for men might bear, 
They sat within the city's great guest-hall, 
Nigh enow to the sea to hear the fall 
Of the low haven-waves when night was still. 
But on that day wild wind and rain did fill 
The earth and sea with clamor, and the street 
Held few who cared the driving scud to meet 
But inside, as a little world it was, 
Peaceful amid the hubbub that did pass 
Its strong walls in untiring waves of rage. 
With the earth's intercourse wild war to wage. 
Bright glowed the fires, and cheerier their light 
Fell on the gold that made the fair place bright 
Of roof and wall, for all the outside din. 
Yet of the world's woe somewhat was within 
The noble compass of its walls, for there 
Were histories of great striving painted fair, 
Striving with love and hate, with life and death, 
With hope that lies, and fear that threateneth. 

And so mid varied talk the day went by, 
As such days will, not quite unhappily, 
Not quite a burden, till the evening came 
With lulling of the storm : and little blame 
The dark had for the dull day's death, when now 
The good things of the hall were set aglow 
By the great tapers. Midmost of the board 
Sat Rolf, the captain, who took up the word, 
And said : 

" Fair fellows, a strange tale is this, 
Heard and forgotten midst my childish bliss. 
Little remembered midst the change and strife, 
Come back again this latter end of life, 
I know not why ; yet as a picture done 
For my delight, I see my father's son, 
My father with the white cloth on his knees, 
Beaker in hand, amid the orange-trees 
At Micklegarth, and the high-hatted man 
Over against him, with his visage wan, 
Black beard, bright eyes, and thin composed hands, 
Telling this story of the fiery lands." 



THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 



ARGUMENT. 

A CERTAIN man, who from rich had become poor, having been taken by 
one of his former friends to a fair house, was shown strange things there, 
and dwelt there awhile among a company of doleful men ; but these in 
the end dying, and he desiring above all things to know their story, so 
it happened that he at last learned it to his own cost. 

A CITY was there nigh the Indian Sea, 
As tells ray tale, where folk for many an age 
Had lived, perforce, such life as needs must be 
Beneath the rule of priestly king and mage, 
Bearing with patient hearts the summer's rage, 
Yea, even bowing foolish heads in vain 
Before the mighty sun, their life and bane. 

Now ere the hottest of the summer came, 
While yet the rose shed perfume on the earth, 
And still the grass was green despite the flame 
Of that land's sun while folk gave up to mirth 
A little of their life, so little worth, 
And the rich man forgot his fears awhile 
Beneath the soft eve's still recurring smile 

Mid those sweet days, when e'en the burning land, 
Knew somewhat of the green north's summer rest, 
A stately house within the town did stand, 
When the fresh morn was falling from its best, 
Though the street's pavement still the shadow blessed 
From whispering trees, that rose, thick-leaved and tall, 
Above the well-built marble bounding-walL 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 153 

Each side the door therein rose-garlands hung, 
And through the doorway you might see within 
The glittering robes of minstrel-men that sung, 
And resting dancing-girls in raiment thin, 
Because the master there did now begin 
Another day of ease and revelry, 
To make it harder yet for him to die. 

And toward the door, perfumed and garlanded, 
The guests passed, clad in wonderful attire, 
And this and that one through the archway led 
Some girl, made languid by the rosy fire 
Of that fair time ; with love and sweet desire 
The air seemed filled, and how could such folk see 
In any eyes unspoken misery ? 

Yet 'gainst the marble wall, anigh the door, 
A man leaned, gazing at the passers-by, 
Who, young, was clad in wretched clothes and poor, 
And whose pale face, grown thin with misery, 
Told truthful stories of his end anigh, 
For sucii a one was he as rich men fear, 
Friendless and poor, nor taught hard toil to bear ; 

And some in passing by that woful man 
A little time indeed their loud talk stayed 
To gaze upon his haggard face and wan, 
Some even, their hands upon their pouches laid, 
But all passed on again, as if afraid 
That, e'en in giving thanks for unasked gift, 
His dolorous voice their veil of joy would lift. 

He asked for naught, nor did his weary eyes 
Meet theirs at all, until there came at last, 
On a white mule, and clad in noble guise, 
A lonely man, who by the poor wretch passed, 
And, passing, on his face a side-glance cast, 
Then o'er his shoulder eyed him, then drew rein 
And turned about, and came to him again ; 



154 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And said, " Thou hast the face of one I knew, 
Men called the Golden One, in such a town, 
Because they deemed his wealth forever grew, 
E'en in such times as beats the richest down ; 
What stroke of hapless fate, then, hast thou known 
That thou hast come to such a state as this, 
To which the poorest peasant's would be bliss ? 

The other raised his eyes, and stared awhile 
Into the speaker's face, as one who draws 
His soul from dreams, then with a bitter smile 
He said, " Firuz, thou askest of the cause 
Of this my death ? I knew not the world's laws, 
But 'give to-day, and take to-morrow morn,' 
I needs must say, holding the wise in scorn. 

" For even as with gifts contempt I bought, 
So knowledge buys disease, power loneliness. 
And honor, fear, and pleasure, pains unsought, 
And friendship, anxious days of great distress, 
And love, the hate of what we used to bless 
Ah, I am wise, and wiser soon shall grow, 
And know the most that wise dead men can know. 

" What shall I say ? thou knowest the old tale ; 
I gave, I spent, and then I asked in vain, 
And when I fell, my hands could scarce avail 
For any work ; at last, worse woe to gain, 
I fled from folk who knew my present pain 
And ancient pleasure midst strange men I wait, 
In this strange town, the last new jest of fate. 

" But since we talk of such-like merchandise, 
What gift has bought for thee an equal curse ? 
Because, indeed, I deem by this thy guise 
Thou hast not reached the bottom of thy purse ; 
Therefore, perchance, thy face seems something worse 
Than mine, for I shall die, but thou must live, 
More laughter yet unto the Gods to give ? " 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 155 

Nor did he speak these words unwarranted, 
For in the other's face those signs there were 
That mark the soul wherein all hope is dead ; 
While, with the new-born image of despair 
The first man played, and found life even there, 
Changeless his old friend's face was grown, and he 
Had no more eyes things new or strange to see. 

He said, " Then hast thou still a wish on earth ; 
Come now with me, if thou wouldst know my fate : 
Thou yet mayst win again that time of mirth 
When every day was as a flowery gate 
Through which we passed to joy, importunate 
To win us from the thought of yesterday, 
In whatso pleasures it had passed away ! " 

" Great things thou promisest," the other said, 
"And yet indeed since I have feared to die, 
Though well I know that I were better dead, 
The life thou givest me I yet will try ; 
It will not be so long in passing by, 
If it must be such life as thou hast shared 
Yet thanks to thee who thus for me hast cared." 

" Friend," said he, " in thine hand thy life thou hast, 
If thou hast told me all that grieveth thee, 
And unto thee the past may well be past, 
And days not wholly bad thou yet mayst see ; 
And if indeed thy first felicity 
Thou winnest not, yet something shalt thou have 
Thy soul from death or loathed life to save. 

" And for thy thanks, something I deem I owe 
To our old friendship, could I mind it aught, 
And well it is that I should pay it now 
While yet I have a little wavering thought 
Of things without me : neither have I brought 
A poisoned life to give to thee to-day, 
Or such a life as I have cast away." 



156 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Nay," said he, "let all be since I must live, 
I will not think of how to play my part : 
And now some food to me thou needs must give, 
For wretched hunger gnaweth at my heart. 
Take heed withal that old desires will start 
Up to the light since first I heard thee speak, 
Wretched as now I am, and pined and weak." 

Firuz thenceforward scarcely seemed to heed 
What words he said, but as a man well taught 
To do some dull task, set himself to lead 
That man unto an hostel, where they brought 
Food unto him, and raiment richly wrought ; 
Then he being mounted on a mule, the twain 
Set out therefrom some new abode to gain. 



NOW cheered by food, and hope at least of ease, 
Perchance of something more, as on they went 
Betwixt the thronged streets and the palaces, 
No more did Bharam keep his head down bent, 
Rather from right to left quick glances sent, 
And though his old complaints he murmured still, 
He scarcely thought his life so lost and ill. 

But for his fellow, worse he seemed to be 
Than e'en before, his thin face pinched and gray, 
Seemed sunk yet deeper into misery, 
Nor did he lift his eyes from off the way, 
Nor heed what things his friend to him might say, 
But plodded on till they were past the town, 
When now the fiery sun was falling down. 

Then by the farms and fields they went, until 
All tillage and smooth ways were left behind, 
And half-way up a bare and rugged hill 
They entered a rude forest close and blind, 
And many a tale perforce seized Bharam's mind 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 157 

Of lonely men by fiends bewildered, 

So like his fellow looked to one long dead. 

But now, as careless what might hap to him, 
He 'gan to sing of roses and delight 
Some snatch, until the wood, that had been dim, 
E'en in broad day, grew black with coming night ; 
Then lower sank his song, and dropped outright, 
When on his rein he felt his guide's hand fall, 
And still they pierced that blackness like a wall. 

Thus on the little-beaten forest-soil 
They went, with naught to see, and naught to hear 
Except their mules' unceasing, patient toil : 
But full the darkness seemed of forms of fear, 
And like long histories passed the minutes drear, 
To Bharam's overwrought mind expecting death, 
And like a challenge seemed his lowest breath. 

How long they went he knew not, but at last 
Upon his face he felt a doubtful breeze, 
Quickening his soul, and onward as they passed 
A feeble glimmer showed betwixt the trees, 
And his eyes, used to darkness, by degrees 
Could dimly see his fellow, and the way 
Whereon they rode to some unearthly day. 

Then as the boughs grew thinner overhead, 
That glimmer widened into moonlit night, 
And 'twixt the trees grown sparse their pathway led 
Unto a wide bare plain, that 'neath that light 
Against the black trunks showed all stark and white ; 
Then Bharam, more at ease thereat, began 
His fellow's visage in that light to scan. 

No change was in his face, and if he knew 
Who rode beside him, 't was but as some hook 
Within an engine knows what it must do, 
His hand indeed from his friend's rein he took, 
But never cast on him one slightest look ; 



158 THE EARTHLY PARADTSE. 

Then, shuddering, Bharam 'gan to sing again 
To make him turn, but spent his breath in vain. 

But when the trees were wholly past, afar 
Across the plain they saw a watch-tower high, 
That 'neath the moonlight, l^ke an angry star, 
Shone over a white palace, and thereby 
Within white walls did black-treed gardens lie: 
And Firuz smote his mule and hastened on 
To where that distant sign of trouble shone. 

And as they went, thereon did Bharam stare, 
Nor turned his eyes at all unto the plain, 
Nor heeded when from out her form the hare 
Started beneath the mule's feet, and in vain 
The owl called from the wood, for he drew rein 
Within a little while before the gate, 
Casting his soul into the hands of fate. 

Then Firuz blew the horn, nor waited long 
Ere the gate, opened by a man scarce seen, 
Gave entry to a garden, where the song 
Of May's brown bird had hardly left the green 
Sweet-blossomed tree-tops lonely, and between 
The whispering glades the fountain leaped on high, 
And the rose waited till morn came, to die. 

But when the first wave of that soft delight 
Swept o'er the spendthrift's sense, he smiled and 

turned 

Unto his guide throughout the wondrous night, 
And while his heart with hope and wonder burned, 
He said, " Indeed a fair thing have I learned 
With thee for master ; yet is this the end ? 
Will they not now bring forth the bride, O friend? " 

Drunk with the sweetness of that place he spoke, 
And hoped to see the mask fall suddenly 
From his friend's face, from whose thin lips there 
broke 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 159 

A dreadful cry of helpless misery, 
Scaring the birds from flowery bush and tree ; 
" O fool ! " he said ; " say such things in the day, 
When noise and light take memory more away ! " 

Bharam shrank back abashed, nor had a word 
To say thereto, and 'tvvixt the trees they rode, 
Noted of nothing but some wakeful bird, 
Until they reached a fair and great abode 
Whereon the red gold e'en in moonlight glowed. 
There silently they lighted down before 
Smooth marble stairs, and through the open door 

They entered a great, dimly-lighted hall ; 
Yet through the dimness well our man could see 
How fair the hangings were that clad the wall, 
And what a wealth of beast and flower and tree 
Was spent wherever carving there might be, 
And what a floor was 'neath his wearied feet, 
Not made for men who call death rest and sweet. 

Now he, though fain to linger and to ask 
What was the manner of their living there, 
And what thenceforth should be his proper task, 
And who his fellows were, did nowise dare 
To meet that cry again that seemed to bare 
A wretched life of every softening veil 
A dreadful prelude to a dreadful tale. 

So silently, whereas the other led 
He followed, and through corridors they passed, 
Dim lit, but worthy of a king new wed, 
Till to a chamber did they come at last, 
O'er which a little light a taper cast, 
And showed a fair bed by the window-side ; 
Therewith at last turned round the dreary guide, 

And said, " O thou to whom night still is night 
And day is day, bide here until the morn, 
And take some little of that dear delight, 



160 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That we for many a long day have outworn. 
Sleep, and forget awhile that thou wast born, 
And on the morrow will I come to thee 
To show thee what thy life with us must be." 

And with that word he went, and though at first 
The other thought that he should never sleep 
For wondering what had made that house accursed, 
And sunk that seeming bliss in woe so deep, 
Yet o'er his soul forgetfulness did creep, 
And in a dreamless slumber long he lay, 
Not knowing when the sun brought back the day. 

But in broad daylight of the following morn 
He woke, and o'er him saw his fellow stand, 
Who seemed, if it could be, yet more forlorn 
Than when he last reached out to him his hand. 
But now he said, " Come thou and see the band 
Of folk that thou shall dwell with, and the home 
Whereto, fate leading thee, thou now hast come." 

He rose without a word,' and went with him 
Who led the way through pillared passages, 
Dainty with marble walls, made cool and dim 
By the o'erhanging boughs of thick-leaved trees 
That brushed against their windows in the breeze, 
And still the work of one all seemed to be 
Who had a mind to mock eternity. 

Too lovely seemed that place for any one 
But youths and damsels, who, not growing old, 
Should dwell there, knowing not the scorching sun, 
Without a name for misery or cold, 
Without a use for glittering steel or gold 
Except adornment, and content withal, 
Though change or passion there should ne'er befall. 

And still despite his fellow's woful face, 
And that sad cry that smote him yesternight, 
The strange luxurious perfume of that place, 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 161 

Where everything seemed wrought for mere delight, 
Still made his heart beat, and his eyes wax bright 
With delicate desires new-born again, 
In that sweet rest from poverty and pain. 

And looking through the windows there askance, 
He yet had something like a hope to see 
The garden blossom into feast and dance, 
Or, turning round a corner suddenly, 
Mid voices sweet, and perfumed gowns to be, 
Bewildered by white limbs and glittering eyes, 
Striving to learn love's inmost mysteries. 

But as they went, unto a door they came 
That Firuz opened, showing a great hall 
Whose walls with wealth of strange- wrought gold did 

flame 

Through a cool twilight, for the light did fall 
From windows in the dome high up and small, 
And Bharam's lustful hope was quenched in fear, 
As he low moaning and faint sobs could hear. 

He stopped and shut his eyes, oppressed with awe, 
Thinking the rites of some sad god to see 
The secrets of some blood-stained hidden law 
But Firuz grasped his arm impatiently, 
And drew him in. " O friend, look up ! " said he, 
" Naught dwelleth here but man's accursed race, 
And thou art far the mightiest in this place." 

Then he, though trembling still, looked up, and there 
Beheld six men clad even as his guide, 
Who sat upon a bench of marble fair 
Against the wall, and some their eyes must hide 
When they met his, and some rose up and cried 
Words inarticulate, then sank again 
Into their places, as o'utworn with pain. 

But one against the wall, with head back thrown, 
Was leaning, and his eyes wide open stared, 
ii 



1 62 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And by his side his nerveless hands hung down, 
Nor showed his face a glimmer of surprise, 
Deaf was he to the wisest of the wise, 
Speechless though open-mouthed ; for there sat he, 
Dead midst the living slaves of misery. 

Bharam stared at him, wondering, still in dread ; 
But no heed took his fellows of his case, 
Till Firuz, with a side-glance at him, said, 
" Why mourn ye more that yet another face 
Must see our shame and sorrow in this place ? 
Do ye not know this worldly man is come 
To lay the last one of us in his home ? 

"And now in turn another soul is gone, 
Get ready then to bear him forth straightway. 
Be patient, for the heavy days crawl on ! 
But thou, O friend, I pray thee from this day 
Help thou us helpless men, who cannot pray 
Even to die ; no long time will it be 
Ere we shall leave this countless wealth to thee. 

" Behold, a master, not a slave, we need, 
For we, I say, have neither will to die 
Nor yet to live, yet will we pay good heed 
To thy commands, still doing patiently ' 
Our daily tasks, as the dull time goes by ; 
Drive us like beasts, yea, slay us if thou wilt, 
Nor will our souls impute to thee the guilt. 

" Yet ask us not to tell thee of our tale, 
Why we are brought unto this sad estate, 
Nor for the rest will any words avail 
To make us flee from this lone house, where fate 
With all its cruel sport will we await ; 
Lo, now thy task, O fellow, in return 
A mighty kingdom's wealth thou soon shalt earn." 

Now as he spoke, a hard forgetfulness 
Of his own lot, the rich man's cruel pride, 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 163 

Smote Bharam's heart, bethought, "What dire distress 
Could make me cast all hope of life aside ? 
Could aught but death my life and will divide : 
Surely this mood of theirs will pass away 
And these walls yet may see a merry day." 

So thought he, yet, beholding them again, 
And seeing them so swallowed up with woe 
That they scarce heeded him, a pang of pain 
Like pleasures death throughout his heart did go ; 
And therewithal a strong desire to know 
The utmost of their tale possessed his mind 
And made him scorn an easy life and blind. 

So midst his silence neither spoke they aught, 
Firuz himself, as one, who having laid 
His charge upon another, may take thought 
Of his own miseries, sat with head down weighed, 
With tears that would not flow ; then Bharam said, 
" Masters, I bid you rise and do your best 
To give your fellow's body its due rest ! " 

They rose up at his words and straight began, 
As men who oft had had such things to do, 
To dress the body of the just-dead man 
For his last resting-place, then two and two 
They bore it forth, passing the chambers through, 
Where Bharam on that morn had hoped to see 
Fair folk that had no name for misery. 

Then through the sunny pleasance slow they passed, 
That sweet with flowers behind the palace lay, 
Until they reached a thick, black wood at last, 
Bounding the garden as the night bounds day, 
And through a narrow path they took their way, 
Less like to men than shadows in a dream, 
Till the wood ended at a swift broad stream, 

Beneath the boughs dark green it ran, and deep, 
Wellnigh awash with the wood's tangled grass, 



164 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But on the other side wall-like and steep 
Straight from the gurgling eddies, rose a mass 
Of dark gray cliff, no man unhelped could pass ; 
But a low door e'en in the very base 
Was set, above the water's hurrying race. 

Of iron seemed that door to Bharam's eyes, 
Heavily wrought, and closely locked it seemed ; 
But as he stared thereon strange thoughts would rise 
Within his heart, until he wellnigh deemed, 
That he in morning sleep of such things dreamed, 
And dreamed that he had seen all this before, 
Wood and deep river, cliff, and close-shut door. 

But in the stream, and close unto his feet 
A boat there lay, as though for wafting o'er 
Whoso had will such doubtful things to meet 
As that strange door might hide, and on the shore 
About the path, a rod of ground or more 
Was cleared of wood, in which space here and there 
Low changing mounds told of dead men anear. 

So there that doleful company made stay, 
And 'twixt the trees and swift stream hurrying by, 
Their brother's body in the earth did lay. 
Nor ever to the cliff would raise an eye, 
But trembling, as with added agony, 
Did their dull task as swiftly as they could, 
Then went their way again amidst the wood. 



NOW with these dreary folk must Bharam live 
Henceforward, doing even as he would ; 
And many a joy the palace had to give 
To such a man as e'en could find life good 
So prisoned, and with naught to stir the blood, 
And seeing still from weary day to day 
These wretched mourners cast their lives away. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 165 

Yet came deliverance ; one by one they died, 
E'en as new-come he saw that man die first, 
And so were buried by the river-side. 
And ever as he saw these men accurst 
Vanish from life, he grew the more athirst 
To know what evil deed had been their bane, 
But still were all his prayers therefor in vain. 

His utmost will in all things else they did, 
Serving as slaves if he demanded aught, 
But in grim silence still their story hid ; 
Nor did he fare the better when he sought 
In the fair parchments that scribes' hands had wrought 
Within that house. Of many a tale they told, 
But none the tale of that sad life did hold. 

Therefore in silence he consumed his days 
Until a weary year had clean gone by 
Since first upon that palace he did gaze, 
And all that doleful band had he seen die, 
Except Firuz ; and ever eagerly 
Did Bharam watch him, lest he too should go, 
And make an end of all he longed to know. 

At last a day came when the mourner said, 
" Beneath the ground my woe thou soon shalt lay, 
And all our foolish sorrow shall be dead ; 
Come then, I fain would show thee the straight way 
Through which we came the night of that passed day 
When first I brought thee here. This knowledge thine, 
Guard thou this house, and use it as a mine ; 

" While safe thou dwellest in some city fair, 
Hasten, for little strength is in me now! " 
But Bharam thought, " Yet will he not lay bare 
His story to me utterly, and show 
What thing it was that brought these men so low." 
Yet said he naught, but from the house they went, 
While painfully the mourner on him leant. 



166 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So, the wood gained, by many glades they passed 
That Firuz heeded not, though they were wide, 
Until they reached a certain one at last, 
Whereon he said, " Here did we come that tide ; 
I counsel thee no longer to abide 
When 1 am dead, but mount my mule and go, 
Nor doubt the beast the doubtful way shall know. 

" She too shall serve thee when thou com'st again, 
With many men, and sumpter mules enow 
To gather up the wealth we held in vain, 
Turn me, I would depart ! fainter I grow ! 
And thou the road to happy life dost know. 
Alas, my feet are heavy ! nor can I 
Go any further. Lay me down to die ! " 

Then 'gainst a tree-root Bharam laid his head, 
Saying, " Fear not, thou hast been good to me, 
And by the river-side, when thou art dead, 
I will not fail to lay thee certainly ! " 
<l Nay, nay," he said, " what matter let it be ! 
I bring the dismal rite unto an end. 
Hide my bones here, and toward thy city wend ! 

" Better perchance that thou beholdest not 
That place once more, our misery and bane ! " 
Then at that word did Bharam's heart wax hot ; 
He seemed at point his whole desire to gain. 
He cried aloud, " Nay, surely all in vain 
Thy secret hast thou hidden till this day, 
Since to the mystic road thou showest the way ! " 

" My will is weak," his friend said, " thine is strong ; 
Draw near, and I will tell thee all the tale, 
If this my feeble voice will last so long. 
Perchance my dying words may yet avail 
To make thee wise. This pouch of golden scale, 
Open thou it. The gold key hid therein 
Opens the story of our foolish sin. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 167 

" How thy face flushes, holding it ! Just so, 
As by that door I stood, did my face burn 
That summer morning past so long ago. 
Draw nigher still if thou the tale wouldst learn 
I scarce can speak now, and withal I yearn 
To die at last, and leave the thing unsaid. 
Raise thou me up, or I shall soon be dead ! " 

His fellow raised him trembling, nor durst speak 
Lest he should scare his feeble life away, 
Then from his mouth came wailing words, and weak: 
" Where art thou then, O loveliest one, to-day ? 
Beneath the odorous boughs that gladden May, 
Laid in the thymy hollow of some hill, 
Dost thou remember me a little still ? 

" Can kindness such as thine was vanish quite 
And be forgotten ? Ah, if I forget, 
Canst thou forget the love and fresh delight 
That held thee then my love that even yet 
Midst other love must make thy sweet eyes wet, 
At least sometimes, at least when heaven and earth 
In some fair eve are grown too fair for mirth ? 

" O joy departed, know'st thou how at first 
I prayed in vain, and strove with hope to dull 
My ravening hunger, mock my quenchless thirst? 
And know'st thou not how when my life was full 
Of naught but pain, I strove asleep to lull 
My longing for the eyeless, hopeless rest, 
Lest even yet strange chance should bring the best ? 

" Farewell, farewell, beloved ! I depart, 
But hope, once dead, now liveth though I die, 
Whispering of marvels to my fainting heart- 
Perchance the memory of some written lie, 
Perchance the music of the rest anigh ; 
I know not but farewell, be no more sad ! 
For life and love that has been, I am glad." 



168 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

He ceased, and his friend, trembling, faintly said 
"Wilt thou not speak to me, what hast thou done ? " 
But even as he spoke, the mourner's head 
Fell backward, and his troubled soul was gone ; 
And Bharam, in the forest left alone, 
Durst scarcely move at first for very fear, 
And longing for the tale he was to hear. 

But in a while the body down he laid, 
And swiftly gat him o'er the hot dry plain, 
And through the garden, as a man afraid, 
Went softly, and the golden porch did gain, 
And from the wealth those men had held in vain, 
Most precious things he did not spare to take 
For his new life and joyous freedom's sake. 

So doing he came round unto the door 
That led out to the passage through the wood, 
Wherethrough the mourners erst their dead ones bore 
Down to the river ; but as there he stood 
He felt a new fire kindling in his blood ; 
His sack he laid aside, and touched the key 
That could unlock that dreadful history ; 

And his friend's words, that loving tender voice 
He sent forth ere he died, smote on his heart : 
How could he leave those dead men and rejoice 
With folk who in their story had no part ; 
Yea, as he lingered did the hot tears start 
Into his eyes, he wept, and knew not why ; 
Some pleasure seemed within his grasp to lie, 

He could not grasp or name, and none the less 
He muttered to himself, " I must be gone 
Or I shall die in this fair wilderness, 
That every minute seems to grow more lone ; 
Why do I stand here like a man of stone ? " 
And with that very word he moved indeed, 
But took the path that toward the stream did lead. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 169 

Quickly he walked with pale face downward bent, 
As 'twixt the trembling tulip-beds he passed, 
Until a horror seized htm as he went, 
And, turning toward the house, he ran full fast, 
Nor, till he reached it, one look backward cast; 
And by the gathered treasure, left behind 
Awhile ago, he stood confused, half blind. 

Then slowly did he lift the precious weight, 
Yet lingered still, "Ah, must I go?" he said, 
" Have I no heart to meet that unknown fate ? 
And must I lead the life that once I led, 
Midst folk who will rejoice when I am dead ; 
Even as if they had not shared with me, 
The fear and longing of felicity ? " 

" And yet indeed if I must live alone, 
If fellowship is but an empty dream, 
Is there not left a world that is mine own ? 
Am I not real, if all else doth but seem ? 
Yea, rather, with what wealth the world doth teem, 
When we are once content from us to cast 
The dreadful future and remorseful past. !J 

A little while he lingered yet, and then 
As fearful what he might be tempted to, 
He hurried on until he reached again 
The outer door, and, sighing, passed therethrough, 
But still made haste to do what he must do, 
And found the mule and cast on her the sack, 
And took his way to that lone forest-track. 

Mattock and spade with him too did he bear, 
And dug a grave beneath the spreading tree 
Whereby Firuz had died, and laid him there, 
Thinking the while of all his misery, 
And muttering still, " How could it hap to me ? 
Unless I died within a day or two 
Surely some deed I soon should find to do." 



170 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But when the earth on him he 'gan to throw, 
He said, " And shall I cast the key herein ? 
What need have I this woful tale to know, 
To vex me midst the fair life I shall win ; 
Why do I seek to probe my fellow's sin, 
Who, living, saved my life from misery, 
And dying, gave this fresh life unto me ? " 

He kept the key, his words he answered not, 
But smoothed the earth above the mourner's head, 
Then mounting, turned away from that sad spot, 
Feverish with hope and change, bewildered, 
And ever more oppressed with growing dread, 
As through the dark and silent wood he rode, 
And drew the nigher unto man's abode. 

But when at last he met the broad sweet light 
Upon the hill's brow where that wood had end, 
And saw the open upland fresh and bright, 
A thrill of joy that sight through him must send, 
And with good heart he 'twixt the fields did wend, 
And not so much of that sad house he thought 
As of the wealthy life he thence had brought ; 

So amidst thoughts of pleasant life and ease, 
Seemed all things fair that eve ; the peasant's door, 
The mother with the child upon her knees 
Sitting within upon the shaded floor ; 
While 'neath the trellised gourd some maid sung o'er 
Her lover to the rude lute's trembling strings, 
Her brown breast heaving 'neath the silver rings ; 

The slender damsel coming from the well, 
Smiling beneath the flashing brazen jar, 
Her fellows left behind thereat, to tell 
How weary of her smiles her lovers are ; 
While the small children round wage watery war 
Till the thin linen more transparent grows, 
And ruddy brown the flesh beneath it glows ; 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 171 

The trooper drinking at the homestead gate, 
Telling wild lies about the sword and spear, 
Unto the farmer striving to abate 
The pedler's price ; the village drawing near, 
The smoke, that scenting the fresh eve, and clear, 
Tells of the feast ; the stithy's dying spark, 
The barn's wealth dimly showing through the dark. 

How sweet was all ! how easy it should be 
Amid such life one's self-made woes to bear ! 
He felt as one who, waked up suddenly 
To life's delight, knows not of grief or care. 
How kind, how lovesome, all the people were ! 
Why should he think of aught but love and bliss 
With many years of such-like life as this ? 

Night came at last, and darker and more still 
The world was, and the stars hung in the sky, 
And as the road o'ertopped a sunburnt hill 
He saw before him the great city lie, 
The glimmering lights about gray towers and high, 
Rising from gardens dark ; the guarded wall, 
The gleaming dykes, the great sea, bounding all. 

As one who at the trumpet's sound casts by 
The tender thought of rest, of wife and child, 
And fear of death for hope of victory, 
So at that sight those sweet vague hopes and wild 
Did he cast by, and in the darkness smiled 
For pleasure of the beauty of the earth, 
For foretaste of the coming days of mirth. 



172 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



SURELY if any man was blithe and glad 
Within that city, when the morrow's sun 
Beheld it, he at least the first place had, 
And midst of glad folk was the happiest one 
So much to do, that was not e'en begun, 
So much to hope for, that he could not see, 
So much to win, so many things to be ! 

Yea, so much, he could turn himself to naught 
For many days, but wandering aimlessly 
Wherever men together might be brought, 
That he once more their daily life might see, 
That to his new-born life new seemed to be, 
And staving thought off, he awhile must shrink 
From touching that sweet cup he had to drink. 

Yet when this mood was past by, what was this, 
That in the draught he was about to drain, 
That new victorious life, all seemed amiss ? 
If, thinking of the pleasure and the pain, 
Men find in struggling life, he turned to gain 
The godlike joy he hoped to find therein, 
All turned to cloud, and naught seemed left to win. 

Love moved him not, yea, something in his heart 
There was that made him shudder at its name ; 
He could not rouse himself to take his part 
In ruling worlds and winning praise and blame ; 
And if vague hope of glory o'er him came, 
Why should he cast himself against the spears 
To make vain stories for the unpitying years. 

The thing that men call knowledge moved him not, 
And if he thought of the world's varying face, 
And changing manners, then his heart waxed hot 
For thinking of his journey to that place 
And how 'twixt him and it was little space, 
Then back to listlessness once more he turned, 
Quenching the flame that in his sick heart burned. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 173 

What thing was left him now, but only this, 
A life of aimless ease and luxury, 
That he must strive to think the promised bliss, 
Where hoping not for aught that was not nigh, 
Midst vain pretence he should but have to die, 
But every minute longing to confess 
That this was naught but utter weariness. 

So to the foolish image of delight 
That rich men worship, now he needs must cling 
Despite himself, and pass by day and night 
As friendless and unloved as any king ; 
Till he began to doubt of everything 
Amidst that world of lies ; till he began 
To think of pain as very friend of man. 

So passed the time, and though he felt the chain 
That round about his wasting life was cast, 
He still must think the labor all in vain 
To strive to free himself while life should last, 
And so, midst all, two weary years went past, 
Naught done, save death a little brought anear, 
The hard deliverance that he needs must fear. 

At last one dawn, when all the place was still, 
He took that key, and e'en as one might gaze 
Upon the record of some little ill 
That happed in past days, now grown happy days, 
He eyed it, sighing, 'neath the young sun's rays ; 
And silently he passed his palace through, 
Nor told himself what deed he had to do. 

He reached the stable where his steeds were kept 
And midst the delicate-limbed beasts he found 
The mule that o'er the forest grass had stepped, 
Then, having on her back the saddle bound, 
Entered the house again, and, looking round 
The darkened banquet-chamber, caught away 
What simple food the nighest to him lay. 



174 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then, with the hand that rich men fawned upon, 
The wicket he unlocked, and forth he led 
His beast, and mounted when the street was won, 
Wherein already folk for daily bread 
Began to labor, who now turned the head 
To whisper as the rich man passed them by 
Betwixt the frails of fresh-plucked greenery. 

He passed the wall where Firuz first he saw, 
The hostel where the dead man gave him food ; 
He passed the gate and 'gan at last to draw, 
Unto the country bordering on the wood, 
And still he took no thought of bad or good, 
Or named his journey, nay, if he had met 
A face he knew, he might have turned back yet 

But all the folk he saw were strange to him, 
And, for all heed that unto them he gave, 
Might have been naught ; the reaper's bare brown limb, 
The rich man's train with litter and armed slave, 
The girl barefooted in the stream's white wave 
Like empty shadows by his eyes they passed, 
The world was narrowed to his heart at last. 

He reached the hill, which e'en in that strange mood 
Seemed grown familiar to him, with no pain 
He found the path that pierced the tangled wood, 
And midst its dusk he gave his mule the rein, 
And in no long time reached the little plain, 
And then indeed the world seemed left behind, 
And no more now he felt confused and blind. 

He cried aloud to see the white house rise 
O'er the green garden and the long white wall, 
Which erst the pale moon showed his wondering eyes, 
But on the stillness strange his voice did fall, 
For in the noon now woodland creatures all 
Were resting 'neath the shadow of the trees, 
Patient, un vexed by any memories. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 175 

How should he rest, who might have come too late ? 
O'er the burnt plain he hurried, and laid hand 
Upon the rusted handle of the gate, 
Not touched since he himself thereby did stand, 
The warm and scented air his visage fanned, 
And on his head down rained the blossoms' dust, 
As back the heavy grass-choked door he thrust. 

But ere upon the path grown green with weed 
He set his foot, he paused a little while, 
And of her gear his patient beast he freed, 
And muttered, as he smiled a doubtful smile, 
" Behold now if my troubles make me vile, 
And I once more have will to herd with man, 
Let me get back, then, even as I can." 

There 'neath the tangled boughs he went apace, 
Remembering him awhile of that sad cry, 
That erst had been his welcome to that place, 
That showed him first it might be good to die, 
When he but thought of new delights anigh ; 
Thereat he shuddered now, bethinking him 
In what a sea he cast himself to swim. 

But his fate lay before him, on he went, 
And through the gilded doors, now open wide, 
He passed, and found the flowery hangings rent, 
And past his feet did hissing serpents glide, 
While from the hall wherein the mourners died 
A gray wolf glared, and o'er his head the bat 
Hung, and the paddock on the hearth-stone sat. 

He loitered not amid those loathsome things, 
That in the place which erst had been so fair, 
Brought second death to fond imaginings 
Of that sweet life, he once had hoped for there ; 
So with a troubled heart and full of care, 
Though still with wild hopes stirring his hot blood, 
He turned his face unto the dreary wood. 



1 76 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

No less the pleasance felt its evil day ; 
The trellis, that had shut the forest trees 
From the fair flowers, all torn and broken lay, 
Though still the lily's scent was on the breeze, 
And the rose clasped the broken images 
Of kings and priests, and those they once had loved, 
And in the scented bush the brown bird moved. 

But with the choking weeds the tulip fought, 
Paler and smaller than he had been erst 
The wind-flowers round the well, fair feet once sought, 
Were trodden down by feet of beasts athirst ; 
The well-trained apricot its bonds had burst ; 
The wild-cat in the cherry-tree anear 
Eyed the brown lynx that waited for the deer. 

A little while upon the black wood's edge 
Did Bharam eye the ruin mournfully, 
Then turned and said, " I take it as a pledge 
That I shall not come back again to die ; 
The mocking image of felicity 
Awaited those poor souls that failed herein. 
But I most surely death or life shall win." 

Thus saying, through the wood he 'gan to go, 
And kindlier its black loneliness did seem 
Than all the fairness ruin brought so low ; 
So with good heart he reached the swift full stream, 
And there, as in an old unfinished dream, 
He stood among the mourners' graves and saw 
Past the small boat the eddies seaward draw. 

Slowly, as one who thinks not of his deed, 
He gat into the boat, and loosed from shore, 
And 'gan to row the ready shallop freed 
Unto the landing cut beneath the door, 
And in a little minute stood before 
Its rusty leaves with beating heart, and hand 
His wavering troubled will could scarce command. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 177 

But almost ere he willed it, was the key 
Within the lock, and the great bolt sprang back, 
The iron door swung open heavily, 
And cold the wind rushed from a cavern black : 
Then with one look upon the woodland track, 
He stepped from out the fair light of the day, 
Casting all hope of common life away. 

For at his back the heavy door swung to, 
Before him was thick darkness palpable ; 
And as he struggled further on to go, 
With dizzied head upon the ground he fell, 
And if he lived on yet, he scarce could tell, 
Amid the phantoms new born in that place 
That past his eyes 'gan flit in endless race. 

Fair women changing into shapeless things, 
His own sad face mirrored, he knew not how, 
And heavy wingless birds, and beasts with wings, 
Strange stars, huge swirling seas, whose ebb and flow 
Now seemed too swift for thought, now dull and slow : 
Such things emmeshed his dying troubled thought, 
Until his soul to sightless sleep was brought. 

But when he woke to languid consciousness 
Too well content he was therewith at first, 
To ope his eyes, or seek what things might bless 
His soul with rest from thought of good and worst, 
And still his faint incurious ease he nursed, 
Till nigh him rang a bird's note sweet and clear, 
And stirred in him the seeds of hope and fear. 

Withal the murmur of a quiet sea 
He heard, and mingled sounds far off and sweet, 
And o'er his head some rustling summer tree ; 
Slowly thereon he gat unto his feet, 
And therewithal his sleep-dazed eyes did meet 
The westering golden splendor of the sun, 
For on that fair shore day was wellnigh done. 

12 



178 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then from the flashing sea and gleaming sky 
Unto the green earth did he turn him round, 
And saw a fair land sloping lazily 
Up to a ridge of green with gray rocks crowned, 
And on those slopes did fruitful trees abound, 
And, cleaving them, came downward from the hill 
In many a tinkling fall a little rilL 

Now with his wakening senses, hunger too 
Must needs awake, parched did his dry throat feel, 
And hurrying, toward the little stream he drew, 
And by a clear and sandy pool did kneel 
And quenched his thirst, the while his hand did steal 
Unto his wallet, where he thought to find 
The bread he snatched from vain wealth left behind. 

But when within his hand he held that bread, 
Mouldy and perished as with many days, 
He wondered much that he had not been dead, 
And fell to think with measureless amaze 
By what unheard-of, unimagined ways 
Unto that lonely land he had been brought ; 
Until, bewildered in the maze of thought 

That needs could lead nowhither, he arose 
And from the fairest of those fruit-hung trees 
The ripest and most luscious seeds he chose, 
And staved his hunger off awhile with these ; 
Then 'twixt their trunks got back to where the breeze 
Blew cool from off the calm sea, thinking still 
That thence his fate must come for good or ill. 

Thus, looking unto right and left, he passed 
Over the greensward, till he reached the strand, 
And naught was 'twixt the sea and him at last, 
Except a lessening belt of yellow sand. 
There, looking seaward, he awhile did stand, 
Until at last the great sun's nether rim, 
Red with the sea-mist, in the sea 'gan swim. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 179 

But 'gainst it now a spot did he behold, 
Nor knew if he were dazzled with the light, 
Till as the orb sank and the sea grew cold, 
Greater that grew beneath the gathering night, 
And when all red was gone, and clear and bright 
The high moon was, beneath its light he saw 
A ship unto him o'er the waters draw. 

Quickly his heart 'gan beat at sight of it, 
But what that he could do could change his fate ? 
So calmly on the turfs edge did he sit 
The coming of that unknown keel to wait, 
That o'er the moonlit sea kept growing great, 
Until at last the dashing oars he heard, 
The creaking yard, the master's shouted word. 

Then as the black hull 'neath the moonlight lay, 
In the long swell, bright against side and oar, 
A little shallop therefrom took its way 
Unto the low line of the breakers hoar, 
And when its keel was firm upon the shore 
Two women stepped out thence, and 'gan to go 
To Bharam's place with gentle steps and slow. 

Then he arose, and wondering what should be 
The end hereof, stood gazing at them there, 
And even in that doubtful light could see 
That they were lovesome damsels young and fair ; 
And as he watched their garlanded loose hair 
And dainty flutter of their rich array, 
Full many a hope about his heart 'gan play. 

Now they drew nigh, and one of them began 
In a sweet voice these hopeful words to say, 
" Fear not, but come with us, O happy man, 
Nor with thy doubts or questions make delay ; 
For this soft night gets ready such a day, 
As shall thy heart for feeble pining blame, 
And call thy hot desire a languid shame." 



i8o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Therewith she turned again unto the sea, 
As though she doubted not \v~hat he would do, 
And Bharam followed after silently, 
And went aboard the shallop with the two, 
As one who dreams ; and as the prow cleft through 
The gray waves, sat beside them, pondering o'er 
The days grown dim that led to that strange shore. 

None spake to him, the mariners toiled on, 
Silent the damsels sat, hand joined to hand, 
Until the black sides of the ship were won ; 
Then folk hauled up the boat, his feet did stand 
On the wide deck, the master gave command, 
Back went the oars, and o'er the waters wan, 
Unto the west 'neath sail and oar she ran. 

All night they sailed, and when the dawn was nigh 
And far astern the eastern sky grew bright, 
A dark line seemed to cross the western sky 
Afar and faint, and with the growing light 
Another land began to heave in sight, 
And when the lingering twilight was all done, 
Gray cliffs they saw, made ruddy with the sun. 

But when the shadow of their well-shaved mast 
Had shortened that it no more touched the sea, 
And wellnigh all the windy waste was past 
That kept them from the land where they would be, 
They turned about a ness, and 'neath their lee 
A sandy-beached and green-banked haven lay, 
For there a river cleft the mountains gray. 

Thither they steered with no delay, and then 
Upon the green slopes Bharam could behold 
The white tents and the spears of many men, 
And on the o'erhanging height a castle old, 
And up the bay a ship o'erlaid with gold, 
With golden sails and fluttering banners bright, 
And silken awnings 'gainst the hot sun dight 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 181 

But underneath the tents, anigh that ship, 
A space there was amidst of shadowing trees, 
Well clad with turf down to the haven's lip ; 
And there, amongst the pasture of the bees, 
Fanned by the long-drawn sweet-breathed ocean-breeze, 
Well canopied, was set a wondrous throne, 
Amidst whose cushions sat a maid alone. 

Crowned as a queen was she, and round her seat 
Were damsels gathered, clad just in such guise 
As those who on the sands did Bharam meet, 
And stood beside him now, with lovesome eyes. 
All this saw Bharam in no other wise 
Than one might see a dream becoming true, 
Nor had he thought of what he next should do. 

Only those longings, vague and aimless erst, 
Now quickened tenfold, found a cause and aim, 
And on his soul a flood of light outburst, 
That swallowed up in brightness of its flame 
Strange thoughts of death, and hopes without a name, 
For now he knew that love had led him on, 
Until until, perchance, the end was won. 

Unto that presence straight the shipmen steered, 
And as the white foam from the oars did fly, 
And the black prow the daisied greensward neared, 
Uprose a song from that fair company, 
Which those two damsels echoed murmuringly, 
Bearing love-laden words unto his ears 
On tender music, mother of sweet tears. 



SONG. 

O thou who drawest nigh across the sea, 
O heart that seekest Love perpetually, 
Nor knoitfst his name, come now at last to me / 

Come, thirst of love thy lips too long have borne, 
Hunger of love thy heart hath long outworn, 
Speech hadst thou but to call thyself for-lorn. 



182 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The seeker finds now, tJie parched lips are led 
To sweet full streams, the hungry heart is fed, 
And song springs up from moans of sorrow dead. 

Draw nigh, draw nigh, and tell me all thy tale j 
In words grown sweet since all the woe doth fail, 
Show me wherewith thou didst thy woe bewail. 

Draw nigh, draw nigh, beloved! think of these 
That stand around as well-wrought images, 
Earless and eyeless as these trembling trees. 

I think the sky calls living none but three : 
The God that looketh thence and thee and me; 
And He made us, but we made Love to be. 

Think not of time, then, for thou shall not die, 
How soon soever shall the world go by, 
And naught be left but God and thou and I. 

And yet, O love, why makes t thou delay, 
Life comes not till thou earnest, and the day 
That knows no end may yet be cast away ? 



Such words the summer air swept past his ears, 
Such words the lovesome maidens murmured, 
With unabashed soft eyes made wet with tears, 
As though for them the world were really dead, 
As though indeed those tender words they said 
Each to her love, and each her fingers moved, 
As though she thought to meet the hands she loved. 

But Bharam heeded not their lovesomeness, 
As through his heart there shot one bitter thought 
Of those dead mourners and their dead distress 
That his own feet to such a land had brought, 
But even ere the fear had come to naught, 
The thought that made it, yea, all memory 
Of what had been, had utterly passed by. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 183 

But when the song was done, and on the strand 
The bark's prow grated, and the maidens twain 
In low words bade him follow them aland, 
Still, mid the certain hope of boundless gain, 
About him clung the seeming-causeless pain 
Of that past thought, that love had driven away, 
The dreary teaching of a hopeless day. 

And as unto the throne he drew anigh 
He tried to say unto himself, " Alas ! 
Why am I full of such felicity ? 
How know I that for me the music was ? 
How know I yet what thing will come to pass? 
How know I that my heart can bear the best, 
Vain foolish heart that knew but little rest ? " 

A moment more and toward that golden ship 
His face was turned, a hand was holding his ; 
His eyes with happy tears were wet, his lip 
Still thrilled with memory of a loving kiss, 
His eager ears drank in melodious bliss 
Past words to tell of ; joy was born at last, 
Surely the bitterness of death was past. 

How can I give her image unto you, 
Clad in that raiment wonderful and fair ? 
What need ? Be sure that love's eye pierceth through 
What web soever hides the beauty there 
To tell her fairness ? Measure forth the air, 
And weigh the wind, and portion out the sun ! 
This still is left, less easy to be done. 

Into the golden ship now passed the twain, 
The maidens followed, and the soldiers moved 
Their ordered ranks, the shoreward road to gain ; 
The minstrels played what tunes the best behoved, 
While in the stern the lover and beloved 
Had naught to do but each on each to gaze, 
Without a thought of past or coming days. 



184 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Up stream the gold prow pointed, the long oars 
Broke into curves of white the swirling green, 
On each side opened out the changing shores ; 
So lovely there were all things to be seen, 
That in the golden age they might have been ; 
But rather had he gaze upon those eyes 
Than see the whole world freed from miseries. 

Sometimes she said, " And this, O love, is thine 
As thou art mine. Look forth thy land to see ! " 
But he looked not, but rather would entwine 
His fingers in her fingers amorously, 
And answer, " Yea, and that one day shall be 
When thou shalt go upon the blossoms sweet, 
And I must look thereon to see thy feet ! " 

Now the stream narrowed, and the country girls 
Thronged on the banks to see the Queen go by, 
And cast fresh flowers upon the weedy swirls. 
" Look forth ! they sing to our felicity ! " 
The Queen said, " And the city draweth nigh." 
" Nay, nay," said Bharam, " I will look on them 
When they shall kneel to kiss thy garment's hem." 

Now far ahead, above dark banks of trees 
Could they behold the city's high white wall, 
And, as they neared it, on the summer breeze 
Was borne the tumult of the festival ; 
And when that sound on Bharam's ears did fall, 
He cried, " Ah, will they lengthen out the day, 
E'en when kind night has drawn the sun away ? " 

She sighed and said, " Nay now, be glad, O king, 
That thou art coming to thy very own ; 
Nor one day shalt thou think it a small thing 
That thou therein mayst wear the royal crown 
When somewhat weary thou at last art grown, 
Through lapse of days, of this and this and this 
That something more is left thee than a kiss." 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 185 

He stared at her wide eyes as one who heard 
Yet knew not what the words might signify, 
Then said, " And think'st thou I shall be afeared 
To slay myself before our love goes by, 
That changed by death, if we indeed can die, 
Unwearied by this anxious, earthy frame, 
I still may think of thee, and know no shame ? " 

She gazed upon his flushed face tenderly, 
Reddening herself for love, but said not aught, 
Only her bosom heaved with one soft sigh, 
And some unravelled maze of troublous thought 
Unbidden tears unto her sweet eyes brought ; 
And he forgot that shade of bitterness 
When such a look his yearning heart did bless. 

Thereat the silver trumpet's tuneful blare 
Made music strange unto his lovesome dream, 
For now before them lay the city fair, 
With high white bridges spanning the swift stream, 
And bridge and shore with wealth of gold did gleam. 
From a great multitude shout followed shout, 
And high in air the sound of bells leapt out. 

And then the shipmen furled the golden sail 
Slowly the red oars o'er the stream did skim, 
As 'twixt the houses the light wind 'gan fail, 
Till by a palace on the river's brim, 
Whose towering height made half the bells grow dim, 
The golden ship was stayed, for they had come 
Unto the happy seeker's wondrous home. 

" Look up and wonder, well beloved," she said, 
As now they rose to go unto the shore, 
" At what the men did for us who are dead, 
And praise them for the depth of their past lore, 
And thank them though their life is long past o'er. 
If they had known that all these things should be 
How better had they wrought for thee and me ? " 



1 86 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Gravely she looked into his eager eyes, 
That turned unto the house a little while, 
But took small heed of all the fantasies 
Wherewith those men their trouble did beguile, 
Though calmly did the vast front seem to smile, 
From all its breadth of beauty looking down 
Upon the tumult of the joyous town. 

Again she sighed, but passed on silently, 
And o'er the golden gangway went the twain 
Unto the gold shade of the doorway high, 
Treading on golden cloths, betwixt a lane 
Of girls who each had been a kingdom's bane 
In toiling, troubled lands, where loveliness 
In scanty measure longing men doth bless. 

One moment, and the threshold Bharam passed, 
And that desire his heart was set upon 
Yet would not name, his heart hath won at last 
Ah, if the end of all thereby were won ! 
For though, indeed, the noontide sun hath shone, 
And all the clouds are scattered, who can say 
What clouds shall curse the latter end of day ? 



THE days passed growing sweeter as the year 
Declined through autumn into winter-tide ? 
Perchance, for though no day could be so dear 
As that whereon he first had seen his bride, 
Yet still no less did love with him abide, 
Tempered with quiet days and restfulness ; 
Desire fulfilled, renewed, his life did bless. 

And thereto now were added other joys, 
Her gifts indeed, unmeet for him to scorn : 
The judgment-seat, the tourney's glorious noise, 
The council wherein were the wise laws born ; 
Sweet tales of lovers vanquished and forlorn, 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 187 

To make bliss greater when these lovers met, 
Silent, alone, all troubles to forget 

All troubles to forget the winter went, 
Spring came, and love seemed worthier therewith 

weighed, 

The summer came, and brought no discontent, 
Nor yet with autumn's fading did love fade, 
And the cold winter love the warmer made. 
So Bharam said, when round his love he clung, 
And lonely, still such words were on his tongue. 

At last from this and that (it boots not now 
To tell the why and wherefore of the thing), 
Great war and strife with other lands did grow, 
And weeping she around his neck must cling, 
Bidding him look for such a welcoming 
When he came back again, as should outdo 
The day that made one heart and life of two. 

Nor did this fail : tried at all points was he, 
He met the foe, and, beaten back with shame, 
Snatched from victorious hands the victory, 
And, winner of a great and godlike name, 
Sighing with love, back to his love he came, 
Worthy of love and changed by love indeed, 
And with most glorious love to be his meed. 

Ah, changed by love the fickle careless earth, 
The deeds of men, the troubles that they had, 
That in first love he held of little worth, 
Now like a well-told tale would make him glad, 
And naught therein to him seemed lost or bad ; 
" And love," he said, " my joyous life doth bound, 
E'en as the sea some fair isle flows around." 

" Love flows around " alas, as time went on 
Some strong career of striving would he stay, 
And falter e'en at point of victory won, 
And well nigh cast the longed-for thing away : 



i88 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Nay, let me think of love," then would he say, 
" Ah, I have swerved from singleness of heart, 
Let me return, nor in these things have part." 

" Let me return " but, ah, what thing was this ? 
That in his love's arms he would feel the sting 
Of vain desire, and ne'er-accomplished bliss. 

At whiles, indeed for he had strength to fling 
All thought away, and to his love to cling. 

At least as yet, and still he seemed to be 
Dowered with the depth of all felicity. 

So passed the time, till he two years had been 
Living that joyous life in that fair land, 
When on a day there came to him the Queen, 
And said : " Fair love, all folk bow 'neath the hand 
Of this or that, and I, at the command 
Of one whose will I dare not disobey, 
Must leave thee lonely till the hundredth day. 

" Nay, now, forbear to ask me why I go ! 
Thou know'st all things are thine that I have got, 
Natheless this one thing never shalt thou know, 
Unless the love grow cold that once was hot, 
And thou art grown aweary of thy lot. 
Ah, love, forgive me ! for thy kiss is sweet, 
As cool fresh streams to bruised and weary feet. 

" Yet one more word ; the room where thou and I 
Were left alone that day of all sweet days ; 
Enter it not, till that time is passed by 
I told thee of, and many weary ways 
My feet have worn, to meet thy loving gaze ; 
For surely as thy foot therein shall tread, 
Thou unto me, and I to thee, are dead. 

" And yet, for fear of base and prying folk, 
Needs must thou bear about that chamber's key. 
Ah, love, farewell ! no hard or troublous yoke 
Thou hast to bear, nor have I doubt of thee. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 189 

Fcr all the stream of tears that thou dost see, 
They are love's offspring only, for my heart 
Yet more than heretofore in thine has part." 

Thus did she go, and he, so left behind, 
Mourned for her and desired her very sore, 
Yet, with a pang, he felt that he was blind. 
Despite of words, that yet there was a store 
Of some undfeamed-of and victorious lore 
He might not touch frowning he turned away, 
And seemed a troubled, gloomy man that day. 

Yet loyally for many days he dwelt 
Within that house, or from his golden throne 
Good justice to the thronging people dealt ; 
But when night came, and he was left alone, 
Then all that splendor scarcely seemed his own ; 
And when he fell to thinking of his love, 
He 'gan to wish that he his heart might prove. 

In agony he strove to cast from him 
Fresh doubts of what she was, and all his tale 
Rose up once more, now vague indeed and dim, 
Yet worse therefore perchance if he should fail, 
And in some half-remembered hell go wail 
His happy lot, the days that might have been ! 
Was she his bane ? his life, his love, his queen. 

Then would he image forth her body fair, 
And limb by limb would set before his eyes 
Her loveliness as he had seen it there ; 
Then cry, " Why think of these vain mysteries 
When still ahead such happy life there lies ? 
And yet and yet, this that doth so outshine 
All other beauty, is it wholly mine ? 

" How can it change, that throne of loveliness ? 
How can it change but I grow old and die. 
Perchance some other heart those eyes shall bless, 
Some other head upon that bosom lie, 



190 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

When all that once I was is long gone by : 

And now what memory through my mind has passed 

Of men from some strange heaven of love outcast? 

"Who knows but in that chamber I may find 
The clew unto this tangled, weary maze, 
And vision clear, whereas I now am blind, 
And endless love instead of anxious days 
A glorious end to all these dark strange ways ? 
Perchance those words she did but say to me, 
To try my heart did she not give the key ? " 

So passed the days, and sometimes would he strive 
To think of nothing but her dear return, 
And midst of kingly deeds would think to live, 
But then again full oft his heart would burn 
The uttermost of all the thing to learn ; 
Love failed him not, but baneful jealousy 
Had scaled his golden throne and sat thereby. 

Now he began to wander nigh the door, 
And draw from out its place the golden key, 
And curse the gift, and wish the days passed o'er, 
Till in his arms his love once more should be ; 
Yet still he dreaded what his eyes should see 
In those familiar and beloved eyes, 
Changed now perchance in some unlooked-for wise. 

At last a day came, on the morn of it 
Did he arise from haggard dreamful sleep, 
And on the throne of justice did he sit, 
In troublous outward things his soul to steep ; 
Then, armed, upon his war-horse did he leap, 
And in the lists right eagerly did play, 
As one who every care hath cast away. 

Then came the evening banquet, and he sat 
To watch the dancers' gold-adorned feet, 
And with his great men talked of this and that, 
Then rose, with gold a minstrel-man to greet, 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 191 

Then listened to his pensive song and sweet 
With serious eyes, and still in everything 
He seemed an unrebuked and glorious king. 

But at the dead of night was he alone 
Once more, once more within his wavering heart 
Strange thought against confused thought was thrown, 
Nor knew he how real life from dreams to part, 
All seemed to him a picture made by art, 
Except the overwhelming strong desire 
To know the end, that set his heart afire. 

Dawn found him thus ; then he arose from bed, 
He kissed her picture hanging on the wall, 
The linen things that veiled her goodlihead 
From all but him, and still, like bitterest gall, 
A thought rose up within him therewithal, 
And strangely was his heart confused with fears 
That checked the rise of tender, loving tears. 

He gat the golden key into his hand, 
And once more had a glimmering memory 
Of how just so he once before did stand, 
Ready another golden key to try ; 
Then murmured he, " Gat I not bliss thereby ? 
Unless all this is such a gleam of thought, 
That to a man's mind sometimes will be brought, 

"Of how he lived before, he knows not where." 
So saying from the chamber did he pass, 
And went a long way down a cloister fair, 
And o'er a little pleasance of green grass, 
Until anigh the very door he was 
That hid that mystery from him ; there he stayed, 
And in his hand the golden key he weighed. 

There stood he, trying hard to think thereof, 
The better and the worse, how all would be 
If he should do the deed, but thought would move 
From this thing unto that confusedly, 



192 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And neither past nor future could he see, 

Nay scarce could say of what thing then he thought, 

Such fever now the fierce desire had wrought 

Not long he lingered, in the lock he set 
The golden key, as one constrained thereto, 
And thrust the door back, and with scared eyes met 
The lovely chamber that so well he knew, 
And therein still was all in order due, 
No deathlike image seared his wondering eyes, 
No strange sound smote his ears with ill surprise. 

He sighed, and smiled, as one would say, " Ah, why 
Have I feared this, wherein was naught to fear, 
Wrapping familiar things in mystery ? " 
And even therewithal did he draw near 
To well-remembered things his soul held dear, 
Gazing at all those matters one by one, 
That told of sweet things there in past days done. 

There in the gray light were the hangings fair, 
No figure in them changed now any whit, 
The marble floor half hid with carpets rare 
E'en as when first he saw her feet on it, 
A gray moth's whirring wings indeed did flit 
Across the fair bed's gleaming canopy, 
But yet no other change had passed thereby. 

And by the bed upon the floor there lay 
Soft raiment of his love, as though that she 
Had there unclad her, ere she went away. 
He stopped and touched the fair things tenderly, 
And love swept over him as some gray sea 
Sweeps o'er the dry shells of a sandy bank, 
And with dry lips his own salt tears he drank. 

He rose within a while, and turned about 
Unto the door, and said, " Three days it is 
Before she comes to take away all doubt 
And wrap my soul again in utter bliss ; 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 193 

I will depart, that she may smile at this, 
Giving the pity and forgiveness due 
Unto a heart whose feebleness she knew. 

Therewith he turned to go, but even then, 
Upon a little table nigh his hand, 
Beheld a cup the work of cunning men 
For many a long year vanished from the land, 
And up against it did a tablet stand ; 
Whereon were gleaming letters writ in gold ; 
Then breathlessly these things did he behold ; 

For never had his eyes beheld them erst, 
And well he deemed the secret lay therein ; 
Trembling, he said, " This cup may quench my thirst, 
Fair rest from this strange tablet may I win, 
And if I sin she will forgive my sin ; 
Nay, rather since her word I disobey 
In entering here, no heavier this will weigh." 

Withal he took the tablet, and he read : 
" O thou who, venturing much, hast gained so much, 
Drink of this cup, and be remembered 
When all are gone whose feet the green earth touch : 
Dull is the laboring world, nor holdeth such 
As think and yet are happy ; then be bold, 
And things unthought of shall thine eyes behold! 

" Yea, thou must drink, for if thou drinkest not 
Nor soundest all the depths of this hid thing, 
Think 'st thou that these my words can be forgot, 
How close soever thou to love mayst cling, 
How much soever thou art still a king : 
Drink then, and take what thou hast fairly won, 
For make no doubt that thine old life is done" 

He took the cup and round about the bowl 
Beheld strange figures carved, strange letters writ, 
But mid the hurrying tumult of his soul, 
He of their meaning then could make no whit, 
13 



194 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Though afterwards their smallest lines would flit 
Before his eyes, in times that came to him 
When many a greater matter had grown dim. 

So with closed eyes he drank, and once again, 
While on his quivering lip the sweet draught hung, 
Did he think dimly of those mourning men 
And saw them winding the dark trees among, 
And in his ears their doleful wailing rung ; 
His love and all the glories of his home 
E'en in that minute shadows had become.' 

E'en in that minute though at first indeed 
In one quick flash of pain unbearable, 
His love, his queen, made bare of any weed, 
Seemed standing there, as though some tale to tell 
From opened lips ; and then a dark veil fell 
O'er all things there, a chill and restless breeze 
Seemed moaning through innumerable trees. 

Yet still he staggered onwards to the door 
With arms outspread, as one who in dark night 
Wanders through places he has known before ; 
W 7 ide open were his eyes that had no sight, 
And with a feverish flush his cheeks were bright, 
His lips moved, some unspoken words to say, 
As, sinking down, across the door he lay. 



WHAT strange confused dreams swept through his 
sleep ! 

What fights he fought, nor knew with whom or why ; 
How piteously for nothing he must weep, 
For what inane rewards he still must try 
To pierce the inner earth or scale the sky ! 
What faces long forgot rose up to him ! 
On what a sea of unrest did he swim ! 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 195 

He woke, the wind blew cold upon his face, 
The sound of swirling waters smote his ear, 
Through the deep quiet of some lonely place ; 
Shuddering with horror at what might be near, 
He closed his dazzled eyes again for fear, 
Ere they had seen aught but the light of day 
And formless things against it, black and gray. 

Trembling awhile he lay, and scarcely knew 
Why he was sick with fear, but when at last 
His wretched soul unto his body drew, 
And somewhat he could think about the past, 
As one might wake to hell, around he cast 
A haggard glance, and saw before him there 
A gray cliff rising high into the air 

Across a deep swift river, and the door 
Shut fast against him, did he see therein, 
Wherethrough with trembling steps he passed before 
That happy h'fe above all lives to win, 
And round about him the sharp grass and thin, 
Covered low mounds that here and there arose, 
For to his head his forerunners were close. 

Then with changed voice he moaned and to his feet 
Slowly he gat, and 'twixt the tree-boles gray 
He 'gan to go, and tender words and sweet 
Were in his ears, the promise of a day 
When he should cast all troublous thoughts away. 
He stopped, and turned his face unto the trees 
To hearken to the moaning of the breeze ; 

Because it seemed wellnigh articulate ; 
He cried aloud, " Come back, come back to me ! 
If yet the echo of the fearful gate 
Had any sound to help his misery ; 
He shut his eyes, lest he perchance might be 
Caught by some fearful dream within a dream, 
That he might wake up to his gold bed's gleam. 



196 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Voiceless the wind was, the gray cliff was dumb, 
His eyes could show him naught but that same place 
Whereto in days of hope his feet had come ; 
He cast himself adown, and hid his face 
Within the grass, and needing no disgrace, 
Howled beastlike, till his voice grew hoarse and dim, 
And little life indeed seemed left in him. 

Then in a while he rose and tottered on 
Adown that path, scarce knowing what had been 
Or why his woe was such, until he won 
To where had been of old the pleasance green, 
Whose beauty, whose decay he erst had seen 
That now indeed a tangled waste had grown, 
Whose first estate scarce any man had known. 

Roofless above it then he saw the house, 
Whose vanished loveliness his heart had filled 
With fresh luxurious longings amorous, 
And thitherward, though thus he scarcely willed, 
His feet must stray to see the wild bird build 
Her nest within the chambers, once made bright, 
To house the delicate givers of delight. 

And now the first rage of his grief being o'er, 
Madness was past, though pain was greater still, 
And he remembered well the days of yore, 
And how his great desire made all things ill, 
And aye with restlessness his life did fill ; 
Too hard to bear that he must cast away 
Honor and wealth, to reach e'en such a day. 

Now in the hall upon that bench of stone, 
Where erst the mourners used to sit, he sat, 
Striving to think of all that he had done 
Before his heart's unnamed desire he gat, 
Striving to hope that still in this or that 
He might take pleasure yet before he died, 
That the hard days a little joy might hide. 



HE WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN. 197 

He moaned to think that he had cast away 
All hope of quiet life then when his hand 
Was on the key 'neath that high cliff and gray, 
And looking backward he awhile did stand 
Needs must he deem him worse than that sad band 
Who therein erst their wretched lives outwore, 
However great the burden that they bore. 

For they, he said, had somewhat left of rest, 
Since in that place indeed they could abide, 
But on his heart the weight of woe so pressed 
That he his wretched head could never hide, 
But needs must wander forth until he died 
Ah God, more full of horror seemed that place, 
Than the world's curious eyes upon his face. 

For there he seemed to sleep that he might dream 
The worst of dreams, he seemed to be awake, 
That through them all might pierce no hopeful gleam. 
That he the fearful chain might never break ; 
And shameful images his eyes must make 
That shuddering he must call by his love's name, 
And on his lips must gather words of shame. 

Midst this, I say, what will was left to him, 
Still urged him unto men's abodes again, 
So that he rose, and though his eyes were dim 
With misery, he crossed the sunburnt plain, 
And as one walks in sleep, with little pain 
He pierced the forest through, and came once more 
Unto the hill that looked the uplands o'er. 

Fierce was the summer sun of that bright day, 
When on the upland road he set his feet, 
And man and beast within the shadow lay 
And rested, but no rest to him was sweet 
That he could gain, and when the hot sun beat 
Upon his head as from the wood he passed, 
Naught noted he that flame upon him cast. 



198 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

At end of day he reached the city gate, 
And now no more he moaned, his eyes were dry ; 
Shut in his body's bonds, his soul would wait, 
The utmost term of all its misery, 
Nor hope for any ease, nor pray to die. 
Some poor abode within that city fair 
He gat himself and passed the long days there. 

But now and then men saw him on the quays, 
Gazing on busy scenes he heeded naught, 
Or passing through the crowd on festal days, 
Or in some net of merry children caught, 
And when they saw his dreamy eyes distraught, 
His changeless face drawn with that hidden pain, 
They Said, "THE MAN WHO NE'ER SHALL LAUGH 
AGAIN." 



AH, these, with life so done with now, might deem 
That better is it resting in a dream, 
Yea, e'en a dull dream, than with outstretched hand, 
And wild eyes, face to face with life to stand, 
No more the master now of anything, 
Through striving of all things to be the king 
Than waking in a hard taskmaster's grasp 
Because we strove the unsullied joy to clasp 
Than just to find our hearts the world, as we 
Still thought we were and ever longed to be, 
To find naught real except ourselves, and find 
All care for all things scattered to the wind, 
Scarce in our hearts the very pain alive. 
Compelled to breathe indeed, compelled to strive, 
Compelled to fear, yet not allowed to hope 
.For e'en as men laid on a flowery slope 
'Twixt inaccessible cliffs and unsailed sea, 
Painless, and waiting for eternity 
That will not harm, were these old men now grown 
The seed of unrest, that their hearts had sown, 



NOVEMBER. 199 

Sprung up, and garnered, and consumed, had left 
Naught that from out their treasure might be reft ; 
All was a picture in these latter days, 
That had been once, and they might sit and praise 
The calm, wise heart that knoweth how to rest, 
The man too kind to snatch out at the best, 
Since he is part of all, each thing a part, 
Beloved alike of his wide-loving heart 

Ah, how the night-wind raved, and wind and sea 
Clashed wildly in their useless agony, 
But dulled not or made weak the minstrel's song 
That through the hall bemocked the lost year's wrong. 



NOVEMBER. 

ARE thine eyes weary ? is thy heart too sick 
To struggle any more with doubt and thought, 
Whose formless veil draws darkening now and thick 
Across thee, e'en as smoke-tinged mist-wreaths brought 
Down a fair dale to make it blind and naught ? 
Art thou so weary that no world there seems 
Beyond these four walls, hung with pain and dreams ? 

Look out upon the real world, where the moon, 
Half-way 'twixt root and crown of these high trees, 
Turns the dead midnight into dreamy noon, 
Silent and full of wonders, for the breeze 
Died at the sunset, and no images, 
No hopes of day, are left in sky or earth 
Is it not fair, and of most wondrous worth ? 

Yea, I have looked and seen November there ; 
The changeless seal of change it seemed to be, 
Fair death of things that, living once, were fair ; 
Bright sign of loneliness too great for me, 
Strange image of the dread eternity, 



200 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

In whose void patience how can these have part, 
These outstretched feverish hands, this restless heart ? 



ON a clear eve, when the November sky 
Grew red with promise of the hoar-frost nigh, 
These ancient men turned from the outside cold, 
With something like content that they, grown old, 
Needed but little now to help the ease 
Of those last days before the final peace. 
The empty month for them left no regret 
For sweet things gained and lost, and longed for yet, 
'Twixt spring-tide and this dying of the year. 
Few things of small account the whole did bear, 
Nor like a long lifetime of misery 
Those few days seemed, as oft to such may be 
As, seeing the patience of the world, whereby 
Midst all its strife it falls not utterly 
Into a wild, confused mass of pain, 
Yet note it not, and have no will to gain, 
Since they are young, a little time of rest, 
Midst their vain raging for the hopeless best 

Such thought, perchance, was in his heart, who broke 
The silence of the fireside now, and spoke : 
" This eve my tale tells of a fair maid born 
Within a peaceful land, that peace to scorn, 
In turn to scorn the deeds of mighty kings, 
The council of the wise, and far-famed things, 
And envied lives ; so, born for discontent, 
She through the eager world of base folk went, 
Still gaining naught but heavier weariness. 
God grant that somewhere now content may bless 
Her yearning heart ; that she may look and smile 
On the strange earth that wearied her awhile, 
And now forgets her ! Yet so do not we, 
Though some of us have lived full happily ! " 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 



ARGUMENT. 

THERE was in a poor land a certain maid, lowly but exceeding beautiful, 
who, by a strange hap, was drawn from her low estate, and became a 
queen and the world's wonder. 

A GRECIAN-SPEAKING folk there dwelt of yore, 
Whose name my tale remembers not, between 
The snow-topped mountains and the sea-beat shore, 
Upon a strip of plain, and upland green, 
Where seldom was the worst of summer seen, 
And seldom the last bond of winter's cold ; 
Easy was life 'twixt garden, field, and fold. 

My tale says these dealt little with the sea, 
But for the mullet's flushed vermilion, 
And weight o' the tunny, and what things might be 
Behind the snowy tops but moon and sun 
They knew not, nor as yet had any one 
Sunk shaft in hillside there, or dried the stream 
To see if 'neath its sand gold specks might gleam. 

Yet rich enow they were ; deep-uddered kine 
Went lowing towards the pails at eventide ; 
The sheep cropped close unto the well-fenced vine, 
Whose clusters hung upon the southering side 
Of the fair hill ; the brown plain far and wide 
Changed year by year through green to hoary gold, 
And the unherded, moaning bees untold 

Blind-eyed to aught but blossoms, ranged the land, 
Working for others ; and the clacking loom 



202 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Not long within the homestead still did stand ; 
The spindles twirled within the women's room, 
And oft amidst the depth of winter's gloom, 
From off the poplar-block white chips would fly 
'Neath some deft hand, watched of the slanders by. 

Sometimes too would the foreign chapmen come, 
And beach their dromond in the sandy bay, 
And then the women-folk from many a home, 
With heavy-laden beasts would take their way, 
And round the black-keeled ship expend the day, 
And by the moon would come back, light enow, 
With things soon told, for that rough wealth to show. 

Therefore of delicate array, full oft 
Small lack there was in coffers of that land, 
And gold would shine on shoulders smooth and soft, 
And sparklike gems glitter from many a hand, 
And by the altar would the goodman stand 
Upon the solemn days of sacrifice, 
Clad in attire of no such wretched price. 

But the next morn the yellow-headed girls 
Would be afield, or 'twixt the vine-rows green, 
And on the goodman's forehead would no pearls, 
But rather sundrawn beaded drops be seen, 
As the bright share carved out the furrow clean, 
Or the thick swathe fell 'neath the sturdy stroke : 
For all must labor midst that simple folk. 

Now, in a land where few were poor, if none 
Were lordly rich, a certain man abode, 
Who poorer was perchance than any one 
That ruled a house ; yea, somewhat of a load 
Of fears he bare adown life's latter road, 
For, touching now upon his sixtieth year, 
His wealth still waned, and still his house grew bare. 

Why this should be none knew, for he was deft 
In all the simple craft of that fair land, 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 203 

Plough-stilt, and spade, and sickle, and axe-heft, 
As much as need be pressed his hardened hand, 
And creeping wanhope still did he withstand ; 
Wedded he was, and his gray helpmate too 
Was skilled in all, and ever wrought her due. 

Yet did his goods decrease ; at end of dry 
He cut his hay, to lie long in the rain, 
And timorous must he let the time go by 
For vintaging ; and August came in vain 
To his thin wheat; his sheep, of wolves were slain, 
Lame went his horses, barren were his kine, 
His slaughtering-stock before the knife would pine. 

All this befell him more than most I say, 
And yet he lived on ; gifts were plenty there, 
The rich man's wealth but seldom hoarded lay ; 
And at a close-fist would the people stare, 
And point the finger as at something rare 
Yet ever giving is a burden still, 
And fast our goodman trundled down the hill. 

Not always though had fortune served him thus, 
In earlier days rich had he been and great, 
But had no chick or child to bless his house, 
And much did it mislike him of his fate, 
And early to the gods he prayed and late, 
To give him that if all they took besides, 
As to fate's feet will blind men still be guides. 

So on a day when more than twenty years 
Of childless wedlock had oppressed his wife, 
She spake to him with smiles and happy tears ; 
And said, " Be glad, for ended is the strife 
Betwixt us and the gods, and our old life 
Shall be renewed to us ; the blossom clings 
Unto the bough long barren, the waste sings." 

Joyful he was at those glad words, and went 
A changed man through his homestead on that morn, 



204 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And on fair things stored up he stared intent, 
And hugged himself on things he erst did scorn, 
When life seemed quickly ended and forlorn. 
And so the days passed, till the time was come, 
When a new voice should wail on its cold home. 

March was it, but a foretaste of the June 
The earth had, and the budding 4inden grove 
About the homestead, with the brown bird's tune 
Was happy, and the faint blue sky above 
The black-thorn blossoms made meet roof for love, 
For though the south wind breathed a thought of rain, 
No cloud as yet its golden breadth did stain. 

That afternoon within his well-hung hall, 
Amidst of many thoughts the goodman lay 
Until a gentle sleep on him 'gan fall, 
And he began to dream, but the sweet day 
The dream forgat not, nor could wipe away 
The pictures of his home that seemed so good, 
For midst his garden in his dream he stood ; 

Hand in hand with his wife he seemed to be, 
And both their eyes were lovingly intent 
Upon a little blossom fair to see 
Before their feet, that through the fresh air sent 
Sweet odors ; but as over it they bent, 
The day seemed changed to cloudiness and rain, 
And the sweet flower, whereof they were so fain, 

Was grown a goodly sapling, and they gazed 
Wondering thereat, but loved it nothing less. 
But as they looked a bright flame round it blazed, 
And hid it for a space, and weariness 
The souls of both the good folk did oppress, 
And on the earth they lay down side by side, 
And unto them it was as they had died. 

Yet did they know that o'er them hung the tree 
Grown mighty, thick-leaved, on each bough did hang 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 205 

Crown, sword, or ship, or temple fair to see ; 
And therewithal a great wind through it sang, 
And trumpet blast there was ; and armor rang 
Amid that leafy world, and now and then 
Strange songs were sung in tongues of outland men. 

Amid these sounds the goodman heard at last 
A song in his own tongue, and sat upright 
And blinking at the broad bright sun that cast 
A straight beam through the window, making bright 
The dusky hangings ; till his gathering sight 
Showed him outside two damsels, pail on head, 
Who went by, singing, to the milking shed. 

And meeting them with jingling bit and trace 
Came the gray team from field ; a merry lad 
Sat sideways on the foremost, broad efface, 
Freckled and flaxen-haired, whose red lips had 
A primrose 'twixt them, yet still blithe and glad, 
With muffled whistle, swinging, did he mock 
The maidens' song and the brown throstle-cock. 

Then rose the goodman, happy, for his dream 
Seemed nowise ill to think on ; rather he 
Some echo of his hopes the thing did deem 
If hardly any certain prophecy 
Of happy things in time to come to be. 
And into the March sun he wandered forth, 
With life and wealth all grown of double worth. 

From barn to well-stocked field he went that eve, 
Smiling on all, and wondering how it was 
That any one in such a world might grieve, 
At least for long, at what might come to pass ; 
The soft south-wind, the flowers amid the grass, 
The fragrant earth, the sweet sounds everywhere, 
Seemed gifts too great almost for man to bear. 

Long wandered he, the happiest of all men 
Till day was gone, and the white moon and high 



206 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Cast a long shadow on the white stones, when 
He came once more his homestead door anigh ; 
And there a girl stood watching, and a cry 
Burst from her lips when she beheld him come ; 
She said, " O welcome to thy twice-blessed home ! 

" Thy wife hath borne to thee a maiden fair, 
Come and behold it, and give thanks withal 
Unto the gods, who thus have heard thy prayer." 
Sweetly that voice upon his ears did fall, 
'Twixt him and utter bliss no bounding wall 
Seemed raised now, nor did end of life seem nigh ; 
Once more he had forgot that he must die. 

So on the morrow high feast did he hold, 
And all the guests with gifts were satisfied, 
And gladdened were the gods of field and fold, 
With many a beast that at their altars died. 
How should the spring of all that wealth be dried ? 
Naught did he deal with untried things or strange, 
'Twixt year and year how might the seasons change ? 

Well, by next year, grown had the child and thriven 
Unto his heart's desire, and in his hall 
Again was high feast held, and good gifts given 
To the departing guests ; yet did it fall 
That somewhat his goods minished therewithal, 
But little grief it gave him : " Ah, let be, 
This year will raise the scale once more," said he. 

But as the time passed, with the child's increase 
Did ill luck grow apace, till field by field 
Fell his lands from him ; naught he knew of ease, 
Yet little good hap did his trouble yield ; 
The gods belike a new bag had unsealed 
Of hopeless longing for him, and his day 
Mid restless yearning still must pass away. 



THE 'STORY OF RHODOPE. 207 



SO things went on, till June of that same year 
Whereof I tell, when nineteen May-tides green 
The maid had looked on, and was grown so fair 
That never yet the like of her had been 
Within that land ; and her divine soft mien, 
Her eyes and her soft speech, now blessed alone 
A house wherefrom all fair things else were gone. 

Yet whoso gloomed thereat, not she it was 
Who with her grave set face and heart unmoved, 
Watched, wearied not, nor pleased, each new day pass ; 
Nor thought of change, she said. As well behoved 
By many men ere now she was beloved ; 
Wild words she oft had heard, and harder grown 
At bitter tears about her fair feet strown. 

For far apart from these she seemed to be, 
Their joys and sorrows moved her not, and they 
Looked upon her as some divinity, 
And cursed her not, though whiles she seemed to lay 
A curse on them unwitting, and the day 
Seemed grown unhappy, useless, as she came 
With eyes fulfilled of thoughts of life and shame 

Across their simple merriment. Meanwhile 
She labored as need was, nor heeded aught 
What thing she did, nor yet did aught seem vile 
More than another that the long day brought 
Unto her hands ; and as her father fought 
Against his bitter foe, she watched it all 
As though in some strange play the thing did fall. 

And he, who loved her yet amidst of fear, 
Would look upon her, wondering, even as though 
He, daring not her soul to draw anear, 
Yet of her hopes and fears was fain to know, 
Was fain to hope that she one day would show 
In what wise he within her heart was borne ; 
Yea, if that day he found in her but scorn. 



208 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

It fell then in the June-tide, mid these things, 
That on an eve within the bare great hall, 
When nigh the window the bat's nickering wings 
Were brushing, and the soft dew fast did fall, 
And o'er the ferry far away did call 
The homeward-hastening traveller, that the three 
Sat resting in that soft obscurity. 

Some tale belike unto the other two 
The goodman had been telling, for he said, 
" Well, in the end no more the thieves might do, 
For when enough of them were hurt or dead 
Needs must they cry for quarter ; by Jove's head, 
That parley as sweet music did I hear, 
Who for three hours had seen grim death anear. 

" So then their tall ship did we take in tow, 
And beached her in the bay with no small pain. 
The painted dragon-head, that ye note now 
Grin at Jove's temple-door with gapings vain, 
And her steel beaks the merchant galleys bane, 
We smote away ; with every second oar 
We roofed that house of refuge nigh the shore. 

" Then fell we unto ransacking her hold, 
And left them store of meal, but took away 
Armor, fair cloths, and silver things and gold, 
Rich raiment, wine and honey ; then we lay 
Upon the beach that latter end of day, 
And shared the spoil by drawing short and long 
That was before my fate 'gan do me wrong, 

" And good things gat I ; two such casks of wine, 
And such ajar of honey, as would make 
The very gods smile, had they come to dine 
E'en in this bare hall ; ah ! my heart doth ache, 
O daughter Rhodope, for thy sweet sake 
When of the gold-sewn purple robe I tell 
That certes now had matched thy beauty well. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 209 

" What else ? a crested helm all golden wrought, 
A bow and sheaf of arrows there they hang 
Since they with one thing else came not to naught 
Of all the things o'er which the goodwife sang, 
When on the threshold first my spear-butt rang, 
And o'er the bay the terror of the sea 
With clipped wings labored slow and painfully. 

" Take down the bow, goodwife ; a thing of price 
Though unadorned, therefore it yet bides here ; 
For trusty is it in the wood, and wise 
The long shafts are to find the dappled deer 
And mend our four days' fast with better cheer. 
But for the other thing the twilight fails 
Amid these half-remembered woful tales ; 

" So light the taper for a little while 
To see a marvel." Therewith speedily 
The goodwife turned and lighted up her smile, 
And deep-set eyes turned full on Rhodope 
As hoping there some eagerness to see ; 
But on the brightening stars her wide eyes stared 
E'en when the taper through the darkness glared. 

Then to the great chest did the goodman go, 
And turning o'er the coarser household gear 
That lay therein, much stuff aside did throw 
Ere from the lowest depths his hand 'did bear 
A silken cloth of red, embroidered fair, 
Wrapped about something ; this upon the board 
He laid, and 'gan unfold the precious hoard. 

With languid eyes that hoped for little joy 
Did Rhodope, now turning, gaze thereon, 
And wait the showing forth of the fair toy, 
In days long past from fear and battle won ; 
But yet a strange light in her bright eyes shone 
When now the goodman did the cloth unfold, 
And showed the gleam of precious gems and gold. 
14 



2io THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And there upon the silken cloth now lay 
Twin shoes first made for some fair woman's feet, 
Wrought like the meadows of an April day, 
With gems amidst the sun of gold ; most meet 
To show in kings' halls, when the music sweet 
Is at its softest, and the dance grown slow, 
Midst of white folds the feet of maids may show. 

Now unto these fair things went Rhodope, 
And, blushing faintly, 'gan the latchets touch, 
And drew her hand across them daintily, 
Then let it fall, smiling, that overmuch 
She thought of them, then turned away to such 
Rude work, as then the season asked of her, 
With face firm set that weary life to bear. 

Then said the goodman, with a rueful smile 
Upon her: " Chick or child I had not then, 
But riches, wherewith fortune did beguile 
My heart to ask for more ; and now again 
That thou grow'st fairer than the seed of men, 
All goes from me and let these go withal, 
Since I am thrust so rudely to the wall ! 

" Long have I kept them ; first, for this indeed, 
That few men of our land have will therefor 
To pay me duly ; and the coming need 
Still did I fear would make the past less sore ; 
And then withal a man well skilled in lore 
Grew dreamy o'er them once, and said that they 
Bore with them promise of a changing day. 

" Yet bread is life, and while we live we yet 
May turn a corner of this barren lane, 
And Jove's high-priest hath ever prayed to get 
These fair things, and prayed hitherto in vain : 
Belike a yoke of oxen might I gain 
To turn the home-field deeper, when the corn, 
Such as it is, to barn and stack is borne. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 2 

" The meal-ark groweth empty too, and thou, 
O fairest daughter, worthy to be clad 
In weed like this, shall feel November blow 
No blessing to thee ; cask-staves must be had 
Against the vintage, seeing that men wax glad 
Already o'er the bunches, and the year 
Folk deem great wealth to all men's sons will bear. 

" So, daughter, unto thee this charge I give 
To take these things to-morrow morn with thee 
Unto Jove's priest, and say, we needs must live ; 
Therefore these fair shoes do I let him see, 
That he may say what he will give to me, 
That they may shine upon his daughter's feet, 
When she goes forth the sacrifice to meet." 

Now as he spake again a light flush came 
Into her cheek, and died away again ; 
Then cried the goodwife : " Ah, thou bearest shame, 
That we are fallen 'neath the feet of men, 
That thou goest like a slave ! what didst thou then 
So coldly e'en on this man's son to look, 
That he thy scornful eyes no more might brook ? " 

But still sat Rhodope, as though of stone 
Her face was, and the goodman spake and said : 
" Nay, mother, nay, she is not such an one 
As lightly to our highest to be wed 
Before the crown of love has touched her head : 
Be patient ; hast thou ne'er heard stories tell 
What things to such as her of old befell ? " 

Kindly he smiled at her, as half he meant 
The words he said ; but now her changeless eye 
Cast on him one hard glance, and then she bent 
Over her work, and with a half-choked sigh 
The goodman rose, and from a corner nigh 
Took up some willow-withes, and so began 
To shape the handle of a winnowing fan. 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



BUT with the new day's sun might you behold 
The maiden's feet firm planted on the way 
Which led unto the vale, where field and fold 
About the temple of the Thunderer lay, 
And the priest wrought, a sturdy carle to-day 
Within the hay-field or behind the plough, 
To-morrow dealing with high things enow. 

First betwixt sunny meads the highway ran 
With homesteads set therein, and vineyards green, 
Now merry with the voice of maid and man, 
Who shouted greetings the tall rows between, 
Whereto she answered softly, as a queen 
Who feels herself of other make to be 
Than those who worship her divinity. 

The dark-eyed shepherd slowly by her passed, 
And from his face faded the merry smile, 
And down upon the road his eyes he cast, 
And strove with other names his heart to wile 
From thought of her ; so coarse he seemed and vile 
Before her smileless face, o'er which there shone 
Some glory, as of a bright secret sun, 

That was for her alone. The mother stood 
Within her door, and as the gown of gray 
Fluttered about her, and the coarse white hood 
Flashed from the oak shade o'er the sunlit way ; 
She muttered after her : " Ah, have thy day, 
If thou wert set high up as thou art low, 
On many a neck those feet of thine should go ! " 

But heeding little of the hearts of these 
She went upon her way, and walking fast 
Soon left the tilled fields and the cottages, 
For toward the mountain slopes the highway passed, 
And turned unto the south, and 'gan at last 
To mount aloft 'twixt heathery slopes set o'er, 
With red-trunked pines, and mossy rocks and hoar. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 213 

Still fast she went, though high the sun was grown, 
For on strange thoughts and wild her heart was set, 
Those things held in the bosom of her gown 
Seemed teaching hopes she might not soon forget, 
She clenched her hands harder and harder yet, 
And cried aloud : " So small, so quickly done, 
O idle timorous life beneath the sun ! 

" And here amid these fields and mountains gray, 
Drop after drop slowly it ebbs from me, 
And leaves no new thing gained ; day like to day, 
Face like to face as waves in some calm sea ! 
With memory of our sad mortality 
Pipes the dull tune of earth, naught comes anigh 
To give us some bright dream before we die. 

" What say'st thou ' Beautiful thou art and livest, 
And men there are, strong, young and fair enow, 
To take with thankful heart e'en what thou givest ; 
Love and be loved then ! ' Nay, heart, dost thou know 
How through thin flame of love thou still wilt show 
The long years set with mocking images, 
Ready to trap me if I think of these ? 

" Ah, love they say, and love ! Shall not love fade 
And turn a prison, barred with vain regret 
And vain remorse that we so lightly weighed, 
The woes wherein our stumbling feet were set, 
Stifling with thoughts we never may forget ; 
Because life waneth, while we strive to turn 
And seek another thing for which to yearn. 

" So deem I of the life that holds me here, 
As though I were the shade of one long dead, 
Come back awhile from Pluto's region drear, 
To mine own land where unremembered 
My fathers are lo, now, these words just said, 
This heathery slope my feet are passing o'er, 
Yon gray-winged dove has it not been before ? 



214 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Would then that I were gone, and lived again 
Another life ; if it must still be so, 
That life on life passes, forgotten, vain, 
To still our longings, that no soul can know 
By what has been, how this and this shall go 
Because methinks I yet have heard men tell 
How lives there were wherein great things befell. 

" How mid such life had I forgot the past, 
Nor thought about the future ! but been glad 
While round my head a dreamy veil I cast, 
And seemed to strive with seeming good or bad ; 
Till at the last some dream I might have had 
That nigh a god I was become to be, 
And, dying, yet should keep all memory ; 

" Know what I was, nor change my hope and fear 
All utterly, but learn why I was born, , 
Nor come to loathe what once to me was dear, 
Nor dwell amidst a world of ghosts forlorn, 
Nor see kind eyes, and hear kind words with scorn. 
But ye, O fields, and hills, and steads of men, 
Why are ye fair to mock my longings then ? " 

And therewithal panting she turned, and stood 
High up the hillside ; a light fitful wind 
Sung mournful ditties through the pine-tree wood 
That edged the borders of the pass behind, 
And made most fitting music to her mind, 
But clear and hot the day of June did grow, 
And a fair picture spread out down below. 

The green hill-slopes, besprinkled o'er with kine, 
And a gray neat-herd wandering here and there, 
And then the greener squares of well-propped vine, 
The changing cornfields, and the homesteads fair, 
The white road winding on, that yet did bear 
Specks as of men and horses ; the gray sea 
Meeting the dim horizon dreamily. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 215 

A little while she gazed, then, with a sigh, 
She turned again, and went on toward the pass, 
But slowly now, and somewhat wearily, 
And murmuring as she met the coarser grass 
Within the shade : " What, something moved I was, 
By hope, and pity of myself ! Well then, 
I shall not have that joy so oft again." 

Then with bent head 'tvvixt rocky wall and wall 
Slowly she went, and scarce knew what she thought, 
So many a picture on her heart did fall, 
Nor would she let one wish to her be brought 
Of good or better. Going so, distraught, 
The long rough road was nothing to her feet, 
Nor took she heed of what her eyes might meet. 

But so far through the pass at last she came, 
That the road fell unto the temple-vale, 
And there she stopped and started, for her name 
She heard called out. She thought of many a tale 
Of gods who brought to mortals joy or bale, 
For so despite herself her thoughts would run, 
That all the joy of life was not y.et done. 

But from the hillside came a dappled hound 
That fawned upon her e'en as one he knew, 
And when she raised her eyes, and looked around, 
She saw the man indeed he 'longed unto, 
A huntsman armed, and clad in gown of blue, 
Come clattering down the stones of the pass side ; 
So, standing still, his coming did she bide. 

She smiled a smile that was not all of bliss, 
For this was he of whom her mother spake, 
The high-priest's son, who fain had made her his ; 
And at the sight of him her heart did ache 
With hapless thoughts, and scorn and shame 'gan wake 
Within her mind, that still she strove to lull, 
Calling herself both cursed and beautiful. 



216 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

So, while she gathered heart of grace to meet 
The few words they might speak together there, 
He was beside her ; slim he was and fleet, 
Well knit, with dark-brown eyes and crisp black hair, 
Eager of aspect, round-chinned, fresh, and fair, 
And well attired as for that simple folk 
Who in those days might bear no great man's yoke. 

Now his lip trembled, and he blushed blood-red, 
Then turned all pale again. " O Rhodope, 
Right fair thou go'st afoot this morn," he said ; 
" Hast thou some errand with my sire or me ?" 
And therewithal, as if unwittingly, 
Unto her hand did he stretch out his hand ; 
But moveless as an image did she stand, 

But that her gown was fluttering in the wind 
That came up from the pass. She spake as one 
That hath no care at heart : " I thought to find 
Thy father, and to give to him alone 
A message from my father. Is he gone ? " 
He seemed to swallow something in his throat : 
" These two nights, maiden, hath he been afloat, 

" Watching the tunnies ; if thou turn'st again 
Thou well mayst meet him coming from the sea." 
" Nay," said she, " neither wholly shall be vain 
My coming so far, since I have with me 
Poor offerings meet for the divinity 
From poor folk, which my mother bade me bear 
To bless this midmost month of the glad year." 

" In a good hour," he said, "for I have done 
Little against the roes whereof to tell, 
So I will fare with thee ; and till the sun 
Is getting low, in our house shalt thou dwell, 
And in the evening, if it like thee well, 
With helmet on the head, and well-strung bow, 
Beside thee to thine own home will I go." 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 217 

ITaught spake she for a while, and his heart beat 
Quicker with hope of some small happiness ; 
But at the last her eyes his eyes did meet. 
She spake : " Few hearts this heart of mine will bless, 
And yet for thee will I do nothing less 
Than save thee from the anguish of the strife, 
Wherewith thou fain would make my life thy life. 

" Thou art unhappy now, but we may part, 
And to us both is left long lapse of time 
To gain new bliss. What wouldst thou ? To my heart 
Cold now and alien are this folk and clime, 
And while I dwell with them no woe or crime, 
If so I may, shall stain my garments' hem ; 
Thou art an image like the rest of them : 

" Yea, but an image unto me alone, 
For unto thee this world is wide enow, 
Full of warm hearts enow so get thee gone 
Upon thy way. I am not fallen so low 
As unto thee dreams of false love to show, 
Or for my very heart's own weariness 
To give thee clinging life-long sharp distress. 

" Now fain I would unto the temple-stead ; 
And, if thou mayst, do thou go otherwhere, 
For good it were that all thy hopes were dead, 
Since naught but bitter fruit they now can bear." 
He gazed at her as one who doth not hear, 
Or hears an outland tongue ill understood ; 
Wild love and hate made wild-fire of his blood. 

Yea, she belike was nigher unto death 
Than she might know ; yet did he turn at last 
And, clutching tight his short-sword's gold-wrought 

sheath, 

Slowly along the seaward way he passed, 
Nor backward at her any look he cast, 
For fate would not that his blind eyes should see 
How on the way her tears fell plenteously. 



2i8 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet not long there she stayed, but set her face 
Unto the downward road, but had not fared 
A many yards from that their meeting-place, 
Before upon the wind a sound she heard, 
As though some poor wretch a great sorrow bared 
Unto the eyes of heaven, and then her feet 
With quicker steps the stony way did meet 

And soon she said : " O fate, all left behind, 
I follow thee adown the bitter road, 
With weary feet, and heavy eyes and blind, 
That leadeth to thy far unknown abode ; 
No need, then, with thy stings my flesh to goad, 
Keep them for those that strive with thee in vain, 
And leave me to my constant weary pain." 

Now the pass, widening, to her eyes did show 
The little vale hemmed in by hills around, 
Wherein was Jove's house fair and great enow, 
Some three miles thence, but on a rising ground, 
And with fair fields as a green girdle bound, 
And guarded well by long low houses white, 
Orchards for fruit, and gardens for delight. 

Far off, like little spots of white, she saw 
The long-winged circling pigeons glittering 
Above the roofs, the noise of rook and daw 
Came sweet upon the wind from the dark ring 
Of elms that edged the cornfields ; with wide wing 
The fork-tailed restless kite sailed over her, 
Hushing the twitter of the linnets near. 

She stayed now, gazing downward ; at her feet 
A dark wood clad the hollow of the hill, 
And its black shade a little lake did meet, 
Whose waters smooth a babbling stream did still, 
Then toward the temple-stead stretched on, until 
Green meads with oaks beset 'gan hem it in, 
And from its nether end the stream did win. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 219 

She gazed and saw not, heard and did not hear, 
But said, " Once more have I been vehement, 
Have spoken out, as if I knew from where 
Come good and ill, and whither they are sent, 
As though I knew whereon I was intent ; 
So, knowing that I know not, e'en as these 
Who think themselves as gods and goddesses 

" To know both good and evil must I do- 
Now ne'er again in this wise shall it be 
While here I dwell, nor shall false hope shine through 
My prison bars, false passion jeer at me 
With what might hap if I were changed and free ; 
The end shall come at last, and find me here, 
Desiring naught, and free from hope or fear." 

So saying, but with face cleared not at all, 
Rather with trembling lips, upon her way 
Once more she went ; short now did shadows fall, 
It grew unto the hottest of the day, 
And round the mountain-tops the sky waxed gray 
For very heat ; June's sceptre o'er the earth, 
If rest it gave, kept back some little mirth. 

At last upon the bridge the stream that crossed 
Just ere it met the lake she set her feet, 
And walked on swiftly, e'en as one clean lost 
In thought, till at its end her skirt did meet 
A bough of brier-rose, whose pale blossoms sweet 
Were draggled in the dust ; she stooped thereto 
And from her hem its hooked green thorns she drew. 

Then drawing a deep breath, she cast aside 
The broken bough ; and from the dusty road 
She turned, and o'er the parapet she eyed 
The broad blue lake, the basking pike's abode, 
And the dark oakwood where the pigeons cooed ; 
And as she gazed, some little touch of bliss 
Came over her amidst her loneliness. 



220 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Drowsy she felt, and weary with the way, 
And mid such listlessness that brought no pain, 
She drew her arms from off the coping gray, 
And o'er the bridge went slowly back again, 
As though no whit of purpose did remain 
Within her mind ; but when the other end 
She passed, along the stream she 'gan to wend. 

She watch.ed its eddies till it widened out 
Into the breezy lake, and even there 
Began the wood ; so then she turned about 
And shading her grave eyes with fingers fair, 
Beneath the sun beheld the temple glare 
O'er the far tree-tops ; then she cast her down 
Within the shade on last year's oak-leaves brown. 

There as she lay, at last her fingers stole 
Unto the things that on her bosom lay, 
She drew them forth and slowly 'gan unroll 
The silken cloth, until a wandering ray 
Upon the shoes' bright 'broideries 'gan to play 
Through the thick leaves ; and with a flickering smile 
She 'gan her mind with stories to beguile. 

Pondering for whom those dainty things were 

wrought, 

And in what land ; and in what wondrous wise 
She missed the gift of them ; and what things brought 
The sea-thieves to her land until her eyes 
Fell on her own gear wrought in homely guise, 
And with a half smile she let fall the gold 
And glistening gems her listless hand did hold. 

Then long she lay there, gazing at the sky 
Between the thick leaves, growing drowsier, 
While slowly the gray rabbit hobbled by, 
And the slim squirrel twisted over her 
As one to heed not ; as if none were near 
The woodpecker slipped up the smooth-barked tree, 
The water-hen clucked nigh her fearlessly. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 221 

But in a little while she woke, and still 
Felt as if dreaming, all seemed far away 
Save present rest, both hope and fear and ill ; 
The sun was past the middle of the day, 
Cut bathed in flood of light the world still lay, 
And all was quiet, but for faint sounds made 
By the wood creatures wild and unafraid. 

From out her wallet now coarse food she drew, 
And ate with dainty mouth, then o'er the strip 
Of dazzling sunlight where the daisies grew 
Unto the babbling streamlet's rushy lip 
She went, and kneeling down thereby did dip 
Her hollow hand into the water gray 
And drank, then back again she went her way. 

There 'neath the tree-bole lay the glittering shoes, 
And over them she stood awhile and gazed, 
Then stooped adown as though one might not choose ; 
And from the grass one by the latchet raised, 
And with the eyes of one by slumber dazed 
Did off her own foot-gear, and one by one 
Set the bright things her shapely feet upon. 

Then to the thick wood slowly did she turn, 
And through its cool shade wandered till once more 
Thinner it grew, and spots of light did burn 
Upon her jewelled feet, till lay before 
Her upraised eyes a bay with sandy shore ; 
And 'twixt the waves and birds' abiding-place 
Was stretched a treeless, sunlit, grassy space. 

Friendly the sun, the bright flowers, and the grass 
Seemed after the dark wood ; with upraised gown 
Slowly unto the water did she pass, 
And on the grassy edge she sat her down ; 
And since right swift these latter hours had flown 
Less did the sun burn ; there awhile she lay 
Watching a little breeze sweep up the bay. 



222 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Shallow it was, a shore of hard white sand 
Met the green herbage, and as clear as glass 
The water ran in ripples o'er that strand, 
Until it wellnigh touched the flowery grass ; 
A dainty bath for weary limbs it was, 
And so our maiden thought belike, for she 
'Gan put her raiment from her languidly. 

Until at last from out her poor array, 
Pure did she rise e'en as that other One 
Rose up from out the ragged billows gray, 
For earth's dull days and heavy to atone ; 
How like another sun her gold hair shone ; 
In the green place, as down she knelt, and raised 
The glittering shoes, and long time on them gazed, 

As on strange guides that thus had brought her there, 
Then cast them by, so that apart they fell, 
And in the sunlight glittering lay and fair, 
Like the elves' blossoms, hard and lacking smell ; 
Then to the sward she stooped, and bud and bell 
Of the June's children gat into her hand, 
And left the grass for the scarce-covered sand. 

She stood to watch the thin waves mount her feet 
Before she tried the deep, then toward the wide, 
Sun-litten space she turned, and 'gan to meet 
The freshness of the water cool, and sighed 
For pleasure as the little rippling tide 
Lapped her about, and slow she wandered on 
Till many a yard from shore she now had won. 

There, as she played, she heard a bird's harsh cry, 
And looking to the steep hillside could see 
A broad-winged eagle hovering anigh, 
And stood to watch his sweeping flight and free 
Dark 'gainst the sky, then turned round leisurely 
Unto the bank, and saw a bright red ray 
Shoot from a great gem on the sea-thieves' prey. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 223 

Then slowly through the water did she move, 
Down on the changing ripple gazing still, 
As loath to leave it, and once more above 
Her golden head rang out the erne's note shrill, 
Grown nigher now ; she turned unto the hill, 
And saw him not, and once again her eyes 
Fell on the strange shoes' jewelled 'broideries. 

And even therewithal a noise of wings 
Flapping, and close at hand again the cry, 
And then the, glitter of those dainty things 
Was gone, as a great mass fell suddenly, 
And rose again, ere Rhodope could try 
To raise her voice, for now might she behold 
Within his claws the gleam of gems and gold. 

Awhile she gazed at him as, circling wide, 
He soared aloft, and for a space could see 
The gold shoe glitter, till the rock-crowned side 
Of the great mountain hid him presently, 
And she 'gan laugh that such a thing should be 
So wrought of fate, for little did she fear 
The lack of their poor wealth, or pinching cheer. 

But when she was aland again and clad, 
And turned back through the wood, a sudden thought 
Shot through her heart, and made her somewhat glad ; 
" Small things," she said, " her feet had thither brought : 
Perchance this strange hap should not be for naught." 
And therewithal stories she 'gan to tell 
Unto her heart how such things once befell, 

How as it had been it might be again. 
Then from her odorous breast she took the shoe 
Yet left, and turned it o'er and o'er in vain, 
If yet she might therein find aught of new 
To tell her what all meant ; and thus she drew 
Unto the wood's edge, and once more sat down 
Upon the fresh grass and the oak-leaves brown. 



224 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And there beneath the quickly sinking sun 
She took again her foot-gear cast aside, 
And, scarce beholding them now, did them on, 
And while the pie from out the oak-boughs cried 
Over her head, arose and slowly hied 
Unto the road again, and backward turned 
Up through the pass. Blood-red behind her burned 

The sunless sky, and scarce awake she seemed, 
As 'gainst the hill she toiled, and when at last 
Beneath the moon far off the gray sea gleamed, 
And all the rugged mountain road was passed, 
Back from her eyes the wandering locks she cast, 
And o'er her cheeks warm ran the tears, as she 
Told herself tales of what she yet might be. 



BUT cold awakening had she when she came 
Unto the half-deserted homestead gate, 
And she must think how she would take the blame 
That from her mother did her deed await, 
Without a slave-like frightened frown at fate ; 
Must harden yet her heart once more to face 
Her father's wondering sigh at his hard case. 

So when within the dimly lighted hall 
Her mother's wrath brake out, as she did hear 
Her cold words, and her father's knife did fall 
Clattering adown ; then seemed all life so drear, 
Hapless and loveless, and so hard to bear, 
So little worth the bearing, that a pang 
Of very hate from out her heart upsprang. 

With cold eyes, but a smile on her red lips, 
She watched them ; how her father stooped again 
And took his knife, and how once more the chips 
Flew from the bowl half finished, but in vain, 
Because he saw it not ; she watched the rain 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 225 

Of tears wherewith her mother did bewail 
That all her joy in her one child should fail. 

But when her mother's tears to sobs were turned 
The goodman rose and took her hand in his, 
And then, with sunken eyes for love that yearned, 
Gazed hard at her, and said, " Nay, child, some bliss 
Awaits thee surely yet ; enough it is ; 
Trouble and hunger shall not chase me long, 
The walls of one abiding-place are strong ; 

" And thither now I go apace, my child." 
Askance she looked at him with steady eyes, 
But when she saw that midst his words he smiled 
With trembling lips, then in her heart 'gan rise 
Strange thoughts that troubled her like memories 
And changed her face ; she drew her hands from him, 
And yet before her eyes his face waxed dim. 

Then down the old man sat, and now began 
To talk of how their life went, and their needs, 
In cheerful strain ; and, even as a man, 
Unbeaten yet by fortune's spiteful deeds, 
Spoke of the troublous twisted way that leads 
To peace and happiness, till to a smile 
The goodwife's tearful face he did beguile. 

So slipped the night away, and the June sun 
Rose the next morn as though no woe there were 
Upon the earth, and never any one 
Was blind with love or bent by hopeless care ; 
But small content was in the homestead there, 
Despite the bright-eyed June, for unto two 
That dwelt there life still held too much to do. 

While to the third, empty of deeds it seemed, 
A dragging dulness changed by here a pain 
And there a hope, waking or sleeping, dreamed, 
But, waking still or sleeping, dreamed in vain ; 
For how could anything be loss or gain 
15 



226 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

When still the order of the world went round, 
And still the wall of death all hopes did bound ? 

So said she oft, and fell to hating men ; 
Nevertheless with hope still beat her heart, 
And changing thoughts that rose and fell again 
Would stir within her as she sat apart, 
And to her brow the unbidden blood would start, 
And she would rise, nor know whereon she trod. 
And forth she walked as one who walks with God. 

Oftener indeed that dull and heavy mood 
Oppressed her, and when any were anigh, 
Little she spake, either of bad or good, 
Nor would she heed the folk that were thereby 
So much as thereon to look scornfully ; 
Unless perchance her father stood anear, 
And then her set hard face she strove to clear. 

And if he, fearful, answered with no smile 
Unto the softening eyes, yet when he went 
About his labor, would he so beguile 
His heart with thought of her, that right content 
He 'gan to feel with what the Gods had sent ; 
The little flame of love that in him burned, 
Hard things and ill to part of pleasure turned. 

Withal his worldly things went not so ill 
As for a luckless man ; the bounteous year 
More than before his barn and vats did fill 
With the earth's fruit, and bettered was his cheer, 
So that he watched the winter draw anear 
Calmly this tide, and deemed he yet might live, 
Some joy unto his daughter's heart to give. 

But for the one shoe that the erne had left, 
The goodwife's word was, " Take the cursed thing, 
And when the gems from out it are all reft, 
Into the fire the weaver's rag go fling ; 
Would in like wise the fond desires, that cling 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 227 

To Rhodope's proud heart, we thus might burn, 
That she to some good life at last might turn ! 

" I think some poison with a double curse 
Hath smitten her, and double wilfulness, 
For surely now she groweth worse and worse, 
Since the bright rag her wayworn foot did press 
Well then and surely thou wilt do no less 
Than as 1 bid a many things \ve need, 
More than this waif of cast-off-royal weed." 

With querulous voice she spake, because she saw 
Her husband look at Rhodope, as she 
Still through her fingers did the gray thread draw 
From out the rock, and sitting quietly 
Seemed not to heed what all the talk might be ; 
But for the goodman's self he answered not 
Until, at last the goodwife waxed o'er hot ; 

And laid hard word on word, till she began 
To say, " Alas, and wherefore was I wed 
To such an one as is a foredoomed man ? 
Lo, all this grief hast thou brought on my head, 
So wander forth, and dream as do the dead 
When to the shadowy land they first are brought ! 
Surely thou knowest that we lack for naught ! " 

Then blind with rage from out the place she went, 
But still the goodman stood awhile, and gazed 
At Rhodope, who sat as if intent 
Upon her work, nor aught her fair head raised. 
At last he spake : " Well, never was I praised 
For wisdom overmuch before this day, 
And can I now be certain of the way ? 

" True is it that our needs are many and sore, 
And that those gems would help us plenteously, 
Yet do I grudge now more than heretofore 
The very last of that strange gift to see. 
What sayest thou, how dost thou counsel me, 



228 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

O daughter ? didst them ever hear folk tell 

Of the strange dream that at thy birth befell ? " 

Blood-red her face grew as she looked on him, 
And with her foot the twirling spindle stayed. 
" Yea," said she, " something have I heard, but dim 
My memory is, and little have I weighed 
The worth thereof." The goodman smiled and said, 
" Nay, child, as little wise as I may be, 
Yet know I that thou liest certainly. 

" And so no need there is to tell the tale, 
Or ask thee more what thou wouldst have me do ; 
Have thou thy will, for fate will still prevail, 
Though oft we deem we lead her thereunto 
Where lies our good daughter, keep thou the shoe, 
And let the wise men with their wisdom play, 
While we go dream about a happier day." 

While he was speaking had she laid adown 
The rock, and risen unto her feet, and now 
Upon her bosom lay his visage brown, 
As round him both her fair arms did she throw ; 
Softly she said, " Somewhat thy need I know, 
Remember this whatever happeneth, 
Let it make sweet the space 'twixt this and death ! 

" Hard is the world ; I, loved ere I was born, 
This once alone perchance thy heart shall feel, 
And thou shalt go about, of love forlorn, 
And little move my heart of stone and steel : 
Ah, if another life our life might heal, 
And love become no more the sport of time, 
Chained upon either hand to pain and crime ! " 

A little time she hung about him thus, 
And then her arms from round his neck unwound, 
And went her ways ; his mouth grew piteous 
When he had lost her fluttering gown's light sound, 
And fast his tears 'gan fall upon the ground. 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 229 

At last he turned, " So is it now," he said, 
" With me as with a man soon to be dead. 

" Wise is he all at once, and knows not why, 
And brave who erst was timorous ; fair of speech, 
Whose tongue once stammered with uncertainty, 
Because his soul to the dark land doth reach. 
And is it so that love to me doth teach 
New things, because he needs must get him gone, 
And leave me with his memories all alone ? " 



SO the year past, as has been writ afore, 
With better hopes ; the pinching winter-tide 
Went by, and spring his tender longings bore 
Into all hearts, and scattered troubles wide, 
Nor yet to see the fruit of them would bide, 
But left the burning summer next to deal 
With hearts of men, and hope from them to steal. 

Now came the time round even to the day 
When Rhodope had made her journey vain 
Unto the valley where the temple lay, 
And now, too, when the morn was on the wane, 
Before the homestead door she stood again, 
For to the town she needs must go to bring, 
For their poor household work, some needful thing. 

So with slow feet she crossed the threshold o'er 
With brow a little knitted, as if she 
Dealt with some troublous thought, that oft before 
Had mazed her mind : then no less, steadily 
Through the fair day she went on toward the sea, 
For by the port, and lying low adown 
Stretched out their unwalled simple market-town. 

Some mile of highway had she got to pace, 
Ere she might reach the first house of the street 



230 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That led unto the lowly market-place ; 
So on she went, and still her eyes did meet 
The elm-tree shade that flickered o'er her feet. 
Though thronged beyond its wont the white way was, 
With folk well clad, who toward the town did pass, 

Swiftly she went, till come half-way belike, 
Then stayed her feet and looked up suddenly ; 
There by the wayside the hot sun did strike 
Upon a patch of grass, whereon did lie 
A gray old hound, and 'gainst an elm thereby 
His master leaned, a shepherd older yet, 
Whose deep-sunk eyes her eyes unwitting met. 

Therewith a knot of folk she had just passed 
Passed her in turn, maidens and youths they were, 
Blithe with their life and youth ; on her they cast 
Such looks as if they had a mind to jeer, 
Yet held back, some by wonder, some by fear, 
Went on a space until they deemed them free, 
Then through the summer day outburst their glee. 

Her deep eyes followed them, and yet, indeed, 
As images she saw them ; there a space 
Musing she stood, then at a slower speed 
Went back again to her abiding-place, 
Just as the old man moved his puckered face 
To speak some word to her ; and so at last, 
O'er her own threshold inward her feet passed. 

Then to her sleeping-room she went, and knelt 
Beside a chest, and raised the lid, and drew 
From out the dark where year-long it had dwelt, 
Remembered yet the while, the precious shoe, 
And dreamy over it awhile she grew, 
Then set it in her bosom, and went forth, 
Pondering o'er what her fond desires were worth. 

Still folk thronged on the highway ; as she went 
Some fragment of their talk would reach her ear 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 231 

Howso upon her dreams she was intent ; 
Of new-come men they spake, their ways and gear, 
How glorious of array, how great they were, 
How huge and fair their galley, that last eve 
The little black-quayed haven did receive. 

That talk of strange and great things raised at last 
New and wild hopes in her, but none the less 
Straightway unto her journey's end she passed, 
And did what she must do, nor cared to guess, 
Why in the market-place all folk did press 
Around a glitter as of steel and gold 
That in the midst thereof she did behold. 

Yet, her work done, she gat her back again 
Unto the market-place, and curiously 
'Gan eye the concourse, yea, at last, was fain 
Unto the heart thereof to come anigh ; 
Her heart beat ; strange she felt and knew not why, 
As on she went, and still the wondering folk 
To right and left before her beauty broke. 

A temple midmost of the market-place, 
Raised to the Mother of the Gods there stood, 
An ancient house in guise of other days, 
And e'en amid that simple folk deemed rude ; 
Such as it was the country folk thought good 
To meet and talk there, o'er such things as they, 
Found hard to deal with as day passed by day. 

So when she drew anigh its steps, thereon 
She saw indeed a goodly company, 
For there sat strange men, young and old, who shon*. 
In such attire as scarce she thought could be, 
And by these glittering folk from over sea 
Were the land's fathers, and the chief-priest dight 
To do a solemn sacrifice aright. 

E'en as she came into the foremost rank, 
Bright gleamed the slayer's falchion in the sun, 



232 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And silently the rose-crowned heifer sank 
Upon the time-worn pavement ; yet not one 
Of all the sea-farers might gaze upon 
Victim or priest, for forth c:ood Rhodope 
Lone on the steps, a glorious thing to see. 

For on a tripod by the altar's side, 
Gleaming, as that day year agone it gleamed, 
The shoe her foot had pressed she now espied, 
And o'er her soul a sudden light there streamed, 
While from her eager eyes such glory beamed, 
That all folk stared astonished, all must wait 
For her first word as for the stroke of fate. 

Yea, there she stood, that all fair things did lack, 
Clad in a gown of dark gray woollen stuff, 
The goods she had just dealt for at her back, 
And all about her homely, coarse, and rough, 
Yet, since her beauty blessed them, good enough: 
For, as a Goddess wandering on the earth, 
How might she deem earth's richest gauds of worth ? 

Gently, yet with no flush on her smooth cheek, 
She mounted up the steps, and spake out clear : 
" Perchance a match for yon fair thing ye seek 
Ye seem to prize so much ; it lieth here, 
And both of them on this day was-a-year 
Were on my feet. My father will be glad 
Because great joy in them the old man had." 

Then rose a great shout up into the sky, 
And in despite herself the blood would rise 
Unto her cheek and brow, as quietly 
From her white fragrant bosom, a world's prize, 
She drew the mass of blazing 'broideries, 
And laid it by its fellow, and her hand 
Trembled, as there sun-litten she did stand. 

Then cried a gray-beard, clad in gems and gold : 
" Praise to the Gods who do all things aright, 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 233 

And thus have given my weak eyes to behold 
Now, at the end of life, so fair a sight, 
Have given withal unto the worth and might 
Of the great king so fair a mate as thee 
How good, how good it is thine eyes to see ! " 

She was pale now, though never a word she spake, 
And held her head, as though a crown it wore 
And 'gan 'neath gold, and golden hair to ache 
With new-born longings, fears unknown before, 
And calmly her deep eyes the men passed o'er 
Who sat there marvelling ; till the old man said : 
" Wonder not overmuch, O glorious maid, 

"At all these things ! The Gods who wrought thee 

thus, 

And kept thee here apart from ill men's eyes 
To show thee forth so much more marvellous, 
Have led our hearts unto thee in this wise ; 
For the great king did solemn sacrifice 
Unto the Gods wellnigh a year agone, 
And in the bright sun bright the altar shone. 

" But e'en as to its highest shot the flame, 
And to the awful Gods our hearts did turn, 
A cry from out the far blue sky there came, 
And a bright thing 'twixt flame and sun did burn, 
And some there were who said they could discern 
An eagle, like a faint speck, far above 
The altar, whereon lay this gift of love. 

" How this may be I know not, but the king 
Trembled, and toward the altar stretched his hand, 
And drew to him the strange-sent, fair-wrought thing, 
And, thereon staring, a long while did stand, 
And left the place, not giving such command 
As he was wont, and still from that day forth 
Took little heed of things once held of worth. 

" Silent and pale, and strange-eyed still he grew, 
And yet said naught hereon for many days, 



234 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Until at last he bade us take this shoe 
And diligently search in every place 
That we might come to, till we saw the face 
Of her whose foot had touched it. ' Certainly, 
Whereso she is, she hath been wrought for me. 

" ' Whereso she is, and by what name men name 
Her loveliness and love unknown : lo now, 
Young am I, and have heretofore had shame 
To bend to love, e'en as my folk bend low 
Before my throne, but now my pride doth grow 
As a quenched candle in a golden house, 
And through the dark I wander timorous.' 

"We marvelled at his word, but deemed some God 
Possessed his heart ; but thenceforth constantly 
Have we gone over the wide world, and trod 
Rough ways enow, been tossed o'er many a sea, 
And dealt with many a lie, until to thee 
The Gods have brought us, O thou wondrous one ! 
That we might see thee ere our days are done." 

" Ah me ! " she said, " what thing do ye demand ? 
Is it a little thing that I should go, 
Leaving my people and my father's land, 
To wed some proud great man I do not know ? 
I look for no glad life ; yea, it is so 
That if a grain of love were left in me 
In vain your keel had cleft our girdling sea. 

" No need to speak ; I know what ye would say 
That where I go, still I and love shall rule, 
That where I go I bear about the day 
Made golden by my beauty base and dull, 
Mid hollow shows to strive with knave and fool, 
With death, and nothing done, to end it all ! 
Yet fear ye not ! for surely I shall fall 

" Where the Gods cast me, nor turn round about 
To gaze on bygone time so it shall be 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 235 

E'en as ye will." They stared at her, in doubt 
If her sweet lips had spoken, yea, and she 
Flushed 'neath their eyes fixed on her wonderingly, 
Wondering herself at the new fear, new scorn 
That with beginning of new days was born. 

But they, abased before the rough-clad maid, 
Now led her to an empty ivory chair, 
And each man knee unto the pavement laid, 
And, unashamed, did reverence to her there, 
And ever did she seem to grow more fair 
Before their eyes, till fear arose in them 
As they bent down to her rude garment's hem. 

And then the rites unto the .Gods went on, 
While she sat musing on the wondrous tale ; 
And when all these at last were duly done, 
They prayed her give command when they should sail ; 
She raised her face, grown quiet now and pale, 
. And said in a low voice : " To-day were best, 
For here at least may I have naught of rest 

" The old is gone, the new is not yet come, 
Familiar things with strange eyes I behold, 
And nowhere now I seem to have a home. 
But when I go from homespun unto gold, 
My father and mother, poor folk bent and old, 
Beaten by fortune, needs must go with me, 
And share my new proud life beyond the sea. 

" And since the old man loveth me too well, 
And hitherto small joy from me hath gained, 
Meet is it that my lips alone should tell 
How all is changed, and weal that long hath waned 
Is waxen now, and the cold rain that rained 
Upon his life's gray day hath met the sun, 
And blossoms spring from the dull earth and dun. 

" And, O ye folk, midst whom my feet have dwelt, 
And whom I leave now, if so be, that I 



236 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Hard anger in my heart at whiles have felt 
'Gainst things that pressed upon me wearily, 
Yet now the kindness of time past draws nigh, 
And ye will be my folk still, when I go 
Unto a land where e'en your name none know." 

Then, midst their marvelling silence, she arose, 
And took her cast-down fardel up again, 
And went her ways ; and they, by whom all close 
Her body passed, must tremble, and be fain 
To think of common things to dull the pain 
Of longing, as her lovely majesty, 
Too sweet and strange for earth, brushed swiftly by. 

And yet of earth she was, and as she went 
Through the shrunk shadow to her old abode, 
Fresh hope a new joy through her body sent, 
The clear cold vision of her soul to cloud ; 
And less the striving world seemed like a load 
To weary her, than a strange curious toy, 
To solace life with foolish grief and joy. 

Still grew that hope in her, and when she came 
Unto the homestead, and her father met 
Anigh the byre, then doubt, and fear, and shame, 
Amid the joy of change did she forget, 
As firm feet mid the loitering kine she set, 
And cried aloud, " O father, turn and gaze 
On Fortune's friend, the Queen of glorious days ! " 

He turned and stared upon her glittering eyes 
And godlike mien, and 'gan to speak, but she 
Cried out, "The very Gods may call us wise, 
For great days have they given to thee and me, 
Things stranger than these meadows shall we see, 
And thou shalt wonder that thou ere didst keep 
These kine, as Phcebus erst Admetus' sheep ! " 

Then did she pour the whole tale out on him ; 
Eager at first, but faltered to behold 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 237 

How he fell trembling in his every limb ; 
Through the new fever that her heart did fold, 
Again shame thrust its steely point and cold ; 
" Alas," she thought, " when all the tale is done, 
Why go we thus alone beneath the sun ? " 

He tried to speak, and the words came at last : 
" If thou art gl-id, then surely I am glad 
And yet, we thought our evil time had passed ; 
Surely the days grew not so wholly bad ! 
Ah me, a growing hope of late I had 
Of quiet days and sweet yet shame of me, 
That I should dull the joy that gladdeth thee ! 

" Daughter, thy bidding I will surely do, 
And go with thee ; nathless bethink thee yet, 
How yesterday shall seem full long ago, 
When with to-morrow's dew the grass is wet. 
Child, I will pray thee never to forget 
This face of mine, this heart that loves thee well ; 
Let distance though, and time that sweet tale tell ! " 

She cried : " Ah, wilt thou have me lonelier 
Than the Gods made me ? As day passes day 
The life of fear and hope that happened here, 
Most oft no doubt shall seem full far away ; 
Yet be thou nigh, to be a scarce-felt stay 
To my mazed steps, a green close fresh and sweet, 
On life's hard way, to cool my weary feet. 

" I will not take my bidding back ; go thou, 
And get thee ready swiftly to be gone. 
The sails are flapping in the haven now, 
And we depart before the day is done. 

be thou glad, thou shalt not be alone ! 
Canst thou not see e'en now how this my face 

1 softened to thee by the happy days ? " 

He said no more, but eyed her lovingly, 
Upon his worn old face a trembling smile ; 



238 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then turned him toward the house with one great sigh, 

And she was left alone a little while, 

Her restlessness with strange dreams to beguile, 

And though bright things those dreams did nowise lack, 

Yet oft oft-conquered cold fear would come back. 

But midst her thoughts from out the house there came 
Her father and her mother, and she gazed 
Upon the twain with something more than shame, 
As she beheld what timid eyes and mazed, 
The goodwife to her queenly beauty raised, 
And how with patient mien her father went, 
On all her motions lovingly intent. 

Then to the market-place passed on the three, 
And though her gray gown only covered her, 
Her mother bore some shreds of bravery 
And clad her father was in scarlet gear, 
Worn now and wretched, that he once did bear 
When long ago at his rich board he sat, 
And all that land's best cheer the glad guests gat. 

And as they stood there now, the simple folk, 
Grown used unto the wonder of the tale, 
Warmed with new joy, and into shouts outbroke ; 
The goodwife flushed, but the old man turned pale, 
And gazed round helpless, his limbs seemed to fail 
As though age pressed him sore ; while Rhodope 
Grew softer-eyed and spake majestically : 

" Fain am I, lords, that we depart straightway ; 
For if a dream this is, I long full sore 
E'en in my dream to feel the wind-blown spray, 
And hear the well-timed rolling of the oar, 
And ere dark night behold the lessening shore 
From your dreamed dromund's deck so pass we on, 
If e'en so far as this my dream hath won." 

Then said they, "All is ready in due wise, 
E'en as thou bad'st, the ship has been warped round 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 239 

And rideth toward the sea, and sacrifice 

Has there been done, and goodly gifts been found 

For this land's folk : but wilt thou not be crowned 

And clad in fair array of gold, that we 

May show thy beauty meetly to the sea?" 

" Nay," said she, " in this lowly guise of mine 
Let the king first behold me standing there 
The Gods' gift, that his heart may more incline 
Towards mine, if thus he note me strange and fair, 
Grown up a queen, yet with no wondrous care 
For what I should be. Make no more delay, 
Low looks the sun upon the watery way." 

So seaward now with these all people moved 
Rejoicing, though belike they scarce knew why, 
And Rhodope 'gan feel herself beloved ; 
And as the south wind breathed deliciously 
O'er flowers and sweet things, and the sun did die 
Amid soft golden haze, her loveliness 
She 'gan to feel, and all the world to bless. 

In her slim hand her father's hand she took, 
Her red lips trembled, and her eyes were wet 
With tears that fell not ; but the old man shook 
As one who sees death ; then a hand she set 
Upon his shoulder, and said : " Long years yet, 
With loving eyes these eyes shalt thou behold 
Among the glimmer of fair things and gold." 

But naught he answered, and they came full soon 
To where the gangway ran from out the ship 
On to the black pier ; white yet was the moon, 
And the sun's rim nigh in the sea did dip, 
And from the place where sky met ocean's lip, 
Ran a great road of gold across the sea, 
Where played the unquiet waves impatiently. 

Now was her foot upon the gangway plank ; 
Now over the green depths, and oars blood red 



240 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Fluttered her gown, and from the low green bank 
Above the sea a cry came, as her head 
Gleamed golden in the way that westward led, 
And on the deck her feet were, but no more 
She looked back then, unto the peopled shore. 

But with one hand held back as if to take 
Her father's hand, she went on toward the prow ; 
And there she stood, and watched the billows break, 
Nor noted when men back the ropes did throw, 
And scarce knew when the sea fell from the bow 
And the ship moved, nor turned, till cold and gray, 
And darkling fast, the waste before her lay. 

But at the last she turned on well-poised feet, 

And gazed adown the twilight decks, and heard 

The freshening wind about the cordage beat, 

The master's and rough helmsman's answering word, 

And all alone she felt now, and afeared, 

In spite of all the folk who stood around, 

Unto her lightest service straightly bound. 

A terror seized her ; down the deck she passed, 
Her gown driven close against her, and her hair 
Loosed by the driving wind ; till at the mast 
She stayed, and muttered : "Ah, he is not there ! 
And I, where am I ? the dream seemed so fair 
When it began ; but now am I alone, 
Waiting, I know not what, till life be done." 

Trembling she drew her hand across her brow 
As one who wakes ; and then, grown calm once more 
She went with steady feet unto the prow, 
And ran the line of reverent faces o'er 
With anxious eyes, and stayed at last before 
The ancient gray-haired man, the chief of these, 
And spoke amid the washing of the seas : 

" Where is my father? I am fain to speak 
Of many things with him, we two alone ; 



THE STORY OF RHODOPE. 241 

For mid these winds and waves my heart grows weak 
With memory of the days forever gone." 
The moon was bright, the swaying lanterns shone 
On her pale face, and fluttering garment's hem 
Each stared on each, and silence was on them. 

And midst that silence a new lonely pain, 
Like sundering death, smote on her, till he spoke : 
" O queen, what sayst thou ? the old man was fain, 
He told us, still to dwell among his folk ; 
He said, thou knew'st he might not bear the yoke 
Of strange eyes watching him what say I more, 
Surely thou know'st he never left the shore ? 

" I deemed him wise and true : but give command 
If so thou wiliest ; certes no great thing 
It is, in two hours' space to make the land, 
Though much the land-wind now is freshening." 
One slender hand to the rough shroud did cling, 
As her limbs failed ; she raised the other one, 
And moved her lips to bid the thing be done : 

Yet no words came, she stood upright again, 
And dropped her hand and said, " I strive with change, 
I strive with death the Gods' toy, but in vain : 
No otherwise than thus might all be strange." 
Therewith she turned, her unseeing eyes did range 
Wide o'er the tumbling waste of waters gray, 
As swift the black ship went upon her way. 



DARK night upon the cold still eve did fall 
Amidst the tale, and now the fair guest-hall 
Was lit with naught but firelight, as they sat, 
Silent, soft-hearted, and compassionate 
Midst their own flickering shadows ; yet too old 
They were, to talk about the story told, 
Too old, and knew too well what each man thought, 
16 



242 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And feared in any pleasure to be caught, 
That hid a snare of sadness at its end. 
So slowly did the tale's sweet sorrow blend 
With their own quenched desires, and past regret, 
And dear-loved follies they might scarce forget ; 
That in these latter days indeed, were grown 
Naught but a tale, for others to bemoan, 
Who had not learned with sorrow's self to deal ; 
Who had no need an hour of bliss to steal, 
With trembling hands, from the dark treasury 
Of time long unregarded, long gone by, 
Where cobwebbed o'er amid the dust it lay. 

But these stole not, nor strove, from day to day 
Enough of pleasure to their lot did fall 
To stay them, that on death they should not call 
With change or rest to end the weary tide ; 
Though careless now, his coming did they bide. 



SCARCE aught was left of autumn-tide to die 
When next they met ; the northeast wind rushed 

by 

The house anigh the woods, wherein they were, 
And in the oaks and hollies might they hear 
Its roar grow greater with the dying morn : 
A hard gray day it was, yet scarce forlorn, 
Since scarcely aught of tender or of sweet 
Was left the year, its ruggedness to meet. 
Bare was the countryside of work and folk : 
There from the hillside stead straight out the smoke, 
Over the climbing row of corn-ricks, sailed ; 
And few folk stirred ; a blue-clad horseman hailed 
A shepherd from the white way, little heard 
'Twixt ridge and hollow by November seared ; 
The ferryman stared long adown the road 
That led unto his tottering thatched abode, 
Ere the dark speck into a goodwife turned ; 
The smouldering weed-heap by the garden burned ; 



NOVEMBER. 243 

Sidelong the plough beside the field-gate lay, 

With no one nigh to scare the birds away, 

That twittered mid the scanty wisps of straw. 

So round the fire the ancient folk did draw, 

And, mid the daydreams, that hung round about, 

Rather beheld the wild-wood dim with doubt, 

And twilight of the cloudy leafless tide, 

Than the scant-peopled fallow country-side, 

Whose fields the woods hemmed in : the world grew old 

Unto their eyes, and lacked house, field, and fold. 

Then spake a wanderer : " Long the tale I tell 
Though in few years the deeds thereof befell, 
In a strange land and barren, far removed 
From southlands and their bliss ; yet folk beloved, 
Yearning for love, striving 'gainst change and hate, 
Strong, uncomplaining, yet compassionate, 
Have dwelt therein a strange and awful land 
Where folk, as in the hollow of God's hand, 
Beset with fearful things yet fearing naught, 
Have lived their lives and wondrous deeds have 

wrought 

Wild deeds, as other men. Yet these at least, 
If death from but a rough and homely feast 
Drew them away, lived not so full of care, 
They and their sons, but that their lives did bear 
The fruit of deeds recorded. Bear with me 
If I shall seem to hold this history 
Of a few freemen of the farthest north, 
A handful, as a thing of too much worth ; 
Because this Iceland was my fathers' home, 
Nay, somewhat of the selfsame stock they come 
As these I tell of: know withal that we 
Have ever deemed this tale as true to be, 
As though those very Dwellers in Laxdale, 
Risen from the dead had told us their own tale ; 
Who for the rest while yet they dwelt on earth 
Wearied no God with prayers for more of mirth 
Than dying men have ; nor were ill-content 
Because no God beside their sorrow went 



244 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Turning to flowery sward the rock-strewn way, 

Weakness to strength, or darkness into day. 

Therefore, no marvels hath my tale to tell, 

But deals with such things as men know too well ; 

All that I have herein your hearts to move, 

Is but the seed and fruit of bitter love. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 



ARGUMENT. 

THIS story shows how two friends loved a fair woman, and how he who 
loved her best had her to wife, though she loved him little or not at all ; 
and how one of these two friends gave shame to aud received death of 
the other, who in his turn came to his end by reason of that deed. 

Of Herdholt and Bathstead. 

TTERDHOLT my tale names for the stead, where 

erst 

Olaf the Peacock dwelt, nowise the worst 
Among the great men of a noble day : 
Upon a knoll amidst a vale it lay, 
Nigh where Laxriver meets the western sea, 
And in that day it nourished plenteously 
Great wealth of sheep and cattle. 

Ye shall know 

That Olaf to a mighty house did go 
To take to him a wife : Thorgerd he gat, 
The daughter of the man, at Burg who sat, 
After a great life, with eyes waxing dim, 
Egil, the mighty son of Skallagrim. 
Now of the sons the twain had, first we name 
Kiartan alone, for eld's sake and for fame, 
Then Steinthor, Haldor, Helgi, and Hauskuld, 
All of good promise, strong and lithe and bold, 
Yet little against Kiartan's glory weighed ; 
Besides these props the Peacock's house that stayed, 
Two maidens, Thurid, Thorbiorg there were ; 
And furthermore a youth was fostered there, 
Whom Thorleik, Olaf's brother, called his son : 



246 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Bodli his name was. Thus the tale is done 
Of those who dwelt at Herdholt in those days. 

Midst the gray slopes, Bathstead its roof did raise 
Seven miles from Herdholt; Oswif, wise of men, 
Who Thorclis had to wife, abode there then 
With his five sons, of whom let names go past 
That are but names ; but these were first and last, 
Ospak and Thorolf : never, says my tale, 
That Oswif's wisdom was of much avail 
In making these, though they were stout enow ; 
But in his house a daughter did there grow 
To perfect womanhood, Gudrun by name, 
Whose birth the wondering world no more might blame 
Than hers who erst called Tyndarus her sire, 
What hearts soe'er, what roof-trees she might fire, 
What hearts soe'er, what hearths she might leave cold, 
Before the ending of the tale be told. 

But where we take the story up, fifteen 
The maiden's years were ; Kiartan now had seen 
His eighteenth spring, and younger by a year 
Was Bodli, son of Thorleik. 

Now most fair 

Seemed Olaf s lot in life, and scarcely worse 
Was Oswif s, and what shadow of a curse, 
Might hang o'er either house, was thought of now 
As men think of a cloud, the mountain's brow 
Hides from their eyes an hour before the rain ; 
For so much love there was betwixt the twain,- 
Herdholt and Bathstead, that it well might last 
Until the folk aforenamed were all past 
From out the world ; but herein shall be shown 
How the sky blackened, and the storm swept down. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 247 



The Prophecy of Guest the Wise. 

UPON a day, amid the maids that spun 
Within the bower at Bathstead, sat Gudrun, 
Her father in the firth a-fishing was, 
The while her mother through the meads did pass 
About some homely work. So there she sat, 
Nor set her hand to this work or to that, 
And a half-frown was on her pensive face, 
Nor did she heed the chatter of the place 
As girl spake unto girl. Then did she hear 
The sound of horse-hoofs swiftly drawing near, 
And started up, and cried : " That shall be Guest, 
Riding, as still his wont is, from the west 
Unto the Thing, and this is just the day 
When he is wont at Bathstead to make stay." 

Then to the door she went, and with slim hand 
Put it aback, and 'twixt the posts did stand, 
And saw therewith a goodly company 
Ride up the gray slopes leading from the sea. 

That spring was she just come to her full height, 
Low-bosomed yet she was, and slim and light, 
Yet scarce might she grow fairer from that day ; 
Gold were the locks wherewith the wind did play, 
Finer than silk, waved softly like the sea 
After a three days' calm, and to her knee 
Wellnigh they reached ; fair were the white hands 

laid 

Upon the door-posts where the dragons played ; 
Her brow was smooth now, and a smile began 
To cross her delicate mouth, the snare of man ; 
For some thought rose within the heart of her 
That made her eyes bright, her cheeks ruddier 
Than was their wont, yet were they delicate 
As are the changing steps of high heaven's gate ; 
Bluer than gray her eyes were, somewhat thin 
Her marvellous red lips ; round was her chin, 
Cloven, and clear-wrought ; like an ivory tower 
Rose up her neck from love's white-veiled bower. 



248 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

But in such lordly raiment was she clad, 
As midst its threads the scent of southlands had, 
And on its hem the work of such-like hands 
As deal with silk and gold in sunny lands. 
Too dainty seemed her feet to come anear 
The guest-worn threshold-stone. So stood she there, 
And rough the world about her seemed to be, 
A rude heap cast up from the weary sea. 

But now the new-come folk, some twelve in all, 
Drew rein before the doorway of the hall, 
And she a step or two across the grass 
Unto the leader of the men did pass, 
A white-haired elder clad in kirtle red : 
" Be welcome here, O Guest the Wise ! " she said, 
" My father honors me so much that I 
Am bid to pray thee not to pass us by, 
But bide here for a while ; he says withal 
That thou and he together in the hall 
Are two wise men together, two who can 
Talk cunningly about the ways of man." 

Guest laughed, and leapt from off his horse, and 

said : 

" Fair words from fair lips, and a goodly stead, 
But unto Thickwood must I go to-night 
To give my kinsman Armod some delight; 
Nevertheless here will we rest awhile, 
And thou and I with talk an hour beguile, 
For so it is that all men say of thee, 
' Not far off falls the apple from the tree,' 
That ; neath thy coif some day shall lie again 
When he is dead, the wise old Oswif 's brain." 

With that he took her hand, and to the hall 
She led him, and his fellows one and all 
Leapt to the ground, and followed clattering 
In through the porch, and many a goodly thing 
There had they plenteously ; but mid the noise 
And rattling horns and laughter, with clear voice 
Spake Gudrun unto Guest, and ever he 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 249 

Smiled at her goodly sayings joyfully, 

And yet at whiles grew grave ; yea, and she too, 

Though her eyes glistened, seemed as scarce she knew 

The things she said. At last, amid their speech, 

The old man stayed his hand as it did reach 

Out to the beaker, and his gray eyes stared 

As though unseen things to his soul were bared; 

Then Gudrun waited trembling, till he said : 

" Liest thou awake at rrfidnight in thy bed, 
Thinking of dreams dreamed in the winter-tide, 
When the northeast, turned off the mountain side, 
Shook the stout timbers of the hall, as when 
They shook in Norway ere the upland men 
Bore axe against them ? " 

She spake low to him : 
" So is it, but of these the most wax dim 
When daylight comes again ; but four there are 
Four dreams in one that bring me yet great care, 
Nor may I soon forget them, yea, they sink 
Still deeper in my soul but do thou drink, 
And tell me merry tales ; of what avail 
To speak of things that make a maiden pale 
And a man laugh ? " 

" Speak quick," he said, " before 
This glimmer of a sight I have is o'er." 

Then she delayed not, but in quick words said : 
" Methought that with a coif upon my head 
I stood upon a stream-side, and withal 
Upon my heart the sudden thought did fall 
How foul that coif was, and how ill it sat, 
And though the folk beside me spoke 'gainst that, 
Nevertheless, from off mine head I tore 
The cursed thing, and cast it from the shore ; 
And glad at heart was I when it was gone, 
And woke up laughing." 

" Well, the second one," 
Said Guest ; " Make good speed now, and tell me all ! " 



250 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" This was the dream," she said, " that next did fall : 
By a great water was I ; on mine arm 
A silver ring, that more my heart did charm 
Than one might deem that such a small thing might ; 
My very own indeed seemed that delight, 
And long I looked to have it ; but as I 
Stood and caressed the dear thing, suddenly 
It slipped from off my arm, and straightway fell 
Into the water : nor is more to tell 
But that I wept thereat, and sorrowed sore 
As for a friend that I should see no more." 

"As great," said Guest, "is this thing as the last, 
What follows after ? " 

" O'er the road I passed 

Nigh Bathstead," said she, "in fair raiment clad, 
And on mine arm a golden ring I had ; 
And seemly did I deem it, yet the love 
I had therefor, was not so much above 
That wherewithal I loved the silver ring, 
As gold is held by all a dearer thing 
Than silver is ; now, whatso worth it bore, 
Methought that needs for longer than before 
This ring should give me what it might of bliss ; 
But even as with foolish dreams it is 
So was it now ; falling I seemed to be, 
And spread my arms abroad to steady me ; 
Upon a stone the ring smote, and atwain 
It broke, and when I stooped the halves to gain, 
Lo, blood ran out from either broken place ; 
Then as I gazed thereon I seemed to trace 
A flaw within the craftsman's work, whereby 
The fair thing brake ; yea, withal presently 
Yet other flaws therein could I discern ; 
And as I stood and looked, and sore did yearn, 
Midst blind regrets, rather than raging pain, 
For that fair thing I should not see again, 
My eyes seemed opened, to my heart it came, 
Spite of those flaws, that on me lay the blame 
Why thus was spoiled that noble gift and rare, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 251 

Because therewith I dealt not with due care : 
So with a sigh I woke." 

" 111 fare," said Guest, 
" Three of thy dreams, tell now about the rest" 

" This is the last of the four dreams," she said ; 
" Methought I had a helm upon my head, 
Wrought all of gold, with precious gems beset, 
And pride and joy I had therein, and yet, 
So heavy was it, that I scarce might hold 
My head upright for that great weight of gold ; 
Yet for all that I laid no blame or wrong 
Upon it, and I fain had kept it long ; 
But amid this, while least I looked therefor, 
Something, I knew not what, the fair helm tore 
From off mine head, and then I saw it swept 
Into the firth, and when I vyould have wept 
Then my voice failed me, and mine eyes were dry 
Despite my heart ; and therewith presently 
I woke, and heard withal the neat-herd's song 
As o'er the hard white snow he went along 
Unto the byre, shouldering his load of hay ; 
Then knew I the beginning of the day, 
And to the window went and saw afar 
The wide firth, black beneath the morning star, 
And all the waste of snow, and saw the man 
Dark on the slope ; 'twixt the dead earth and wan, 
And the dark vault of star-besprinkled sky, 
Croaking, a raven toward the sea did fly 
With that I fell a yearning for the spring, 
And all the pleasant things that it should bring, 
And lay back in my bed and shut my eyes, 
To sec what pictures to my heart would rise, 
And slept, but dreamed no more ; now spring is 

here 

Thou knowst perchance, made wise with many a year, 
What thing it is I long for ; but to me 
All grows as misty as the autumn sea 
'Neath the first hoar-frost, and I name it not, 
The thing wherewith my wondering heart is hot" 



252 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then Guest turned round upon her, with a smile 
Beholding her fair face a little while, 
And as he looked on her she hid her eyes 
With slim hands, but he saw the bright flush rise, 
Despite of them, up to her forehead fair ; 
Therewith he sighed as one who needs must bear 
A heavy burden. 

" Since thou thus hast told 

Thy dreams," he said, " scarce may I now withhold 
The tale of what mine eyes have seen therein ; 
Yet little from my foresight shall thou win, 
Since both the blind, and they who see full well 
Go the same road, and leave a tale to tell 
Of interwoven miseries, lest they, 
Who after them awhile on earth must stay, 
Should have no pleasure in the winter night, 
When this man's pain is made that man's delight." 

He smiled an old man's smile, as thus he spake, 
Then said, " But I must hasten ere it break, 
The thin sharp thread of light that yet I see 
Methinks a stirring life shall hap to thee. 
Thou shalt be loved and love ; wrongs shalt thou give, 
Wrongs shalt thou take, and therewithal outlive 
Both wrongs, and love, and joy, and dwell alone 
When all the fellows of thy life are gone. 
Nay, think not I can tell thee much of this, 
How it shall hap, the sorrow or the bliss 
Only foreshadowing of outward things, 
Great, and yet not the greatest, dream-lore brings. 

" For whereas of the ill coif thou didst dream, 
That such a husband unto me doth seem 
As thou shalt think mates thee but ill enow, 
Nor shall love-longings bind thee ; so shalt thou 
By thine own deed shake off this man from thee. 

" But next the ring of silver seems to me, 
Another husband, loved and loving well ; 
But even as the ring from off thee fell 



THE LOVERS OF CUD RUN. 253 

Into the water, so it is with him, 

The sea shall make his love and promise dim. 

" But for the gold ring ; thou shalt wed again, 
A worthier man belike yet wellnigh vain 
My strivings are to see what means the gold 
Thou lovedst not more than silver: I am old 
And thou art very young ; hadst thou my sight 
Perchance herein thou wouldst have more of might. 
But my heart says, that on the land there comes 
A faith that telleth of more lovesome homes 
For dead men, than we deemed of heretofore, 
And that this man full well shall know that lore. 
But whereas blood from out the ring did run, 
By the sword's edge his life shall be foredone : 
Then for the flaws see thou thyself to these ! 
Thou knowest how a thing full well may please, 
When first thou hast it in thine hold, until 
Up to the surface float the seeds of ill, 
And vain regret o'er all thy life is spread. 

" But for the heavy helm that bowed thine head 
This, thy last husband, a great chief shall be 
And hold a helm of terror over thee 
Though thou shalt love him : at the end of life 
His few last minutes shall he spend in strife 
"With the wild waves of Hwammfirth, and in vain, 
For him too shall the white sea-goddess gain. 

" So is thy dream areded ; but these things 
Shall hang above thee, as on unheard wings 
The kestrel hangs above the mouse ; nor more 
As erst I said shalt thou gain by my lore 
Than at the end of life, perchance, a smile 
That fate with sight and blindness did beguile 
Thine eyes in such sort that thou knevv'st the end, 
But not the Way whereon thy feet did wend 
On any day amid the many years, 
Wherethrough thou waitedst for the flood of tears, 
The dreariness that at some halting-place, 



254 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Waited in turn to change thy smiling face. 
Be merry yet ! these things shall not be all 
That unto thee in this thy life shall fall." 

Amid these latter words of his, the may 
From her fair face had drawn her hands away, 
And sat there with fixed eyes, and face grown pale 
As one who sees the corner of the veil, 
That hideth strange things, lifted for a while, 
But when he ceased, she said with a faint smile 
And trembling lips : 

" Thanked be thou ; well it is ! 
From thee I get no promise of vain bliss, 
And constant joy ; a tale I might have had 
From flattering lips to make my young heart glad 
Yea, have my thanks ! yet wise as thou mayst be, 
Mayst thou not dimly through these tangles see ? " 

He answered naught, but sat awhile with eyes 
Distraught and sad, and face made over wise 
With many a hard vain struggle ; but at last 
As one who from him a great weight doth cast, 
He rose and spake to her : 

" Wild words, fair may, 
Now time it is that we were on our way." 
Then unto him her visage did she turn, 
In either cheek a bright red spot did burn, 
Her teeth were set hard, and her brow was knit 
As though she saw her life and strove with it. 
Yet presently but common words she spake, 
And bid him bide yet for her father's sake,- 
To make him joyful when the boards were laid ; 
But certainly, whatever words she said, 
She heeded little, only from her tongue 
By use and wont clear in his ears they rung. 
Guest answered as before, that he would ride, 
Because that night at Thickwood must he bide ; 
So silent now with wandering weary eyes 
She watched his men do on their riding guise, 
Then led him from the hall but listlessly, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 255 

As though she heeded naught where she might be. 
So forth he rode, but turned and backward gazed 
Before his folk the garth-gate latch had raised, 
And saw her standing yet anigh the hall, 
With her long shadow cast upon its wall, 
As with her eyes turned down upon the ground 
A long lock of her hair she wound and wound 
About her hand. Then turning once again, 
He passed the gate and shook his bridle-rein. 

Now but a short way had he gone ere he 
Beheld a man draw nigh their company, 
Who, when they met, with fair words Guest did greet, 
And said that Olaf Peacock bade him meet 
Him and his men, and bid them to his stead : 

" And well ye wot, O Goodman Guest," he said, 
" That all day long it snoweth meat and drink 
At Herdholt, and the gurgle and the clink 
Of mead and horns, the harp alone doth still." 

Guest laughed, and said, " Well, be that as it will, 
Get swiftly back, and say that I will come 
To look upon the marvels of his home 
And hear his goodly voice ; but may not bide 
The night through, for to Thickwood must I ride." 

Then the man turned and smote his horse ; but they 
Rode slowly by the borders of the bay 
Upon that fresh and sunny afternoon, 
Noting the sea-birds' cry and surfs soft time, 
Until at last into the dale they came, 
And saw the gilt roof-ridge of Herdholt flame 
In the bright sunlight over the fresh grass, 
O'er which the restless white-woolled lambs did pass 
And querulous gray ewes ; and wide around, 
Near and far up the dale, they heard the sound 
Of lowing kine, and the blithe neat-herd's voice, 
For in those days did all things there rejoice. 
Now presently from out the garth they saw 
A goodly company unto them draw, 
And thitherward came Olaf and his men ; 
So joyous greeting was betwixt them when 



256 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

They met, and side by side the two chiefs rode, 
Right glad at heart unto the fair abode. 

Great-limbed was Olaf Hauskuldson, well knit, 
And like a chief upon his horse did sit ; 
Clear-browed and wide-eyed was he, smooth of skin 
Through fifty rough years ; of his mother's kin, 
The Erse king's daughter, did his short lip tell, 
And dark-lashed gray-blue eyes ; like a clear bell 
His voice was yet, despite of waves and wind, 
And such a goodly man you scarce might find, 
As for his years, in' all the northern land. 
He held a gold-wrought spear in his right hand, 
A chiefs gold ring his left arm did upbear, 
And as a mighty king's was all his gear, 
Well shaped of Flanders' cloth, and silk and gold ; 
Thus they their way up to the garth did hold, 
And Thord the Short, Guest's son, was next thereby, 
A brisk man and a brave ; so presently 
They passed the garth-wall, and drew rein before 
The new-built hall's well-carven, fair porch-door, 
And Guest laughed out with pleasure, to behold 
Its goodly fashion, as the Peacock told 
With what huge heed and care the place was wrought, 
And of the Norway earl's great wood, he brought 
Over the sea ; then in they went and Guest 
Gazed through the cool dusk, till his eyes did rest 
Upon the noble stories, painted fair 
On the high panelling and roof-boards there ; 
For over the high-seat, in his ship there lay 
The gold-haired Baldur, god of the dead day, 
The spring-flowers round his high pile, waiting there 
Until the Gods thereto the torch should bear ; 
And they were wrought on this side and on that, 
Drawing on towards him. There was Frey, and sat 
On the gold-bristled boar, who first they say 
Ploughed the brown earth, and made it green for Frey. 
Then came dark-bearded Niord, and after him 
Freyia, thin-robed, about her ankles slim 
The gray cats playing. In another place 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 257 

Thor's hammer gleamed o'er Thor's red-bearded face, 
And Heimdall, with the gold horn slung behind, 
That in the God's-dusk he shall surely wind 
Sickening all hearts with fear ; and last of all 
Was Odin's sorrow wrought upon the wall, 
As slow-paced, weary-faced, he went along, 
Anxious with all the tales of woe and wrong 
His ravens, Thought and Memory, bring to him. 

Guest looked on these until his eyes grew dim, 
Then turned about, and had no word to praise, 
So wrought in him the thought of those strange days 
Done with so long ago. But furthermore 
Upon the other side, the deeds of Thor 
Were duly done ; the fight in the far sea 
With him who rings the world's iniquity, 
The Midgard Worm ; strife in the giants' land, 
With snares and mockeries thick on either hand, 
And dealings with the Evil One who brought 
Death even amid the Gods all these well wrought 
Did Guest behold, as in a dream, while still 
His joyous men the echoing hall did fill 
With many-voiced strange clamor, as of these 
They talked, and stared on all the braveries. 

Then to the presses in the cloth-room there 
Did Olaf take him, and showed hangings fair 
Brought from the southlands far across the sea, 
And English linen and fair napery, 
And Flemish cloth ; then back into the hall 
He led him, and took arms from off the wall, 
And let the mail-coat rings run o'er his hands, 
And strung strange bows brought from the fiery lands. 
Then through the butteries he made him pass, 
And, smiling, showed what winter stock yet was ; 
Fish, meal, and casks of wine, and goodly store 
Of honey, that the bees had grumbled o'er 
In clover fields of Kent. Out went they then 
And saw in what wise Olaf's serving men 
Dealt with the beasts, and what fair stock he had, 
And how the maids were working blithe and glad 
17 



258 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Within the women's chamber. Then at last, 
Guest smiled, and said : 

" Right fair is all thou hast, 
A noble life thou livest certainly, 
And in such wise as now, still may it be, 
Nor mayst thou know beginning of ill days ! 
Now let it please thee that we go our ways, 
E'en as I said, for the sun falleth low." 

" So be it then," said he. " Nor shalt thou go 
Giftless henceforth ; and I will go with thee 
Some little way, for we my sons may see ; 
And fain I am to know how to thine eyes 
They seem, because I know thee for most wise, 
And that the cloud of time from thee hides less 
Than from most men, of woe or happiness." 

With that he gave command, and men brought forth 
Two precious things ; a hat of goodly worth, 
Of fur of Russia, with a gold chain wound 
Thrice round it, and a coin of gold that bound 
The chain's end in the front, and on the same 
A Greek king's head was wrought, of mighty fame 
In olden time ; this unto Guest he gave, 
And smiled to see his deep-set eyes and grave 
Gleam out with joy thereover : but to Thord, 
Guest's son, he gave a well-adorned sword 
And English-'broidered belt ; and then once more 
They mounted by the goodly carven door, 
And to their horses gat all Guest's good men, 
And forth they rode toward Laxriver: but when 
They had just overtopped a low knoll's brow, 
Olaf cried out, " There play hot hearts enow 
In the cold waves ! " Then Guest looked, and afar 
Beheld the tide play on the sandy bar 
About the stream's mouth, as the sea waves rushed 
In over it and back the land-stream pushed ; 
But in the dark wide pool mid foam-flecks white, 
Beneath the slanting afternoon sunlight 
He saw white bodies sporting, and the air 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 259 

Light from the southwest up the slopes did bear 
Sound of their joyous cries as there they played. 

Then said he, " Goodman, thou art well apaid 
Of thy fair sons, if they shall deal as well 
With earth as water." 

" Naught there is tell 

Of great deeds at their hands as yet," said he ; 
" But look you, how they note our company ! " 

For waist-high from the waves one rose withal, 
And sent a shrill voice like a sea-mew's call 
Across the river, then all turned toward land, 
And beat the waves to foam with foot and hand, 
And certes kept no silence ; up the side 
They scrambled, and about the shore spread wide 
Seeking their raiment, and the yellowing sun 
Upon the line of moving bodies shone, 
As running here and there with laugh and shout 
They flung the linen and gray cloth about, 
Yet spite of all their clamor clad them fast. 
So Guest and Olaf o'er the green slopes passed 
At sober pace, the while the other men 
Raced down to meet the swimmers. 

"Many then 

There are, who have no part or lot in thee 
Among these lads," said Guest. 

" Yea, such there be," 
Said Olaf, " Sons of dale-dwellers hereby ; 
But Kiartan rules the swimming." 

Earnestly 

Guest gazed upon the lads as they drew near, 
And scarcely now he seemed the words to hear 
That Olaf spake, who talked about his race 
And how they first had dwelling in that place ; 
But at the last Guest turned his horse about 
Up stream, and drew rein, yet, as one in doubt, 
Looked o'er his shoulder at the youths withal ; 
But naught said Olaf, doubting what should fall 
From those wise lips. 



26o THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then Guest spake, " Who are these ? 
Tell me their names ; yon lad upon his knees, 
Turning the blue cloak over with his hands, 
While over him a sturdy fellow stands, 
Talking belike ? " 

" Hauskuld, my youngest son," 
Said Olaf, " kneels there, but the standing one 
Is An the Black, my house-carle, a stout man." 

" Good," Guest said ; " name the one who e'en now ran 
Through upraised hands a glittering silver chain, 
And, as we look now, gives it back again 
Unto a red-haired youth, tall, fair, and slim." 

" Haldor it was who gave the chain to him, 
And Helgi took it," Olaf said. 

Then Guest, 

" There kneeleth one in front of all the rest, 
Less clad than any there, and hides from me 
Twain who are sitting nigher to the sea ? " 

Then Olaf looked with shaded eyes and said : 
" Steinthor, the sluggard, is it, by my head 
He hideth better men ! nay, look now, look ! " 

Then toward the stream his spear-butt Olaf shook, 
As Steinthor rose, and gat somewhat aside, 
And showed the other twain he first did hide. 
On a gray stone anigh unto the stream 
Sat a tall youth whose golden head did gleam 
In the low sun ; half covered was his breast, 
His right arm bare as yet, a sword did rest 
Upon his knees, and some half-foot of it 
He from the sheath had drawn ; a man did sit 
Upon the grass before him ; slim was he, 
Black-haired and tall, and looked up smilingly 
Into the other's face, with one hand laid 
Upon the sword-sheath nigh the broad gray blade, 
And seemed as though he listened. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 261 

Then spake Guest : 

" No need, O friend, to ask about the rest, 
Since I have seen these ; for without a word 
Kiartan, I name the man who draws the sword 
From out the sheath, and low down in the shade 
Before him, Bodli Thorleikson is laid. 
But tell me of that sword, who bore it erst ?" 

Then Olaf laughed : " Some call that sword accursed ; 
Bodli now bears it, which the Eastlander 
Geirmund, my daughter's husband, once did wear, 
Hast thou not heard the tale ? he won the maid 
By my wife's word, wherefor with gold he paid, 
Or so I deemed ; but whereas of good kin 
The man was, and the women hot herein 
I stood not in the way ; well, but his love, 
What e'er it was, quenched not his will to rove ; 
He left her, but would nowise leave the sword, 
And so she helped herself, and for reward 
Got that, and a curse with it, babblers say. 
Let see if it prevail 'gainst my good day ! " 

Guest answered naught at all, his head was turned 
Eastward, away from where the low sun burned 
Above the swimmers. Olaf spake once more : 
" Wise friend, thou thus hast heard their names told o'er, 
How thinkest thou ? hast thou the heart to tell 
Which in the years to come shall do right well ?" 

Guest spake naught for a while, and then he said, 
But yet not turning any more his head : 
" Surely of this at least thou wouldst be glad, 
If Kiartan while he lived more glory had 
Than any man now waxing in the land." 

Then even as he spoke he raised his hand 
And smote his horse, and rode upon his way 
With no word more ; neither durst Olaf stay 
His swift departing, doubting of his mood ; 
For though indeed the word he spake was good, 



262 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet some vague fear he seemed to leave behind, 
And Olaf scarce durst seek, lest he should find 
Some ill thing lurking by his glory's side. 
But after Guest his son and men did ride, 
And forth to Thickwood with no stay they went. 
But now, the journey and the day nigh spent, 
Unto his father as they rode turned Thord, 
With mind to say to him some common word, 
But stared astonished, for the great tears ran 
Over the wrinkled cheeks of the old man, 
Yea, and adown his beard, nor shame had he 
That Thord in such a plight his face should see, 
At last he spake : 

" Thou wonderest, O my son, 
To see the tears fall down from such an one 
As I am folly is it in good sooth 
Bewraying inward grief ; but pain and ruth 
Work in me so, I may not hold my peace 
About the woes, that as thy years increase 
Thou shait behold fall on the country-side 
But me the gray cairn ere that day shall hide 
Fair men and women have I seen to-day, 
Yet I weep not because these pass away, 
Sad though that is, but rather weep for this, 
That they know not upon their day of bliss 
How their worn hearts shall fail them ere they die, 
How sore the weight of woe on them shall lie, 
No sighing eases, wherewithal no hope, 
No pride, no rage, shall make them fit to cope. 
Remember what folk thou this day hast seen, 
And in what joyous steads thy feet have been, 
Then think of this ! that men may look to see 
Love slaying love, and ruinous victory, 
And truth called lies, and kindness turned to hate, 
And prudence sowing seeds of all debate ! 
Son, thou shall live to hear when I am dead 
Of Bodli standing over Kiartan's head, 
His friend, his foster-brother, and his bane, 
That he in turn e'en such an end may gain. 
Woe worth the while ! forget it, and be blind ! 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN: 263 

Look not before thee ! the road left behind 

Let that be to thee as a tale well told 

To make thee merry when thou growest old ! " 

So spake he ; but by this time had they come 
Unto the wood that lay round Armod's home, 
So on the tree-beset arid narrow way 
They entered now, and left behind the day 
And whatso things thenceforth to Guest befell, 
No more of him the story hath to tell. 



Gudnin twice wedded, widowed, and wooed of Kiartan. 

SO wore the time away, nor long it was 
Ere somewhat of Guest's forecast came to pass. 
Drawn by her beauty, Thorvald wooed Gudrun ; 
Saying withal that he was such an one 
As fainer was to wed a wife than lands, 
Readier by far to give forth from his hands 
That which he had, than take aught of her kin. 
And in such wise he did not fail to win 
His fond desire, and, therewith, wretched life. 
For she who deemed naught worth so much of strife 
As to say " no " forever, being wed, found 
How the chain galled whereto she now was bound, 
And more and more began to look on him 
With hate that would be scorn, with eyes grown dim 
With hope of change that came not, and lips set 
Forever with the stifling of regret. 
Coarse Thorvald was, and rough and passionate, 
And little used on change of days to wait ; 
And as she ever gloomed before his eyes 
Rage took the place of the first grieved surprise, 
Wherewith he found that he who needs must love 
Could get no love in turn, nay, nor e'en move 
Her heart to kindness : then as nothing strange 
Still with sad loathing looks she took the change 
She noted in him, as if all were done 



264 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Between them, and no deed beneath the sun 
That he could do would now be worse to her. 
Judge if the hot heart of the man could bear 
Such days as these ? Upon a time it fell 
That he, most fain indeed to love her well, 
Would she but turn to him, had striven sore 
To gain her love, and yet gat nothing more 
Than a faint smile of scorn, 'neath eyes whose gaze 
Seemed fixed forever on the hoped-for days, 
Wherein he no more should have part or lot ; 
Then mingled hate with love in him, and hot 
His heart grew past all bearing ; round about 
He stared, as one who hears the eager shout 
Of closing foes, when he to death is brought ; 
In his fierce heart, thought crowded upon thought, 
Till he saw not and heard not, but rose up 
And cast upon the floor his half-filled cup, 
And crying out, smote her upon the face ; 
Then strode adown the hushed and crowded place, 
For meal-time was it, till he reached the door ; 
Than gat his horse, and over hill and moor, 
Scarce knowing where he went, rode furiously. 

But in the hall, folk turned them round to see 
What thing Gudrun would do, who for a while 
Sat pale and silent, with a deadly smile 
Upon her lips ; then called to where she sat 
Folk from the hall, and talked of this and that 
Gayly, as one who hath no care or pain : 
Yea, when the goodman gat him back again 
She met him changed, so that he wellnigh thought 
That better days his hasty blow had brought. 
And still as time wore on, day after day 
Wondering, he saw her seeming blithe and gay ; 
So he, though sore misdoubting him of this, 
Took what he might of pleasure and of bliss, 
And put thought back. So time wore till the spring, 
And then the goodman rode unto the Thing, 
Not over light of heart, or free from fear, 
Though his wife's face at parting was all clear 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 265 

Of frown or sullenness ; but he being gone, 
Next morn Gudrun rode with one man alone 
Forth unto Bathstead ; there her tale she told, 
And as in those days law strained not to hold 
. Folk whom love held not, or some common tie, 
So her divorce was set forth speedily, 
For mighty were her kin. 

And now once more 

At Bathstead did she dwell, free as before, 
And, smiling, heard of how her husband fared 
When by the Hill of Laws he stood and heard 
The words, that he belike half thought to hear, 
Which took from him a thing once held so dear, 
That all was naught thereby. 

Now wise ones tell 

That there was one who used to note her well 
Within her husband's hall, and many say 
That talk of love they had before the day 
That she went back to Bathstead ; how that was 
I know not surely ; but it came to pass 
That scarcely had abated the first rage 
Of her old mate, and scarce less like a cage 
Of red-hot iron 'gan to feel his life, 
Ere this man, Thord, had won Gudrun to wife ; 
So, since the man was brisk and brave and fair, 
And she had known him when her days were drear, 
And turned with hope and longing to his eyes, 
Kind amid hard things, in most joyous wise 
Their life went, and she deemed she loved him well ; 
And the strange things that Guest did once foretell, 
Which morn and noon and eve she used to set 
Before her eyes, she now would fain forget ; 
Alas ! forgotten or remembered, still 
Midst joy or sorrow fate shall work its will ; . 

Three month's they lived in joy and peace enow, 
Till on a June night did the southwest blow 
The rainy rack o'er Gudrun's sleeping head, 
While in the firth was rolled her husband dead 
Toward the black cliffs ; drowned was he, says my 

tale, 
By wizard's spells amidst a summer gale. 



266 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then back to Bathstead Gudrun came again, 
To sit with fierce heart brooding o'er her pain, 
^Vhile life and time seemed made to torture her, 
That she the utmost of all pain might bear, 
To please she knew not whom ; and yet mid this, 
And all her raging for the vanished bliss, 
Would Guest's words float up to her memory, 
And quicken cold life ; then would she cast by 
As something vile the comfort that they brought, 
Yet, none the less, still stronger grew that thought, 
Unheeded, and unchidden therefore, round 
The weary wall of woe, her life that bound. 

So wore the months ; spring with its longings came, 
And now in every mouth was Kiartan's name, 
And daily now must Gudrun's dull ears bear 
Tales of the prowess of his youth to hear, 
While in his cairn forgotten lay her love. 
For this man, said they, all men's hearts did move, 
Nor yet might envy cling to such an one, 
So far beyond all dwellers 'neath the sun ; 
Great was he, yet so fair of face and limb 
That all folk wondered much, beholding him, 
How such a man could be ; no fear he knew, 
And all in manly deeds he could outdo ; 
Fleet-foot, a swimmer strong, an archer good, 
Keen-eyed to know the dark waves' changing mood ; 
Sure on the crag, and with the sword so skilled, 
That when he played therewith the air seemed filled 
With light of gleaming blades ; therewith was he 
Of noble speech, though says not certainly 
My tale, that aught of his be left behind 
With rhyme and measure deftly intertwined ; 
Well skilled was he, too, in the craftsman's lore 
To deal with iron mid the stithy's roar, 
And many a sword-blade knew his heavy hand. 
Shortly, if he amid ten kings should stand, 
All men would think him worthier man than they ; 
And yet withal it was his daily way 
To be most gentle both of word and deed, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 267 

And ever folk would seek him in their need, 
Nor was there any child but loved him well. 

Such things about him ever would men tell, 
Until their hearts swelled in them as they thought 
How great a glory to their land was brought, 
Seeing that this man was theirs. Such love and praise 
Kiartan's beginning had in those fair days, 
While Gudrun sat sick-eyed, and hearkened this, 
Still brooding on the late-passed days of bliss, 
And thinking still how worthless such things were. 

But now when midsummer was drawing near, 
As on an eve folk sat within the hall, 
Man unto man far off did they hear call, 
And then the sound of horse-hoofs ; Oswif rose, 
And went into the porch to look for those 
Who might be coming, and at last folk heard, 
Close to the porch, the new-come travellers' word, 
And turned to meet them ; Gudrun sat alone 
High on the dais when all folk were gone, 
And playing with her golden finger-rings, 
Set all her heart to think of bygone things, 
Till hateful seemed all hopes, all thoughts of men. 

Yet did she turn unto their voices, when 
Folk back again into the hall did crowd, 
Torch-litten now, laughing and talking loud, 
Then as the guests adown the long hall drew, 
Olaf the Peacock presently she knew, 
Hand in hand with her father ; but behind 
Came two young men ; then rose up to her mind, 
Against her will, the tales of Kiartan told, 
Because she deemed the one, whose hair of gold 
In the new torch-light gleamed, was even he, 
And that the black-haired high-browed one must be 
Bodli, the son of Thorleik ; but with that 
Up to the place where listlessly she sat, 
They came, and on her feet she now must stand 
To welcome them ; then Olaf took her hand 



268 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And looked on her with eyes compassionate, 
And said : 

" O Gudrun, ill has been thy fate, 
But surely better days shall soon be thine, 
For not for naught do eyes like thine eyes .shine 
Upon the hard world ; thou shalt bless us yet 
In many a wise and all thy woes forget." 

She answered naught, but drew her hand away, 
And heavier yet the weight upon her lay 
That thus men spake of her. But, turning round, 
Kiartan upon the other hand she found, 
Gazing upon her with wide hungry eyes 
And parted lips ; then did strange joy surprise 
Her listless heart, and changed her old world was ; 
Ere she had time to think, all woe did pass 
Away from her, and all her life grew sweet, 
And scarce she felt the ground beneath her feet, 
Or knew who stood around, or in what place 
Of heaven or earth she was ; soft grew her face ; 
In tears that fell not yet, her eyes did swim, 
As, trembling, she reached forth her hand to him, 
And with the shame of love her smooth cheeks burned, 
And her lips quivered, as if sore they yearned 
For words they had not learned, and might not know 
Till night and loneliness their form should show. 

But Kiartan's face a happy smile did light, 
Kind, loving, confident ; good hap and might 
Seemed in his voice as now he spake, and said : 

" They say the dead for thee will ne'er be dead, 
And on this eve I thought in sooth to have 
Labor enow to draw thee from the grave 
Of the old days ; but thou rememberest, 
Belike, days earlier yet, that men call best 
Of all days, when as younglings erst we met 
Thou thinkest now thou never didst forget 
This face of mine, since now most certainly 
The eyes are kind wherewith thou look'st on me." 



THE LOVERS OF CUD RUN. 269 

A shade came o'er her face, but quickly passed, 
"Yea," said she, "if such pleasant days might last, 
As when we wandered laughing hand in hand 
Along the borders of the shell-strewn strand." 

She wondered at the sound of her own voice, 
She chid her heart that it must needs rejoice, 
She marvelled why her soul with fear was filled ; 
But quickly every questioning was stilled 
As he sat down by her. 

Old Oswif smiled 

To see her sorrow in such wise beguiled, 
And Olaf laughed for joy, and many a thought 
Of happy loves to Bodli's heart was brought 
As by his friend he sat, and saw his face 
So bright with bliss ; and all the merry place 
Ran over with good-will that sight to see, 
And the hours passed in great festivity. 

At last beneath the glimmer of the moon, 
Fanned by the soft sea-wind that tempers June, 
Homeward they rode, sire, son and foster-son, 
Kiartan half joyful that the eve was done, 
And he had leisure for himself to weave 
Tales of the joyful way that from that eve 
Should lead to perfect bliss ; Bodli no less 
Rejoicing in his fellow's happiness, 
Dreaming of such-like joy to come to him, 
And Olaf, thinking how that nowise dim 
The glory of his line through these should grow. 

But while in peace these through the night did go, 
Vexed by new thoughts and old thoughts, Gudrun lay 
Upon her bed : she watched him go away, 
And her heart sank within her, and there came, 
With pain of that departing, pity and shame, 
That struggling with her love yet made it strong, 
That called her longing blind, yet made her long 
Yet more for more desire, what seeds soe'er 
Of sorrow hate and ill were hidden there. 
So with her strong heart wrestled love, till she 



270 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Sank 'neath the hand of sleep, and quietly 

Beneath the new-risen sun she lay at rest, 

The bed-gear fallen away from her white breast, 

One arm deep buried in her hair, one spread 

Abroad, across the 'broideries of the bed, 

A smile upon her lips, and yet a tear, 

Scarce dry, but stayed anigh her dainty ear 

How fair, how soft, how kind she seemed that morn, 

Ere she anew to love and life was born. 

A little space to part these twain indeed 
Was seven short miles of hill and moor and mead, 
And soon the threshold of the Bathstead hall 
Knew nigh as much of Kiartan's firm footfall 
As of the sweep of Gudrun's kirtle-hem, 
And sweet past words to tell, life grew to them. ; 
Sweet the awaking in the morn, when lay 
Below the hall the narrow winding way, 
The friend that led, the foe that kept apart ; 
And sweet the joyful flutter of the heart 
Anigh the door, ere clinging memory 
Gave place to rapturous sight, and eye met eye ; 
Sweet the long hours of converse when each word 
Like fairest music still seemed doubly heard, 
Caught by the ear and clung to by the heart ; 
Yea, even most sweet the minute they must part, 
Because the veil, that so oft time must draw 
Before them, fell, and clear without a flaw, 
Their hearts saw love, that moment they did stand 
Ere lip left lip, or hand fell down from hand ; 
Yea, that passed o'er, still sweet and bitter sweet 
The yearning pain that stayed the lingering feet 
Upon the threshold, and the homeward way ; 
And silent chamber covered up from day 
For thoughts of words unsaid ah, sweet the night 
Amidst its dreams of manifold delight ! 

And yet sometimes pangs of perplexed pain 
Would torture Gudrun, as she thought again 
On Guest and his forecasting of her dream ; 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 271 

% 

And through the dark of days to come would gleam 

Fear, like a flame of hell shot suddenly 

Up through spring meadows 'twixt fair tree and tree, 

Though little might she see the flaws, whereof 

That past dream warned her, midst her dream of love ; 

And whatso things her eyes refused to see, 

Made wise by fear, none others certainly 

Might see in love so seeming smooth as this, 

That looked to all men like the door of bliss 

Unto the twain, and to the country-side 

Good hope and joy, that thus so fast were tied 

The bonds 'twixt two such houses as were these, 

And folk before them saw long years of peace. 

Of Bodli Thorleikson the story says, 
That he, o'ershadowed still by Kiartan's praise, 
Was second but to him ; although, indeed, 
He, who perchance the love of men did need 
More than his fellow, less their hearts might move ; 
Yet fair to all men seemed the trust and love 
Between the friends, and fairer unto none 
Than unto Olaf, who scarce loved his son 
More than his brother's son ; now seemed it too, 
That this new love closer the kinsmen drew 
Than e'en before, and whatso either did 
The other knew, and scarce their thoughts seemed hid 
One from the other. 

So as day by day 

Went Kiartan unto Bathstead, still the way 
Seemed shorter if his friend beside him rode ; 
Then might he ease his soul of that great load 
Of love unsatisfied, by words, and take 
Mockeries in turn, grown sweet for that name's sake 
They wrapped about, or glow with joy to hear 
The praises of the heart he held so dear, 
And laugh with joy and pleasure of his life, 
To note how Bodli's heart withal, seemed rife 
With love that his love kindled, though as yet 
It wandered, on no heart of woman set. 
So Bodli, nothing loath, went many a day, 



272 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

r 

Whenso they would, to make the lovers gay, 

Whenso they would, to get him gone, that these 

E'en with such yearning words their souls might please 

As must be spoken, but sound folly still 

To aught but twain, because no tongue hath skill 

To tell their meaning : kinder, Kiartan deemed, 

Grew Bodli day by day, and ever seemed 

Wellnigh as happy as the loving twain, 

And unto Bodli life seemed naught but gain, 

And fair the days were. 

On a day it fell 

As the three talked, they 'gan in sport to tell 
The names o'er of such women good and fair, 
As in the land that tide unwedded were, 
Naming a mate for Bodli, and still he 
Must laugh and shake his head ; 

" Then over sea," 

Quoth Kiartan, " Mayhap such an one there is 
That thou mayst deem the getting of her bliss ; 
Go forth and win her with the rover's sword ! " 

Then Bodli laughed, and cast upon the board 

The great gray blade and ponderous iron hilt, 

All unadorned, the yoke-fellow of guilt, 

And said, " Go, sword, and fetch me home a bride ! 

But here in Iceland have I will to bide 

With those that love me, till the fair days change." 

Then Gudrun said, " Things have there been more 

strange, 

Than that we three should sit above the oars, 
The while on even keel 'twixt the low shores 
Our long-ship breasts the Thames flood, or the Seine. 
Methinks in biding here is little gain, 
Cooped up in this cold corner of the world." 

Then up sprang Kiartan, seized the sword, and hurled 
Its weight aloft, and caught it by the hilt 
As down it fell, and cried, " Would that the tilt 
Were even now being rigged above the ship, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 273 

Would that we stood to see the oars first dip 

In the green waves ! nay, rather would that we 

Above the bulwarks now saw Italy, 

With all its beacons flaring ! Sheathe thy sword, 

Fair foster-brother, till I say the word 

That draws it forth ; and, Gudrun, never fear 

That thou a word or twain of me shalt hear, . 

E'en if the birds must bear them o'er the sea." 

Her eyes were fixed upon him lovingly 
As thus he spake, and Bodli smiling saw 
Her hand to Kiartan's ever nigher draw ; 
Then he rose up and sheathed the sword, and said, 
" Nay, rather if I be so hard to wed, 
I yet must think of roving, so I go 
To talk to Oswif, all the truth to know 
About the news the chapmen carried here, 
That Olaf Tryggvison his sword doth rear 
'Gainst Hacon and his fortune." 

Therewithal 

He laughed, and gat him swiftly from the hall, 
And found the old man, nor came back again 
Until through sun and shadow had the twain 
Sat long together, and the hall 'gan fill. 
Then did he deem his friend sat somewhat still, 
And something strange he saw in Gudrun's eyes 
As she gazed on him ; nor did fail to rise 
In his own heart the shadow of a shade, 
That made him deem the world less nobly made, 
And yet was like to pleasure. On the way 
Back home again, not much did Kiartan say, 
And what he spake was wellnigh mockery 
Of speech, wherewith he had been wont to free 
His heart from longings grown too sweet to bear. 
But time went on, and still the days did wear 
With little seeming change ; if love grew cold 
In Kiartan's heart one day, the next o'er bold, 
O'er frank, he noted not who might be by, 
When he unto his love was drawing nigh ; 
Gudrun gloomed not ; as merry as before 
18 



274 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Did Bodli come and go 'twixt dais and door. 

Only perchance a little oftener they 

Fell upon talk of the fair lands that lay 

Across the seas, and sometimes would a look 

Cross Gudrun's face that seemed a half rebuke 

To Kiartan, as all over-eagerly 

He talked about the life beyond the sea, 

As thereof he had heard the stories tell. 

Then Bodli sometimes into musings fell, 

So dreamlike, that he might not tell his thought 

When he again to common life was brought 

So passed the seasons, but in autumn-tide 
The foster-brothers did to Burgfirth ride, 
Unto a ship new come to White-River ; 
Talk with the outland chapmen had they there, 
And Kiartan bade the captain in the end 
Back unto Herdholt as his guest to wend, 
And nothing loath he went with him ; and now 
Great tidings thereupon began to show 
Of Hacon slain, his son thrust from the land, 
And Norway in fair peace beneath the hand 
Of Olaf Tryggvison ; nor did he fail 
To tell about the king full many a tale, 
And praise him for the noblest man, that e'er 
Had held the tiller, or cast forth the spear : 
And Kiartan listened eagerly, yet seemed 
As if amid the tale he wellnigh dreamed ; 
And now withal, when he to Bathstead went, 
Less than before would talk of his intent 
To see the outlands, to his listening love ; 
And when at whiles she spake to him thereof 
Lightly he answered her, and smile or kiss 
Would change their talk to idle words of bliss : 
Less of her too to Bodli now he spake, 
Although this other (for her beauty's sake 
He told himself) to hear of her was fain ; 
And he, for his part, sometimes felt a pain, 
As though the times were changing over fast, 
When Kiartan let the word of his go past 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 275 

Unnoted, that in other days belike 

Had nowise failed from out his heart to strike 

The sparks of lovesome praise. 

But now Yule-tide 

Was come at last, and folk from far and wide 
Went to their neighbors' feasts, and as wont was 
All Bathstead unto Herdholt hall did pass, 
And the feast lasted long, and all folk gat 
Things that their souls desired, and Gudrun sat 
In the high seat beside the goodwife there. 

But ever now her wary ears did hear 
The new king's name bandied from mouth to mouth, 
And tnlk of those new-comers from the south ; 
And through her anxious heart a sharp pain smote 
As Kiartan's face she eagerly 'gan note 
And sighed ; because, leaned forward on the board, 
He sat, with eager face hearkening each word, 
Nor speaking aught ; then long with hungry eyes 
She sat regarding him, nor yet would rise 
A word unto her lips : and all the while 
Bodli gazed on them with a fading smile 
About his lips, and eyes that ever grew 
More troubled still, until he hardly knew 
What folk were roundabout. 

So passed away 

Yule-tide at Herdholt, cold day following day, 
Till spring was gone, and Gudrun had not failed 
To win both many days where joy prevailed, 
And many a pang of fear ; till so it fell 
That in the summer, whereof now we tell, 
Upon a day in blithe mood Kiartan came 
To Bathstead, not as one who looks for blame, 
And Bodli with him, sad-eyed, silent, dull, 
Noted of Gudrun, who no less was full 
Of merry talk, yea, more than her wont was. 
But as the hours toward eventide did pass, 
Said Kiartan : 

" Love, make we the most of bliss, 
For though, indeed, not the last day this is 



276 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Whereon we twain shall meet in such a wise, 
Yet shalt thou see me soon in fighting guise, 
And hear the horns blow up our Loath to go, 
For in White-River " 

" Is it even so," 

She broke in, " that these feet abide behind ? 
Men call me hard, but thou hast known me kind ; 
Men call me fair, my body give I thee ; 
Men call me dainty ; let the rough salt sea 
Deal with me as it will, so thou be near ! 
Let me share glory with thee, and take fear 
That thy heart throws aside ! " 

Hand joined to hand, 

As one who prays, and trembling, did she stand 
With parted lips, and pale and weary-faced. 
But up and down the hall-floor Bodli paced 
With clanking sword, and brows set in a frown, 
And scarce less pale than her. The sun low down 
Shone through the narrow windows of the hall, 
And on the gold upon her breast did fall, 
And gilt her slim clasped hands. 

There Kiartan stood 

Gazing upon her in strange wavering mood, 
Now longing sore to clasp her to his heart, 
And pray her, too, that they might ne'er depart, 
Now wellnigh ready to say such a word 
As cutteth love across as with a sword ; 
So fought love in him with the craving vain 
The love of all the wondering world to gain, 
Though such he named it not. And so at last 
His eyes upon the pavement did he cast, 
And knit his brow as though some word to say ; 
Then fell her outstretched hands, she cried, 

" Nay, nay ! 

Thou need'st not speak, I will not ask thee twice 
To take a gift, a good gift, and be wise ; 
I know my heart, thou know'st it not ; farewell, 
Maybe that other tales the Skalds shall tell 
Than of thy great deeds." 

Still her face was pale, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 277 

As with a sound betwixt a sigh and wail, 
She brushed by Bodli, who, aghast, did stand 
With open mouth, and vainly stretched-out hand ; 
But Kiartan followed her a step or two, 
Then stayed, bewildered by his sudden woe ; 
But even therewith, as nigh the door she was, 
She turned back suddenly, and straight did pass, 
Trembling all over, to his side, and said, 
With streaming eyes : 

" Let not my words be weighed 
As a man's words are ! O fair love, go forth 
And come thou back again, made no more worth 
Unto this heart ; but worthier it may be 
To the dull world, thy worth that cannot see. 
Go forth, and let the rumor of thee run 
Through every land that is beneath the sun ; 
For know I not, indeed, that everything 
Thou winnest at the hands of lord or king, 
Is surely mine, as thou art mine at last ? " 

Then round about his neck her arms she cast, 
And wept right sore, and touched with love and shame, 
Must Kiartan offer to leave hope of fame, 
And noble life ; but midst her tears she smiled, 
" Go forth, my love, and be thou not beguiled 
By woman's tears, I spake but as a fool, 
We of the north wrap not our man in wool, 
Lest they should die at last ; nay, be not moved, 
To think that thou a faint-heart fool hast loved ! " 

For now his tears fell too, he said, " My sweet, 
Ere the ship sails we yet again shall meet 
To say farewell, a little while, and then, 
When I come back to hold my place mid men, 
With honor won for thee how fair it is 
To think on now, the sweetness and the bliss ! " 

Some little words she said no pen could write, 
Upon his face she laid her fingers white, 
And, midst of kisses, with his hair did play ; 



278 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then, smiling through her tears, she went away. 
Nor heeded Bodli aught 

Men say the twain, 
Kiartan and Gudrun, never met again 
In loving wise ; that each to each no more 
Their eyes looked kind on this side death's dark shore, 
That midst their tangled life they must forget, 
Till they were dead, that ere their lips had met. 

For ere the day that Kiartan meant to come 
And kiss his love once more within her home, 
The southeast wind, that had stayed hitherto 
Their sailing, changed, and northwest now it blew ; 
And Kalf, the captain, urged them to set forth, 
Because that tide the wind loved not the north, 
And now the year grew late for long delay. 
Night was it when he spake ; at dawn next day, 
Before the door at Herdholt might men see, 
Armed, and in saddle, a goodly company. 
Kiartan, bright-eyed and flushed, restless withal, 
As on familiar things his eyes did fall, 
Yet eager to be gone, and smiling still, 
For pride and hope and love his soul did fill, 
As of his coming life he thought, and saw 
In all the days that were to be, no flaw. 
About him were his fellows, ten such men 
As in the land had got no equals then ; 
By him his foster-brother sat, as true 
As was the steel the rover's hand erst drew ; 
There stood his father, flushed with joy and pride, 
By the fair-carven door that did abide, 
Till he fulfilled of glory came again 
To take his bride before the eyes of men. 

Now skipper Kdlf, clad in the Peacock's gift, 
Unto the south his gold-wrought spear did lift, 
And Kiartan stooped and kissed his sire. A shout 
Rose from the home-men, as they turned about, 
And trotted jingling down the grassy knolL 
Silent awhile rode Kiartan, till his soul, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 279 

Filled with a many thoughts, in speech o'erflowed, 

And unto Bodli, who beside him rode, 

He fell to talk of all that they should do 

In the fair countries that they journeyed to. 

Not Norway only, or the western lands, 

In time to come, he said, might know their hands, 

But fairer places, folk of greater fame, 

Where 'neath the shadow of the Roman name 

Sat the Greek king, gold-clad, with bloodless sword." 

But as he spoke Bodli said here a word 

And there a word, and knew not what he said, 

Nay, scarcely knew what wild thoughts filled his head, 

What longings burned, like a still quickening flame, 

Within his sad heart. 

So that night they came 
To Burg-firth and the place upon the strand 
Where by the ready ship the tents did stand, 
And there they made good cheer, and slept that night, 
But on the morrow, with the earliest light, 
They gat a-shipboard, and, all things being done, 
Upon a day when low clouds hid the sun, 
And 'neath the harsh northwest down drave the rain 
They drew the gangway to the ship again, 
And ran the oars out. There did Kiartan stand 
By Kdlf, who took the tiller in his hand 
And conned the rising bows ; but when at last 
Toward the gray sky the wet oar-blades were cast, 
And space 'twixt stern and land 'gan widen now, 
Kiartan cried out and ran forth to the prow, 
While rope and block yet beat confusedly, 
And shook his drawn sword o'er the dark gray sea ; 
And step for step behind him Bodli went, 
And on his sword-hilt, with a like intent, 
He laid his hand, and half drew from its sheath 
The rover's sword ; then with a deep-drawn breath 
Most like a sigh, he thrust it back again. 
His face seemed sharpened with a sudden pain. 
He turned him round the driving scud to face, 
His breast heaved, and he staggered in his place, 
And stretched his strong arms forth with a low moan 



280 THE EARTHL Y PARADISE. 

Unto the hidden hills, 'neath which alone 
Sat Gudrun sat his love and therewithal 
Down did the bows into the black trough fall, 
Up rose the oar-song, through the waters gray, 
Unto the south the good ship took her way. 



The Dealings of King Olaf Tryggmson with the Ice 
landers. 



NOW tells the tale that safe to Drontheim came 
Kiartan with all his folk, and the great fame 
Of Olaf Tryggvison then first they knew, 
When thereof spake the townsmen to the crew, 
But therewithal yet other news they heard, 
Which seemed to one and all a heavy word ; 
How that the king, from the old customs turned, 
Now with such zeal toward his new faith burned, 
That thereby nothing else to him was good 
But that all folk should bow before the Rood. 
When Kiartan's coming thitherward betid 
Three ships of Iceland lay there in the Nid, 
Manned by stout men enow ; downcast were these 
Who had been glad enow the king to please ; 
And save their goods, and lives, perchance, withal, 
But knew not how their forefathers to call 
Souls damned forever and ever ; yet they said 
That matters drew so swiftly to a head, 
That when they met the king he passed them by 
With head turned round, or else with threatening eye 
Scowled on them ; " And when Yule-tide comes," said 

they, 

" We look to have from him a settled day 
When we must change our faith or bide the worst." 

" Well," Kiartan said, " this king is not the first 
To think the world is made for him alone, 
Who knows how things will go ere all is done ? 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 281 

God wot, I wish my will done even as he ; 
I hate him not." 

And therewith merrily 

From out the ship the men of Herdholt went ; 
A bright eve was it, and the good town sent 
Thin smoke and blue straight upward through the air, 
For it had rained of late, and here and there 
Sauntered the townsfolk, man and maid and child ; 
Where street met quay a fiddle's sound beguiled 
A knot of listening folk, who no less turned 
And stared hard as the westering sunbeams burned 
Upon the steel and scarlet of that band, 
Whom as ye well may wot, no niggard hand 
Had furnished forth ; so up the long street then, 
Gazing about, well gazed at, went the men, 
A goodly sight. But e'en as they would wend 
About the corner where that street had end, 
High up in air near by 'gan ring a chime 
Whose sweetness seemed to bless e'en that sweet time 
With double .blessing. Kiartan stayed his folk 
When first above his head that sound outbroke, 
And listened smiling, till he heard a sigh 
Close by him, and met Bodli's wandering eye 
That fell before his. 

Softly, Kiartan spake, 

" Now would Gudrun were here e'en for the sake 
Of this sweet sound ! naught have I heard so sweet." 

So on they passed, and turned about the street, 
And saw the great church cast its shadow down 
Upon the low roofs of the goodly town, 
And yet awhile they stayed there marvelling ; 
But therewith heard behind them armor ring, 
And turning, saw a gallant company 
Going afoot, and yet most brave to see, 
Come toward the church, and nigher as they drew 
It was to Kiartan even as if he knew 
One man among them, taller by the head 
Than any there, and clad in kirtle red, ' 
Girt with a sword, with whose gold hilt he played 



282 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

With his left hand, the while his right did shade 

His eyes from the bright sun that 'gainst him blazed, 

As on the band of Icelanders he gazed ; 

Broad-shouldered was he, grand to look upon, 

And in his red beard tangled was the sun 

That lit his bright face up in wrathful wise, 

That fiercer showed his light-gray eager eyes. 

Now ere he came quite close, sidelong he bent 

Unto a man who close beside him went, 

Then turned, and gazed at Kiartan harder yet, 

As he passed by, and therewith their eyes met, 

And Kiartan's heart beat, and his face grew bright, 

His eyes intent as if amidst a fight, 

Yet on his lips a smile was, confident 

Devoid of hate, as by him the man went. 

But Bodli said, " Let us be gone ere day 

Is fully passed, if even yet we may ; 

This is the king, and what then may we do 

'Gainst such a man, a feeble folk and few ? " 

But Kiartan turned upon him loftily, 
And said, " Abide ! I do not look to die 
Ere we get back to Iceland ; one there is, 
Thou know'st, therein, to hold through woe and bliss 
My soul from its departing ; go we then 
And note the way of worship of these men." 

So on that eve about the church they hung, 
And through the open door heard fair things sung, 
And sniffed the incense ; then to ship they went. 

But the next morn 'the king to Kiartan sent 
To bid him come unto the royal hall, 
Where naught but good to him and his should fall ; 
Close by the ship upon the sunny quay 
Was Kiartan, when the man these words did say, 
Amid a ring of Icelanders, who sat 
Upon the bales of unshipped goods : with that 
Kiartan stood up and said unto the man : 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 283 

" Undo thy kirtle if thy worn hands can ! 
Show us thy neck where the king's chain has galled ; 
But tell us not whereby thy sire was called 
Lest some of these should blush go tell the king 
That I left Iceland for another thing 
Than to curse all the dead men of my race, 
To make him merry lengthen not thy face, 
For thou shall tell him therewithal, that I 
Will do him service well and faithfully 
As a free man may do ; else let him take 
What he can get of me for his God's sake." 

Silence there was about him at this word, 
Except that Bodli muttered in his beard : 
" Now certainly a good reward we have, 
In that we cast away what fortune gave, 
Yet doubtless shall our names be bruited far 
When we are dead then, too, no longings are 
For what we may not have." 

So as he came 

The man went, and e'en Kiartan now had blame 
For his rash word. " What will ye, friends ? " he said, 
" The king is wise ; his wrath will well be weighed ; 
He knoweth that we shall not fall for naught. 
Should I speak soft ? why then should we be brought, 
Unarmed belike, and helpless one by one 
Up to the bishop when the feast was done 
What Kalf ! thou say'st, aboard, and let us weigh ? 
Yes, and be overhauled ere end of day 
By the king's long-ships nay, friends, all is well ; 
And at the worst shall be a tale to tell 
Ere all is o'er." 

They hearkened, and cast fear 
Aside awhile ; for death had need be near 
Unto such men for them to heed him aught. 

So the time past, and the king harmed them naught 
And sent no message more to them, and they 
Were lodged within the town, and day by day 
Went here and there in peace, till Yule drew nigh. 



284 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And now folk said the feast would not pass by 
Without some troubling of the ancient faith 
At the king's hands, and war and ugly death 
Drew round the season of the peace on earth 
The angels sang of at that blessed birth. 
But whoso gloomed at tidings men might show, 
It was not Kiartan ; wary was he though, 
And weighed men's speech well ; and upon a day 
He, casting up what this and that might say, 
All Iceland folk into one place did call, 
And when they were assembled in the hall, 
Spake on this wise : 

" Fair fellows, well ye know, 
The saw that says, the wise saves blow by blow; 
This king who lies so heavy on us here 
Is a great man ; his own folk hold him dear, 
For he spares naught to them. Yet ye know well 
That when his might on Hacon's fortune fell, 
Great foes he left alive, and still they live. 
Noble the man is ; but yet who can give 
Good fortune to his foe ? and he must be, 
Despite our good will, still our enemy. 
I grudge it not, for noble seems the chance 
The fortunes of a fair name to advance. 
And so it may be, friends, that we shall free 
The land this tide of the long tyranny 
That Harald Fair-hair laid on it, and give 
Unto all folk beneath just laws to live, 
As in the old days shortly let us go, 
When time shall serve, and to King Olaf show 
That death breeds death ; I say not this same night, 
But hold ye ever ready for the fight, 
And shun the mead-horn : Yule is close anigh 
And the king's folk will drink abundantly ; 
Then light the torch and draw the whetted sword ! 
A great man certes yet I marked this word 
Said by his bishop many words he made 
About a matter small if rightly weighed 
To die is gain this king and I, and ye 
Are young for that, yet so it well may be : 



THE LOVERS OF CUD RUN. 285 

Some of us here are deemed to have done well ; 

How shall it be when folk our story tell 

If we die gray-haired? honor fallen away, 

Good faith lost, kindness perished for a day 

Of little pleasure mingled with great pain 

So will we not unto the Gods complain 

Or draw our mouths awry with foolish hate, 

This king and I, if 'neath the hand of fate 

Sword to sword yet we meet : hearken once more 

It seems the master of this new found lore 

Said to his men once, Think ye that I bring 

Peace upon earth ? nay but a sword O king, 

Behold the sword ready to meet thy sword ! " 

Out sprang his bright steel at that latest word, 
And bright the weapons glittered round about, 
And the roof shook again beneath their shout, 
But only Bodli, silent, pensive, stood, 
As though he heeded naught of bad or good 
In word or deed. But Kiartan, flushed and glad, 
Noted him not, for whatso thought he had, 
He deemed him ever ready in the end 
To follow after as himself should wend. 
Howso that was, now were these men at one, 
That e'en as Kiartan bade it should be done, 
And the king set on, ere on them he fell ; 
So then to meat they gat and feasted well ; 
But the next morn espial should be made 
How best to do the thing that Kiartan bade. 

The next morn came, and other news withal, 
For by a messenger the king did call 
The Icelanders to council in his house, 
Bidding them note, that howso valorous 
They might be, still but little doubt there was 
That lightly he might bring their end to pass 
If need should drive him thereto. " Yet," said he, 
" Fain would I give you peace, though certainly 
This tide but one of two things must ye choose, 
Either naught else but life itself to lose, 



286 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Or else to come and hearken to my words 
In the great hall whereas I see my lords." 

Kiartan gazed round about when this was said, 
Smiling beneath a frown, his face flushed red 
With wrath and shame. " Well," said he, " we are 

caught 

The sluggards' counsel morning brings to naught 
What say ye, shall we hold the feast at home ? 
Hearken, the guests get ready ! shall they come ? " 

For as he spake upon the wind was borne 
Unto' their ears the blast of a great horn, 
And smiled the messenger, and therewithal 
Down from the minster roar of bells did fall, 
Rung back and clashing ; thereon Bodli spake : 

" Thou and I, cousin, for our honor's sake, 
May be content to die ; but what of these ? 
Thy part it is to bring us unto peace 
If it may be ; then, if the worst befall, 
There can we die too, as in Atli's Hall 
The Niblungs fell ; nor worser will it sound 
That thus it was, when we are underground, 
And over there our Gudrun hears the tale." 

Silent sat Kiartan, gazing on the pale 
Set face of Bodli for a while, then turned 
Unto his silent folk, and saw they yearned 
For one chance more of life. 

" Go, man," he said, 

" And tell thy king his will shall be obeyed 
So far as this, that we will come to him ; 
But bid him guard with steel, head, breast, and limb, 
Since as we come, belike, we shall not go, 
And who the end of words begun can know. 
Ho, friends ! do on your war-gear ! Fear ye not, 
Since two good things to choose from have ye got : 
Peace, or a famed death ! " 

Then with both his ears 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN; 287 

Ringing with clink of mail and clash of spears 

The messenger went forth upon his way ; 

And the king knew by spies, the wise ones say, 

What counsel Kiartan gave his folk that eve, 

And had no will in such great hands to leave 

His chance of life or death. Now, armed at last, 

The men of Iceland up the long street passed, 

And saw few men there ; wives and children stood 

Before the doors to gaze, or in his hood 

An elder muttered, as they passed him by, 

Or sad-eyed maids looked on them longingly. 

So came they to the great hall of the king, 

And round about the door there stood a ring 

Of tall men armed, and each a dreaded name ; 

These opened to them as anigh they came, 

And then again drew close, and hemmed them in, 

Nor spared they speech or laughter, and the din 

Was great among them as all silently 

The men of Herdholt passed the door-posts by. 

Then through the hall's dusk Kiartan gazed, and saw 

Small space whereby his company might draw 

Nigh to the king, for there so thick men stood 

That their tall spears were like a wizard's wood. 

Now some way from the da'is must they stand 

Where sat the king, and close to his right hand 

The German bishop, but no heed at all 

The king gave to our folk, as down the hall 

His marshal cried for silence, and the din 

Being quite appeased, in a clear voice and thin 

The holy man 'gan to set forth the faith ; 

But for these men brought nigh the gate of Death, 

Hard was it now to weigh the right and wrong 

Of what he said, that seemed both dull and long. 

So when at last he came unto an end, 
Uprose the King, and o'er the place did send 
A mighty voice : " Now have ye heard the faith, 
And what the High God through his servant saith : 
This is my faith : what say ye to it, then ? " 

Uprose a great shout from King Olaf 's men, 



288 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And clash of tossing spears, and Bodli set 
His hand upon his sword, while Kiartan yet 
Stood still, and, smiling, eyed the King : and he 
Turned on him as the din fell : 

"What say ye, 

What say ye, Icelanders ? thou specially ? 
I call thee yet a year too young to die, 
Son of my namesake ; neither seem'st thou such 
As who would trust in Odin overmuch, 
Or pray long prayers to Thor, while yet thy sword 
Hangs by thy side." 

Now at the king's first word 
Down Kiartan stooped, and 'gan his shoe to lace, 
And a dumb growl went through the crowded place 
Like the far thunder while the sky is bright ; 
But when he rose again and stood upright 
The king cried out : 

" Which man of these is he 
W T ho counselled you to slay no man but me 
Amid my guards ? " 

Kiartan stood forth a space ; 

And said : "E'en so, O king, thou bidd'st him face 
Of his own will, the thing that all men fear, 
Swift death and certain king, the man is here, 
And in his own land, Kiartan Olafson 
Men called him pity that his days are done, 
For fair maids loved him." 

As he said the word 

From out its sheath flamed forth the rover's sword, 
And Bodli was beside him, and the hall 
Was filled with fury now from wall to wall, 
And back to back now stood the Herdholt band, 
Each with his weapon gleaming in his hand. 

Then o'er the clamor was the king's voice heard : 
" Peace, men of mine, too quickly are ye stirred ! 
Do ye not see how that this man and I 
Alone of men still let our sharp swords lie 
Within their sheaths ? Wise is the man to know 
How troublous things among great men will go. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. : 

Speak, Kiartan Olafson ! I offer thee 
That in my court here thou abide with me, 
Keeping what faith thou wilt ; but let me deal 
To these thy fellows either bane or weal, 
As they shall do my bidding." 

Kinglike then," 

Said Kiartan, " dost thou speak about these men ; 
Yea, like a fool, who knowest not the earth, 
And what things thereon bring us woe or mirth ; 
No man there is of these but calls me friend ; 
Yea, and if all truth but this truth should end, 
And sire, and love, and all were false to me, 
Still should I look on my right hand to see 
Bodli the son of Thorleik Come, then, death, 
Thy yokefellow am I." 

* Then from his sheath 

Outsprang his sword, and even therewithal 
Clear rang the Iceland shout amidst the hall, 
And in a short space had the tale been o'er, 
But therewith Olaf stilled the noise once more, 
And smiling said : 

"Thou growest angry, man ! 
Content thee, thou it was the strife began, 
And now thou hast the best of it ; come, then, 
And sit beside me ; thou and thy good men 
Shall go in peace only, bethink thee how 
In idle poet's lies thou needst must trow 
Make no delay to take me by the hand, 
Not meet it is that 'neath me thou shouldst stand." 

To Kiartan's face, pale erst with death, there rose 
A sudden flush, and then his lips, set close, 
And knitted brow, grew soft, and in his eyes 
There came at first a look of great surprise; 
Then kind they grew, and with shamefaced smile 
He looked upon the king a little while, 
Then slowly sank his sword, and, taking it 
By the sharp point, to where the king did sit 
He made his way, and said : 

" Nay, thou hast won ; 
19 



290 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Do thou for me what no man yet has done, 
And take my sword, and leave me weaponless : 
And if thy Christ is one who e'en can bless 
An earthly man, or heed him aught at all, 
On me to let his love and blessing fall ; 
But if nor Christ, nor Odin help, why, then 
Still at the worst are we the sons of men, 
And will we, will we not, yet must we hope, 
And after unknown happiness must grope, 
Since the known fails us, as the elders say ; 
Though sooth, for me, who know no evil day, 
Are all these things but words." 

" Put back thy blade," 
The king said, " Thereof may I be apaid, 
With thee to wield it for me ; and now, come, 
Deem of my land and house e'en as thy home, 
For surely now I know that this thy smile, 
The heart from man or maid can well beguile." 

As the king spake, drew Bodli nigh the place, 
And a strange look withal there crossed his face ; 
It seemed he waited as a man in dread 
What next should come ; but little Kiartan said 
Save thanks unto the king, and gayer now 
Than men had seen him yet, he 'gan to grow. 
Then gave the king command, and presently 
All strife was swallowed of festivity, 
And in all joyance the time slipped away, 
And a fair ending crowned a troublous day. 

Great love there grew 'twixt Kiartan and the king 
From that time forth, and many a noble thing 
Was planned betwixt them ; and ere Yule was o'er 
White raiment in the Minster, Kiartan bore, 
And he and his were hallowed at the font 

Now so I deem it is, that use and wont, 
The lords of men, the masks of many a face, 
Raising the base perchance, somewhat abase 
Those that are wise and noble ; even so 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 291 

O'er Kiartan's head as day by day did go, 
Worthier the king's court, and its ways 'gan seem 
Than many a thing whereof he erst did dream, 
And gay he grew beyond the wont of men. 

Now with the king dwelt Ingibiorg as then, 
His sister ; unwed was she, fair of face, 
Beloved and wise, not lacking any grace 
Of mind or body : often it befell 
That she and Kiartan met, and more than well 
She 'gan to love him ; and he let her love, 
Saying withal, that naught at all might move 
His heart from Gudrun ; and for very sooth 
He might have held that word ; but yet for ruth, 
And a soft pleasure that he would not name 
All unrebuked he let her soft eyes claim 
Kindness from his ; and surely to the king 
This love of theirs seemed a most happy thing, 
And to himself he promised merry days, 
And had in heart so Kiartan's state to raise 
That he should be a king too. 

But meanwhile, 

Silent would Bodli go, without a smile 
Upon his sad changed face from morn to eve ; 
And often now the thronged hall would he leave 
To wander by the borders of the sea, 
Waiting, half dreading, till some news should free 
The band of Icelanders ; most wearily 
Month after month to him the days dragged by. 

For ye shall know that the king looked for news 
Whether the folk of Iceland would refuse, 
At the priest Thangbrand's word, to change their faith. 
A man of violence, the story saith, 
A lecher, and a manslayer tidings came 
While yet the summer at its height did flame, 
And Thangbrand brought it ; little could he do, 
Although indeed two swordsmen stout he slew, 
Unto the holy faith folk's hearts to turn. 
Hall of the Side, as in the tale we learn, 
Gizur the White, and Hialti Skeggison, 



292 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

With some few others, to the faith were won, 
The most of men little these things would heed, 
And some were furious heathens ; so, indeed, 
To save his life he had to flee away. 

Wroth was the king hereat, and now would stay 
The Iceland ships from sailing ; little fain 
Was Kiartan yet to get him back again, 
Since he, forgetting not the former days 
It might be passed his life fulfilled of praise, 
And love, and glory. So the time went on, 
Gizur the White and Hialti Skeggison, 
Fleeing from Iceland in the autumn-tide 
Came out to Norway with the king to bide 
Until the summer came, when they should go 
Once more the truth of Christ's fair lore to show. 
Long ago now of Gudrun and her ways, 
And of the coming of those happy days 
That were to be, had Kiartan ceased to speak 
Unto his friend ; who sullen now and weak, 
Weary with waiting, faint with holding back 
He scarcely knew from what, did surely lack 
Some change of days if yet he was to live. 
Tidings the new-comers to him did give 
From Laxdale, speaking lightly of the thing 
That like a red-hot iron hand did wring 
His weary heart ; Gudrun was fair and well, 
And still at Bathstead in good hope did dwell 
Of Kiartan's swift return. That word or two, 
That name, wrought in him, that at last he knew 
His longing, and intent ; and desolate 
The passing of the days did he await, 
Torn by remorse, tortured by fear, lest yet 
Kiartan the lapse of strange days should forget, 
And take to heart the old familiar days, 
And once more turn him to the bygone ways 
Where they were happy but his fear was vain, 
For if his friend of Iceland had been fain 
Scarce had he gone ; the king would keep him there 
A pledge with other three, till he should hear 
What thing the Icelanders this time would do, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 293 

Nor, as we said, had he good will to go 
Whatso his power was : for so far things went 
With Ingibiorg, that folk with one consent 
Named her his bride that was to be, and said, 
That sure a nobler pair were never wed. 

And so the time passed, till the day came round 
When at the quay the ships lay Iceland-bound, 
And Bodli went to bid his friend farewell, 
Flushed and bright-eyed, for wild hope, sooth to tell, 
Had striven with shame, and cast its light on love, 
Until a fairer sky there seemed above, 
A fairer earth about, and still most fair 
The fresh green sea that was to bring him there, 
Whereon his heart was set. 

"Ogay ! O gay !" 

Said Kiartan, " thou art glad to go away ; 
This is the best face I have seen on thee 
Since first our black oars smote the Burgfirth sea." 

But as he spake a dark flush and a frown 
Swallowed up Bodli's smile ; he cast adown 
His eager eyes : " Thou art as glad to stay, 
Belike," he said, "as I to go away. 
What thinkest thou I plot against thee then ? " 

" Thou art the strangest of the sons of men," 
Said Kiartan, with a puzzled look. " Come now, 
Leave off thy riddles, clear thy troubled brow, 
And let me think of thee as in time past, 
When ever a most merry lad thou wast ! 
Why talkest thou of plotting ? True and leal 
I deem thee ever as the well-tried steel 
That hangs beside thee ; neither cross at all 
Our fond desires. Though whatso thing may fall 
Still shall I trust thee." 

His own face grew grave 
As o'er his heart there swept a sudden wave 
Of the old thoughts. But Bodli said, " O friend, 
Forgive my face fair looks and foul : I wend 



294 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Back to our kin and land, that gladdens me. 
I leave thee here behind across the sea, 
That makes me sad and sour." 

He did not raise 

His eyes up midst his words, or meet the gaze 
Kiartan bent on him, till again he said : 
" Olaf shall hear of all the goodlihead 
Thou gainest here. Thy brethren shall be glad 
That thou such honor from all men hast had. 
Oswif the Wise no doubt I soon shall see 
What shall I say to him ? " 

Then steadily 

Gazed Kiartan on him. " Tell Gudrun all this 
Thou knowest of, my honor and my bliss ; 
Say we shall meet again ! " 

No more they spake, 

But kissed and parted ; cither's heart did ache 
A little while with thought of the old days ; 
Then Bodli to the future turned his gaze, 
Unhappy and remorseful, knowing well 
How ill his life should go whate'er befell. 
But Kiartan, left behind, being such a man 
As through all turns of fortune never can 
Hold truce with fear or sorrow, lived his life 
Not ill content with all the change and strife. 

Fair goes the ship that beareth out Christ's truth, 
Mingled of hope, of sorrow, and of ruth, 
And on the prow Bodli the Christian stands, 
Sunk deep in thought of all the many lands 
The world holds, and the folk that dwell therein, 
And wondering why that grief and rage and sin 
Was ever wrought ; but wondering most of all 
Why such wild passion on his heart should fall 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 295 



Bodli brings Tidings to Bathstead. 

NOW so it chanced, on a late summer day, 
Unto the west would Osvvif take his way 
With all his sons, and Gudrun listlessly 
Stood by the door their going forth to see, 
Until the hill's brow hid them ; then she turned, 
And long she gazed, the while her full heatt yearned 
Toward Herdholt and the south. 

" Late grows the year," 
She said, " and winter cometh with its fear 
And dreams of dying hopes. Ah me, I change, 
And my heart hardens ! Will he think me strange 
When he beholds this face of mine at last, 
Or shall our love make naught of long days past, 
Burn up the sights that we apart have seen, 
And make them all as though they had not been ? 
Ah, the hard world ! I, who in hope so sure 
Have waited, scarcely may the days endure. 
How has it been with those who needs must wait 
With dying hope and lingering love, till hate, 
The seed of ill lies, told and hearkened to, 
The knot of loving memories shall undo, 
Break the last bonds of love, and cast them forth 
With nothing left to them of joy or worth ? 

O love, come back, come back, delay no more 
To ease thine aching heart that yearneth sore 
For me, as mine for thee ! Leave wealth and praise 
For those to win who know no happy days. 
Come, though so true thou art, thou fearest not 
Yet to delay ! Come, my heart waxes hot 
For all thy lonely days to comfort thee." 

So spake she, and awhile stood quietly, 
Still looking toward the south, her wide gray eyes 
Made tenderer with those thronging memories, 
Until upon the wind she seemed to hear 
The sound of horse-hoofs, and 'twixt hope and fear 
She trembled, as more clear the far sounds grew, 



296 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And thitherward it seemed from Herdholt drew ; 

So now at last to meet that sound she went, 

Until her eyes, on the hill's brow intent, 

Beheld a spear rising against the sky 

O'er the gray road, and therewith presently 

A gilded helm rose up beneath the spear, 

And then her trembling limbs no more might bear 

Her body forward ; scarce alive she stood, 

And saw a man in raiment red as blood 

Rise o'er the hill's brow, who when he did gain 

The highest part of the gray road, drew rein 

To gaze on Bathstead spreading 'neath him there, 

Its bright vanes glittering in the morning air. 

She stared upon him panting, and belike 

He saw her now, for he his spurs did strike 

Into his horse, and, while her quivering face 

Grew hard and stern, rode swiftly to the place 

Whereas she stood, and clattering leapt adown 

Unto the earth, and met her troubled frown 

And pale face, with the sad imploring eyes 

Of Bodli Thorleikson. 

Then did there rise 

A dreadful fear within her heart, for she 
No look like that in him was wont to see ; 
Scarce had she strength to say: 

" How goes it then, 
With him thy kinsman, mid the Eastland men ? " 

Then, writhen as with some great sudden sting 
Of pain, he spake : " Fear not, Gudrun, I bring 
Fair news of his well-doing he is well." 

" Speak out," she said, " what more there is to tell ! 
Is he at Herdholt ? will he come to-day ? " 

And with that word she turned her face away, 
Shamed with the bitter-sweet of yearning pain, 
And to her lips the red blood came again ; 
But he a moment made as he would reach 
His hand to hers, his sad eyes did beseech 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 297 

Some look from hers, so blind to him, so blind! 
And scarce his story might he call to mind, 
Until he deemed he saw her shoulders heave 
As with a sob. 

Then said he, " We did leave 
Kiartan in Norway, praised of all men there ; 
He bade me tell thee that his life was fair 
And full of hope and that he looked to see 
Thy face again. So God be good to me, 
These were the words he spake ! " 

For now she turned 

Tearless upon him, and great anger burned 
Within her eyes : " O trusty messenger, 
No doubt through thee his very voice I hear ! 
Sure but light thought and stammering voice he had 
To waste on one, who used to make him glad ! 
Thou art a true friend ! Ah, I know thee, then, 
A follower on the footsteps of great men, 
To reap where they have sowed. Alive and well! 
And doing deeds whereof the skalds shall tell ! 
Ah, what fair days he heapeth up for me ! 
Come now, unless thine envy stayeth thee, 
Speak more of him, and make me glad at heart ! " 

Then Bodli said, " Nay, I have done my part, 
Let others tell the rest " and turned to go, 
Yet lingered, and she cried aloud : 

" No, no, 

Friend of my lover ! if ill words I spake 
Yet pardon me ! for sore my heart doth ache 
With pent-up love." 

She reached her hand to him, 
He turned and took it, and his eyes did swim 
With tears for him and her ; awhile it seemed, 
As though the dream so many a sweet night dreamed, 
Waked from with anguish on so many a morn, 
Were come to pass, that he afresh was born 
To happy life, with heavens and earth made new; 
But slowly from his grasp her hand she drew, 
And stepped aback, and said : 



298 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Speak, I fear not, 

Because so true a heart my love hath got 
That naught can change it; speak, when cometh he ? 
Tell me the sweet words that he spake of me, 
Did he not tell me in the days agone, 
That oft he spake of me to thee alone ? 
Nay, tell me of his doings, for indeed 
Of words 'twixt him and me is little need." 

Then Bodli 'gan in troubled voice to tell 
True tidings of the things that there befell, 
Saving of Ingibiorg, and Gudrun stood 
And hearkened, trembling : 

" Good, yea, very good," 
She said, when he had done, " and yet I deem 
All this thou say'st as if we dreamed a dream ; 
Nor cam'st thou here to say but this to me 
Why tarrieth Kiartan yet beyond the sea?" 

Bodli flushed red, and, trembling sorely, spake : 
' O Gudrun, must thou die for one man's sake, 
So heavenly as thou art? What shall I say ? 
Thou mayst live long, yet never see the day 
That bringeth Kiartan back unto this land." 

He looked at her, but moveless did she stand, 
Nor spake a word, nor yet did any pain 
Writhe her fair face, grown deadly pale again. 
Then Bodli stretched his hand forth : 

"Yet they lie, 

Who say I did the thing, who say that I, 
E'en in my inmost heart, have wished for it. 
But thou O, hearken, Gudrun he doth sit 
By Ingibiorg's side ever ; day by day, 
Sadder his eyes grow when she goes away 
What ) know I not the eyes of lovers then-? 
Why should I tell thee of the talk of men, 
Babbling of how he weds her, is made king, 
How he and Olaf shall have might to bring 
Denmark and England both beneath their rule. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 299 

Ah, woe, woe, woe, that I, a bitter fool, 
Upon one heart all happy life should stake ; 
Woe is me, Gudrun, for thy beauty's sake ! 
Ah, for my fool's eyes and my greedy heart 
Must all rest henceforth from my soul depart ? " 

He reached his hand to her, she put it by, 
And gathered up her gown-skirts hurriedly, 
And in a voice, like a low wailing wind, 
Unto the wind she cried : 

" Still may he find 
A woman worthy of his loveliness ; 
Still may it be that she his days will bless, 
As I had done, had we been wed at last ! " 

Therewith by Bodli's trembling hands she passed, 
Nor gave one look on him ; but he gazed still, 
E'en when her gown fluttered far down the hill, 
With staring eyes upon the empty place 
Where last he saw the horror of her face 
Changed by consuming anguish ; when he turned, 
Blind with the fire that in his worn heart burned, 
Empty the hillside was of any one, 
And as a man who some great crime hath done 
He gat into his saddle, and scarce knew 
Whither he went, until his rein he drew 
By Herdholt porch, as in the other days, 
When Kiartan by his side his love would praise. 

Three days at Herdholt in most black despair 
Did Bodli sit, till folk 'gan whisper there 
That the faith-changer on the earth was dead, 
Although he seemed to live ; with mighty dread 
They watched his going out and coming in ; 
On the fourth day somewhat did hope begin 
To deal, as its wont is, with agony ; 
And he, who truly at the first could see 
What dreadful things his coming days did wait, 
Now, blinded by the hand of mocking fate, 



300 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Deeming that good from evil yet might rise, 
Once more to pleasure lifted up his eyes. 

And now, to nurse his hope, there came that day 
A messenger from Gudrun, who did pray 
That he would straightly come and see her there. 
At whose mazed face a long while did he stare 
As one who heard not, and the man must speak 
His message thrice, before a smile 'gan break 
Over his wan face ; neither did he say 
A word in answer, but straight took his way 
O'er rough and smooth to Bathstead, knowing not 
What ground his horse beneath his hoofs had got 

Ah, did he look for pleasure, when he saw 
Her long slim figure down the dusk hall draw 
Unto his beating heart, as nobly clad 
As in the days when all the three were glad ? 
Did he perchance deem that he might forget 
The man across the sea ? His eyes were wet 
For pity of that heart so made forlorn, 
But on his lips a smile, of pleasure born, 
Played, that I deem perchance he knew not of, 
As he reached out his hand to touch his love 
Long ere she drew anigh. But now, when she 
Was close to him, and therewith eagerly, 
Trembling and wild-eyed, he beheld the face 
He deemed e'en then would gladden all the place, 
Blank grew his heart, and all hope failed in him, 
And e'en the anguish of his love grew dim, 
And poor it seemed, a thing of little price, 
Before the gathered sorrow of her eyes. 

But while, still trembling there, the poor wretch stood, 
She spoke in a low voice that chilled his blood, 
So worn and far away it seemed : " See now, 
I sent for thee, who of all men doth know 
The heart of him who once swore troth to me : 
Kiartan, I mean, the son of Olaf, he 
Who o'er the sea wins great fame as thou say'st 
That thou mayst tell again, why he doth waste 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 301 

The tale of happy days that we shall have ; 
For death comes quickly on us, and the grave 
Is a dim land whereof I know not aught." 

As a gray dove, within the meshes caught, 
Flutters a little, then lies still again 
Ere wildly beat its wings with its last pain, 
So once or twice her passion, as she spake, 
Rose to her throat, and yet might not outbreak 
Till that last word was spoken ; then as stung 
By pain on pain, her arms abroad she flung, 
And wailed aloud ; but dry-eyed Bodli stood 
Pale as a corpse, and in such haggard mood, 
Such helpless, hopeless misery, as one 
Who first in hell meets her he hath undone. 
Yet sank her wailing in a little while, 
Through dreadful sobs to silence, and a smile, 
A feeble memory of the courteous ways, 
For which in days agone she won such praise, 
Rose to her pale lips, and she spake once more 
As if the passionate words, cast forth before, 
Were clean forgotten, with that bitter wail : 

" O Bodli Thorleikson, of good avail 
Thou ever art to me, and now hast come 
Swiftly indeed unto a troubled home : 
F"or ill at ease I am, and fain would hear 
From thee who know him, why this looked-for year 
Lacks Kiartan still." 

He knew not what to say, 
But she reached out her hand in the old way 
And coldly palm met palm : then him she led 
Unto a seat, and sat by him, and said : 

"Yea, fain am I to hear the tale once more, 
The shame and grief, although it hurt me sore ; 
Yea, from thee, Bodli ; though it well may be 
That he I trusted, too much trusted thee." 

So great a burden on his spirit lay 



302 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

He heeded not the last words she did say, 
But in low measured speech began again 
The story of the honor and the gain 
That Kiartan had, and how his days went now ; 
She sat beside him, with her head bent low, 
Hearkening, or hearkening not ; but now when all 
Was done, and he sat staring at the wall 
Silent, and full of misery, then she said : 

" How know I yet but thou the tale hast made, 
Since many a moment do I think of now 
In the old time before ye went, when thou 
Wouldst look on me, as on him I should gaze 
If he were here, false to the happy days ?" 

" A small thing," said he, " shall I strive with fate 
In vain, or vainly pray against thy hate ? 
Would God I were a liar ! that his keel 
E'en now the sands of White- River did feel. 
O Gudrun, Gudrun, thou shall find it true ! 
Ah, God, what thing is left for me to do ? " 

Therewith he rose, and towards the hall-door went, 
Nor heard her voice behind him, as she bent 
O'er the tear-wetted rushes of the floor. 
Sick-hearted was he when he passed the door, 
Weary of all things, weary of his love, 
And muttering to himself hard things thereof; 
But when he reached the Herdholt porch again, 
A heaven long left seemed that morn's bitter pain, 
And one desire alone he had, that he 
Once more anigh unto his love might be ; 
Honor and shame, truth, lies, and weal and woe, 
Seemed idle words whose meaning none might know; 
What was the world to him with all its ways, 
If he once more into her eyes might gaze ? 

Again he saw her, not alone this tide, 
But in the hall, her father by her side, 
And many folk around : if like a dream 
All things except her loveliness did seem, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 303 

Yet doubt ye not that evil shades they were ; 
A dream most horrible for him to bear, 
That all his strength was fallen to weakness now, 
That he the sweet repose might never know 
Of being with her from all the world apart, 
Eyes watching eyes, heart beating unto heart. 
Cold was her face, not pensive as before, 
And like a very queen herself she bore 
Among the guests, and courteous was to all, 
But no kind look on Bodli's face did fall, 
Though he had died to gain it. 

So time wore, 

And still he went to Bathstead more and more, 
And whiles alone, and whiles in company 
With raging heart her sad face did he see, 
And still the time he spent in hall and bower 
Beside her, did he call the evillest hour 
Of all the day, the while it dured ; but when 
He was away, came hope's ghost back again 
And fanned his miserable longing, till 
He said within himself that naught was ill 
Save that most hideous load of loneliness. 
Howso the time went, never rest did bless 
His heart a moment; naught seemed good to him, 
Not e'en the rest of death, unknown and dim. 

And Kiartan came not, and what news came out 
From Norway was a gravestone on such doubt 
As yet might linger in the hearts of men, 
That he perchance might see that land again. 
And no more now spake Gudrun any word 
Of Kiartan, until folk with one accord 
Began to say, how that no little thing 
It was, those two great strains of men to bring 
Into alliance : " Pity though ! " they said, 
" That she to such a strange man should IDC wed 
As Bodli Thorleikson of late hath grown ! " 



So sprung the evil crop by evil sown. 



304 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



Kiartarfs Farewell to Norway. 

MEANWHILE to Kiartan far across the sea, 
Unto all seeming, life went merrily ; 
Yet none the less the lapse of days would bring 
Unto his frank heart something of a sting, 
And Bodli's sad departing face and word, 
Not wholly thrust out from his memory, stirred 
Doubts of the changing days in Kiartan's mind, 
And scarce amid his joyance might he find 
The happy days he ever looked to have, 
Till he were lying silent in his grave. 
And somewhat more distraught now would he take 
The gentle words that the king's sister spake, 
And look into her eyes less fervently, 
And less forget the world when she drew nigh, 
And start and look around as her soft hand 
Fell upon his, as though a ghost did stand 
Anigh him, and he feared to hear it speak. 

And Ingibiorg for her part, grown too weak 
Against the love she had for him, to strive, 
Yet knew no less whither the days did drive 
Her wasted life ; and, seeing him as oft 
As she might do, and speaking sweet and soft, 
When they twain were together : smiling, too, 
Though fast away the lovesome time did go, 
Wept long through lonely hours, nor cast away 
From out her heart thought of the coming day, 
When all should be as it had never been, 
And the wild sea should roll its waves between 
His gray eyes and her weary useless tears. 

But while she brooded o'er the coming years 
Empty of love, and snatched what joy there was 
Yet left to her? great tidings came to pass ; 
For late the summer after Bodli sailed, 
News came, that now at last had Christ prevailed 
In Iceland ; that the Hill of Laws had heard 
Sung through the clear air many a threatening word, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 305 

And seen the weapons gather for the fight ; 
Till Snorri's wiles, Hall's wisdom, Gizur's might, 
And fears of many men, and wavering doubt 
On the worse side, had brought it so about 
That now Christ's faith was law to every one : 
The learned say, a thousand years agone 
Since the cold shepherds in the winter night 
Beheld and heard the angels' fresh delight. 

King Olaf 's heart swelled at such news as these, 
Straightway he sent for the four hostages, 
And bade them with good gifts to go their ways 
If so they would ; or stay and gather praise 
And plenteous honor there ; and as he spake 
He glanced at Kiartan, and a smile did break 
Across his kingly face, as who would say, 
" Thou at the least wilt scarcely go away." 
But Kiartan answered not the smile, but stood 
Grave with deep thought, and troubled in his mood, 
Until he saw his fellows looked that he 
Should speak for all ; then said he presently : 

" Thanks have thou, King, for all that thou hast done 
To us, and the great honor I have won 
At thine hands here ; yet be not angry, King, 
If still we thank thee most for this one thing, 
That here thou stay'st us not against our will ; 
Thicker is blood than water, say I still ; 
This is the third year since I left my kin 
And land and other things that dwell therein." 

The king's face fell, and in sharp words, and few 
He answered : " Well, a gift I gave to you ; 
And will not take it back Go, Kiartan, then, 
And, if thou canst, find kinder, truer men, 
And lovelier maids in thy land than in this ! " 

But Kiartan said, " King, take it not amiss ! 
Thou knowest I have ever said to thee, 
That I must one day go across the sea ; 
Belike I shall come back upon a tide, 
20 



306 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And show thee such a wonder of a bride 

As earth holds not, nay nor the heavens, I deem." 

" God send thee a good ending to thy dream ; 
Yet my heart cries that if thou goest from me, 
Thy pleasant face I never more shall see ; 
Be merry then, while fate will have it so ! " 

So therewith unto high feast did they go, 
And by the king sat Kiartan, and the day 
'Twixt merry words and sad thoughts wore away. 

Now were the ships got ready, and the wares 
Drawn for long months past from the upland fairs 
Were laid a-shipboard. Kalf was skipper still 
Of Kiartan's ship, for never had he will 
To leave his side. Now restless Kiartan was, 
And longed full sore for these last days to pass, 
For in his heart there lurked a spark of fear, 
Nor any word of Gudrun might he hear 
From those who brought the news of change of faith, 
Since nigh the fleet they dwelt, my story saith, 
In the south country, and knew naught at all 
Of what in Laxdale late had chanced to fall. 

Now by their bridges lay the laden ships, 
And he now at the last must see the lips 
Of Ingibiorg grow pale with their farewell, 
And sick at heart he grew, for, sooth to tell, 
He feared her sorrow much, and furthermore 
He loved her with a strange love very sore, 
Despite the past and future. So he went 
Sad-eyed amid the hall's loud merriment 
Unto her bower on that last morn of all. 

Alone she was, her head against the wall 
Had fallen ; her heavy eyes were shut when he 
Stood on the threshold ; she rose quietly, 
Hearing the clash of arms, and took his hand, 
And thus with quivering lips awhile did stand 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 307 

Regarding him : but he made little sliow 
Of manliness, but let the hot tears flow 
Fast o'er his cheeks. At last she spake : 

"Weep then! 

If thou who art the kindest of all men 
Must sorrow for me, yet more glad were I 
To see thee leave my bower joyfully 
This last time ; that when o'er thee sorrow came, 
And thought of me therewith, thou mightst not blame 
My little love for ever saddening thee. 
Love ! let me say love once great shalt thou be, 
Beloved of all, and dying ne'er forgot. 
Farewell ! farewell ! farewell ! and think thou not 
That in my heart there lingers any hate 
Of her who through these years for thee did wait, 
A weary waiting three long, long, long years, 
Well over now ; nay when of me she hears, 
Fain were I she should hate me not. Behold, 
Here is a coif, well wrought of silk and gold 
By folk of Micklegarth, who had no thought 
Of thee or me, and thence by merchants brought 
Who perchance loved not. Is Gudrun too fair 
To take this thing, a queen might long to wear ? 
Upon the day when on the bench ye sit, 
Hand held in hand, crown her fair head with it, 
And tell her whence thou hadst it. Ah, farewell, 
Lest of mine eyes thou shouldst have worse to tell 
Than now thou hast ! " 

Therewith she turned from him 
And took the coif, wherein the gold was dim 
With changing silken threads, the linen white 
Scarce seen amid the silk and gold delight. 
With hands that trembled little did she fold 
The precious thing, and set its weight of gold 
Within a silken bag ; and then to his 
She reached her hands, and in one bitter kiss 
Tasted his tears, while a great wave of thought 
Of what sweet things the changed years might have 

brought 
Swept over her and then she knew him gone, 



308 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And yet for all that scarcely felt more lone 
Than for a many days past she had felt. 
So with fixed eyes she drew into her belt 
Her kirtle, and to this and that thing turned 
With heart that ever for the long rest yearned. 

Bearing that gift, but heeding not what thing 
He had with him, came Kiartan to the king, 
Who in the porch abode him, his great men 
Standing around ; then said he : 

" Welcome then 

This last day that I see thee ; go we forth, 
Fair lords, and see his ship's head greet the north, 
For seldom from the north shall any come 
Like unto him to greet us in our home." 

So forth they went, and all the Iceland men 
Gat them aboard, and skipper Kalf by then 
Stood midway on the last bridge, while the king 
'Gan say to Kiartan : 

" Many a treasured thing 
Had I laid down, O friend, to keep thee here, 
But since the old thing still must be more dear 
Than the new thing, to such men as thou art, 
Now, with my good-will, to thy love depart, 
And leave me here the coming woes to meet 
Without thee. May thy life be fair and sweet, 
Nor yet drag on till present days are naught, 
And all the past days a tormenting thought ! 
Take this last gift of me ; a noble sword, 
Which if thou dost according to my word, 
Shall never leave thy side ; for who can know 
Ere all is o'er, how madly things may go." 

So Kiartan took the sword, and thanked the king, 
With no light heart, for that and everything 
That at his hands he had, and therewith crossed 
The gangway ; s'horeward were the hawsers tossed, 
The long sweeps smote the water, and the crew 



THE LOVERS OF CUD RUN. 309 

Shouted their last farewell ; the white sail drew, 
'Twixt Norway and the stern, swept in the sea. 

There stood the king, and long time earnestly 
Looked on the lessening ship ; then said at last, 
As o'er his knitted brow his hand he passed : 
" Go thy ways, Kiartan ; great thou art indeed, 
And great thy kin are, nathless shall thou need 
Stout heart enough to meet what waiteth thee 
If aught mine eyes of things to come may see." 



Kiartan back in Iceland; Refna comes into the Tale. 

T/"IARTAN and Kalf in Burgfirth came aland 
JX. And raised their tents anigh unto the strand, 
As in the summer-tide the fashion was 
Of mariners, the while the news did pass 
That they were come out, through the country-side, 
And there awhile that summer would abide. 
Now when to Herdholt did that tidings come, 
Olaf and all his sons were gone from home : 
So Kiartan saw them not at first, among 
The folk that to the new-comers did throng ; 
Amidst the first of whom, he, none the less, 
Noted his friend Gudmund of Asbiornsness, 
Who to his sister Thurid now was wed, 
And brought her with him ; with all goodlihead 
He greeted them, yet Kiartan deemed that they 
Looked on him strangely ; on the self-same day 
Kalf's father, Asgeir, came, and brought with him 
Refna, his daughter, fair of face and limb, 
Dark-haired, great-eyed, and gentle : timidly 
She gazed at Kiartan as he drew anigh 
And gave her welcome. 

Now as he began 

To ask them news of this and that good man, 
And how he fared, Thurid with anxious face 
Came up to him, and drew him from the place, 



310 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Saying, " Come, talk with me apart awhile ! " 

He followed after with a puzzled smile, 

Yet his heart felt as something ill drew near. 

So, when they came where none their speech might 

hear, 

Thurid turned round about on him, and said : 
" Brother, amidst thy speech, I shook with dread 
Lest Gudrun's name from out thy lips should burst ; 
How was it then thou spak'st not of her first ? " 

Then Kiartan, trembling, said, " Indeed, I thought 
That news of ill unasked would soon be brought 
Sister, what ails thee then is my love dead ? " 

" Nay," Thurid stammered, "she is well and wed." 

"What!" cried out Kiartan, "and the Peacock's 

house ? 

I used to deem my brothers valorous, 
My father a great man and Bodli's sword, 
Where was it midst this shame ? " 

Scarce was the word 
Out of his lips, ere, looking on her face, 
He turned and staggered wildly from the place, 
Crying aloud, "O blind, O blind, O blind ! 
Where is the world I used to deem so kind, 
So loving to me ? O Gudrun, Gudrun, 
Here I come back with all the honor won 
We talked of, that thou saidst thou knewest well 
Was but for thee to whom then shall I tell 
The tale of that well-doing ? And thou, friend, 
How might I deem that aught but death should end 
Our love together ? yea, and even now, 
How shall I learn to hate thee, friend, though thou 
Art changed into a shadow and a lie? 
O ill day of my birth, ill earth and sky, 
Why was I then bemocked with days of bliss 
If still the ending of them must be this ? 
O wretch, that once wast happy, days agone, 
Before thou wert so wretched and alone, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 311 

How on unhappy faces wouldst thou look 
And scarce with scorn and ruth their sorrow brook ! 
Now then at last thou knowest of the earth, 
And why the elders look askance on mirth." 

Some paces had he gone from where she stood, 
Gazing in terror on his hapless mood, 
And now she called his name ; he turned about, 
And far away he heard the shipmen's shout 
And beat of the sea, and from the down there came 
The bleat 01 ewes ; and all these, and his name, 
And the sights too, the green down 'neath the sun, 
The white strand and the far-off hillsides dun, 
And white birds wheeling, well-known things did seem, 
But pictures now or figures in a dream, 
With all their meaning lost. Yet therewithal 
Cn his vexed spirit did the new thought fall 
How weak and helpless and alone he was. 
Then gently to his sister did he pass, 
And spake : 

" Now is the world clean changed for me 
In this last minute, yet indeed I see 
That still will it go on for all my pain ; 
Come then, my sister, let us back again ; 
I must meet folk, and face the life beyond, 
And, as I may, walk 'neath the dreadful bond 
Of ugly pain such men our fathers were, 
Not lightly bowed by any weight of care." 

She smiled upon him kindly, and they went 
And found folk gathered in the biggest tent, 
And busied o'er the wares, and gay enow 
In outward seeming ; though ye well may know 
Folk dreaded much for all the country's sake 
In what wise Kiartan this ill news would take. 
Now Kalf had brought the gayest things to show 
The women-folk, and by a bale knelt now 
That Kiartan knew right well, and close by him 
Sat Refna, with her dainty hand and slim 
Laid on a broidered bag, her fair head crowned 



312 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

With that rich coif thereafter so renowned 

In Northland story. As he entered there 

She raised to him her deep gray eyes, and fair 

Half-opened mouth, and blushed blood-red therewith ; 

And inwardly indeed did Kiartan writhe 

With bitter anguish as his eyes did meet 

Her bright-flushed gentle face so pure and sweet ; 

And he thenceforth to have no lot or part 

In such fair things ; yet struggling with his heart 

He smiled upon her kindly. Pale she grew 

When the flush passed, as though in sooth she knew 

What sickness ailed him. 

" Be not wroth," she said, 
" That I have got this queen's gift on my head, 
I bade them do it not." 

Then wearily 

He answered : " Surely it beseemeth thee 
Right well, and they who set it there did right. 
Rich were the man who owned the maiden bright, 
And the bright coif together ! " 

As he spake 

Wandered his eyes ; so sore his heart did ache 
That not for long those matters might he note ; 
Yet a glad flush again dyed face and throat 
Of Refna, and she said : " So great and famed, 
So fair and kind ! where shall the maid be named 
To say no to thine asking ? " 

Once again 

All pale she grew, for stung by sudden pain 
Kiartan turned round upon the shrinking maid, 
And, laughing wildly, with a scowl he said : 
" All women are alike to me all good 
All blessings on this fair earth by the rood ! " 

Then silence fell on all, yet he began 
Within a while to talk to maid and man 
Mildly as he was wont, and through the days 
That they abode together in that place 
Seemed little changed ; and so his father thought 
When he to him at last his greeting brought, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. ' 313 

And bade him home to Herdholt. So they rode, 
Talking of many things, to his abode, 
Nor naming Gudrun aught. Thus Kiartan came 
Back to his father's house, grown great of fame, 
And tidingless a while day passed by day 
What hearts soe'er 'neath sorrow's millstone lay. 



Tidings brought to Bathstead of Kiartan's coming 
back. 

YES, there the hills stood, there Lax-River ran 
Down to the sea ; still thrall and serving-man 
Came home from fold and hayfield to the hall, 
And still did Olaf's cheery deep voice call 
Over the mead-horns ; danced the fiddle-bow, 
And twanged the harp-strings, and still sweet enow 
Were measured words, as some one skilled in song 
Told olden tales of war, and love, and wrong. 
And Bodli's face from hall and board was gone, 
And Gudrun's arms were round him, as alone 
They lay, all unrebuked that hour, unless 
The dawn, that glimmered on the wretchedness 
Of Kiartan's lone and sleepless night, should creep 
Cold-footed o'er their well-contented sleep, 
And whisper, " Sleep on, lapse of time is here 
Death's brother, and the very Death is near ! " 

Such thoughts might haunt the poor deserted man, 
When through the sky dawn's hopeless shiver ran, 
And bitterness grew in him, as the day, 
Cleared of fantastic half-dreams, cold and gray, 
Was bared before him. Yet I deem, indeed, 
That they no less of pity had good need. 
Yea, had his eyes beheld that past high-tide 
At Bathstead, where sat Gudrun as a bride 
By Bodli Thorleikson ! Her face of yore 
So swift to change, as changing thoughts passed o'er 
Her eager heart, set now into a smile 



3H THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That scarce the fools of mankind might beguile 

To deeming her as happy : his, once calm 

With dreamy happiness, that would embalm 

Into sweet memory things of yesterday, 

And show him pictures of things far away, 

Now drawn, and fierce, and anxious, still prepared 

It seemed, to meet the worst his worn heart feared. 

A dismal wedding ! every ear at strain 
Some sign of things that were to be to gain ; 
A guard on every tongue lest some old name 
Should set the poisoned smouldering pile aflame. 
Silent the fierce dull sons of Oswif drank, 
And Olaf back into his high seat shrank, 
And seemed aged wearily, the while his sons 
Glanced doubtfully at Bodli ; more than once 
Did one of them begin some word to speak, 
And catch his father's eye, and then must break 
His speech off with a smile not good or kind ; 
And in mean while the wise would fain be blind 
To all these things, or cover boisterously 
The seeds of ill they could not fail to see. 

But if 'neath all folk's eyes things went e'en so, 
How would it be then with the hapless two 
The morrow of that feast ? This know I well, 
That upon Bodli the last gate of hell 
Seemed shut at last, and no more like a star 
Far off perchance, yet bright however far, 
Shone hope of better days ; yet he lived on, 
And soon indeed, the worst of all being won, 
And gleams of frantic pleasure therewithal, 
A certain quiet on his soul did fall, 
As though he saw the end and waited it. 
But over Gudrun changes wild would flit, 
And sometimes stony would she seem to be ; 
And sometimes would she give short ecstasy 
To Bodli with a fit of seeming love ; 
And sometimes as repenting sore thereof, 
Silent the livelong day would sit and stare, 
As though she knew some ghost were drawing near, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 315 

And ere it came with all the world must break, 
That she might lose no word it chanced to speak. 

So slowly led the changed and weary days 
Unto the gateway of the silent place, 
Where either rest or utter change shall be ; 
But on an eve, when summer peacefully 
Yielded to autumn, as men sat in hall 
Two wandering churls old Oswif forth did call 
Into the porch, and asked for shelter there. 
And since unheeded none might make such prayer, 
Soon mid the boisterous house-carles were they set, 
The ugly turns of fortune to forget 
In mirth and ease, and still with coarse rude jest 
They pleased the folk, and laughed out with the best. 
But while the lower hall of mirth was full 
More than their wont the great folk there were dull ; 
Oswif was sunk in thought of other days, 
And Gudrun's tongue idly some tale did praise 
Her brother Ospak told, the while her heart 
Midst vain recurring hopes was set apart ; 
And Bodli looked as though he still did bide 
The coming fate it skilled no more to hide 
From his sore wearied heart : no more there were 
Upon the dais that eve : but when the cheer 
Was over now, old Oswif went his ways, 
But Ospak sat awhile within his place 
Staring at Bodli with a look of scorn ; 
For much he grew to hate that face forlorn, 
Bowed down with cares he might not understand. 

At last midst Gudrun's talk, with either hand 
Stretched out did Ospak yawn, and cried aloud 
Unto the lower table's merry crowd : 
" Well fare ye, fellows ! ye are glad to-night ; 
What thing is it that brings you such delight ? 
We be not merry here." 

Then one stepped forth, 
And said : " Sooth, Ospak, but of little worth 
Our talk was ; yet these wandering churls are full 



316 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Of meat and drink, and need no rope to pull 
Wild words and gleesome from them." 

" Bring them here," 
Said Ospak, " they may mend our doleful cheer." 

So from the lower end they came, ill-clad, 
Houseless, unwashen, yet with faces glad, 
If for a while ; yet somewhat timorous, too, 
With such great men as these to have to do, 
Although to fear was drink a noble shield. 

" Well, fellows, what fair tidings are afield ? " 
Said Ospak, " and whence come ye ? " 

The first man 

Turned leering eyes on Bodli's visage wan, 
And o'er his face there spread a cunning grin. 
But just as he his first word would begin, 
The other, drunker, and a thought more wise, 
Maybe for that, said, screwing up his eyes, 
" Say-all-you-know shall go with clouted head." 

" Say-naught-at-all is beaten," Ospak said, 
" If, with his belly full of great men's meat, 
He has no care to make his speeches sweet." 

" Be not wroth, son of Oswif," said the first ; 
" Now I am full I care not for the worst 
That haps to-night ; yet Mistress Gudrun there " 

" Tush ! " said the second, " thou art full of care 
For a man full of drink. Come, let her say 
That as we came so shall we go away, 
And all is soon told." 

Ospak laughed thereat, 
As sprawling o'er the laden board he sat, 
His cheek close to his cup ; but Gudrun turned 
Unto him, pale, although her vexed heart burned 
With fresh desire, and a great agony 
Of hope strove in her : 

" Tell thy tale to me 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 317 

And have a gift therefor," she said : " behold ! 
My finger is no better for this gold ! 
Draw it off swiftly ! " 

Then she reached her hand 
Out to the man, who wondering there did stand 
Beholding it, half sobered by her face ; 
Nor durst he touch the ring. 

" Unto this place 

From Burgfirth 'did we come," he said, "and there, 
Around a new-beached ship folk held a fair 
Kalf Asgeirson, men said, the skipper was 
But others to and fro did I see pass." 

Still Ospak chuckled, lolling o'er his drink, 
Nor any whit hereat did Gudrun shrink, 
But Bodli rose up, and the hall 'gan pace, 
As on the last time when in that same place 
Kiartan and he and she together were ; 
And on this day of anguish and of fear, 
Wellnigh his weary heart began to deem 
That that past day did but begin a dream 
From which he needs must wake up presently, 
Those lovers in each other's arms to see, 
To feel himself heart-whole and innocent; 
" Yea, yea, a many people came and went 
About the ship," he heard the first guest say; 
" Gudmund and Thurid did I see that day, 
And Asgeir and his daughter, and they stood 
About a man, whose kirtle, red as blood, 
Was fine as a king's raiment." 

Ospak here 

Put up his left hand slowly to his ear, 
As one who hearkens, smiling therewithal, 
And now there fell a silence on the hall, 
As the man said : 

" I had not seen before 

This fair, tall man, who in his sword-belt bore 
A wondrous weapon, gemmed, and wrought with gold ; 
Too mean a man I was to be so bold 
As in that place to ask about his name. 



318 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Yet certes, mistress, to my mind it came, 
That, if tales lied not, this was even he 
Men said should wed a bride across the sea 
And be a king e'en Kiartan Olafson." 

He looked about him when his speech was done 
As one who feareth somewhat, but the word 
He last had said, naught new belike had stirred 
In those three hearts ; Bodli still paced the floor 
With downcast eyes, that sometimes to the door 
Were lifted ; Ospak beat upon the board 
A swift tune with his hand ; without a word 
The gold ring from her finger Gudrun drew 
And gave it to the man ; and Ospak knew 
A gift of Bodli Thorleikson therein, 
Given when first her promise he did win. 
Yet little wisdom seemed it to those men 
About the dais to abide as then, 
Though one turned o'er his shoulder as he went, 
And saw how Ospak unto Gudrun leant 
And nodded head at Bodli, and meanwhile 
Thrust his forefinger with a mocking smile 
At his own breast ; but Gudrun saw him not, 
Though their eyes met, nay, rather scarce had got 
A thought of Bodli in her heart, for still 
" Kiartan come back again," her soul did fill, 
" And I shall see him soon, with what changed eyes ! " 

And now did night o'er the world's miseries 
Draw her dark veil, yet men with stolen light 
Must win from restless day a restless night ; 
Then Gudrun 'gan bestir her, with a smile 
Talking of common things a little while, 
For Bodli to his seat had come again 
And sat him down, though labor spent in vain 
It was to speak to him ; dull the night went, 
And there the most of men were well content 
When bedtime came at last. Then one by one 
They left the hall till Bodli sat alone 
Within the high-seat. No thought then he had 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUiV. 319 

Clear to himself, except that all was bad 

That henceforth was to come to him ; the night 

Went through its changes, light waned after light, 

Until but one was left far down the hall 

Casting a feeble circle on the wall, 

Making the well-known things as strange as death ; 

Then through the windows came the night's last breath, 

And 'gainst the yellow glimmer they showed blue 

As the late summer dawn o'er Iceland drew ; 

And still he sat there, noting naught at all 

Till at his back he heard a light footfall, 

And fell a-trembling, yet he knew not why ; 

Nor durst he turn to look, till presently 

He knew a figure was beside him, white 

In the half dusk of the departing night, 

For the last light had died ; therewith he strove 

To cry aloud, and might not, his tongue clove 

Unto his mouth, no power he had to stand 

Upon his feet, he might not bring his hand, 

How much soe'er he tried, to his sword's hilt ; 

It seemed to him his sorrow and his guilt 

Stood there in bodily form before his eyes, 

Yet, when a dreadful voice did now arise 

He knew that Gudrun spake : 

" I came again 

Because I lay awake, and thought how men 
Have told of traitors, and I needs must see 
How such an one to-night would look to me. 
Night hides thee not, O Bodli Thorleikson, 
Nor shall death hide from thee what thou hast done. 

What ! thou art grown afraid, thou tremblest then 
Because I name death, seed of fearless men ? 

Fear not, I bear no sword, Kiartan is kind, 
He will not slay thee because he was blind 
And took thee for a true man time agone. 

My curse upon thee ! Know'st thou how alone 
Thy deed hath made me ? Dreamest thou what pain 
Burns in me now when he has come again ? 

Now, when the longed-for sun has risen at last 
To light an empty world whence all has passed 



320 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Of joy and hope great is thy gain herein ! 

A bitter broken thing to seem to win, 

A soul the fruit of lies shall yet make vile ; 

A body for thy base lust to defile, 

If thou durst come anigh me any more, 

Now I have curst thee, that thy mother bore 

So base a wretch among good men to dwell, 

That thou might'st build me up this hot-walled hell. 

I curse thee now, while good and evil strive 
Within me, but if longer I shall live 

What shall my curse be then ? myself so cursed, 
That naught shall then be left me but the worst, 
That God shall mock himself for making me." 

Breathless she stopped, but Bodli helplessly 
Put forth his hands till he gained speech, and said 
In a low voice : " Would God that I were dead ! 
And yet a word from him I hope to have 
Kinder than this before I reach the grave ! " 

"Yea, he is kind, yea, he is kind ! " she cried, 
" He loveth all, and casts his kindness wide 
Even as God ; nor loves me more than God 
Loves one among us crawlers o'er earth's sod. 
And who knows how I love him ? how I hate 
Each face on which he looks compassionate ! 

God help me ! I am talking of my love 
To thee ! and such a traitor I may prove 
As thou hast, ere the tale is fully done." 

She turned from him therewith to get her gone, 
But lingered yet, as waiting till he spake. 
Day dawned apace, the sparrows 'gan to wake 
Within the eaves ; the trumpet of the swan 
Sounded from far ; the morn's cold wind, that ran 
O'er the hall's hangings, reached her unbound hair, 
And drave the night-gear round her body fair, 
And stirred the rushes by her naked feet : 
Most fair she was their eyes awhile did meet, 
In a strange look, he rose with haggard face 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 321 

And trembling lips, that body to embrace, 

For which all peace forever he had lost, 

But wildly o'er her head her arms she tossed, 

And with one dreadful look she fled away 

And left him 'twixt the dark night and the day, 

'Twixt good and ill, 'twixt love and struggling hate, 

The coming hours of restless pain to wait. 



The Yule-feast at Bathstead. 

NOW the days wore, and nowise Kiartan stirred, 
Or seemed as he would stir, and no man heard 
Speech from him of the twain, for good or ill ; 
Yet was his father Olaf anxious still, 
And doubted that the smouldering fire might blaze, 
For drearily did Kiartan pass his days 
After a while, and ever silently 
Would sit and watch the weary sun go by, 
Feeling as though the heart in him were dead. 

Kalf Asgeirson came to the Peacock's stead 
With Refna, more than once that autumn-tide ; 
And at the last folk 'gan to whisper wide 
That she was meet for him, if any one 
Might now mate Kiartan, since Gudrun was gone. 
If Kiartan heard this rumor I know not, 
But Refna heard it and her heart waxed hot 
With foolish hopes ; for one of those she was 
Who seem across the weary earth to pass, 
That they may show what burden folk may bear 
Of unrequited love, nor drawing near 
The goal they aim at, die amidst the noise 
Of clashing lusts with scarce-complaining voice. 
God wot that Kiartan in his bitter need 
To her kind eyes could pay but little heed ; 
Yet did he note that she looked kind on him, 
Nor yet had all his kindness grown so dim 
21 



322 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That he might pass her by all utterly, 
And thereof came full many a biting lie. 

Now as the time drew on toward Yule once more, 
Did Oswif send as his wont wr.s of yore 
To bid the men of Herdholt to the feast, 
And howso things had changed, both most and least 
'Gan make them ready, all but Kiartan, who 
That morn went wandering aimless to and fro 
Amid the bustling groups, and spake no word. 
To whom came Olaf when thereof he heard, 
And spake with anxious face : " O noble son, 
Wilt thou still harbor wrath for what is done ? 
Nay let the past be past ; young art thou yet, 
And many another honor mayst thou get, 
And many another love." 

Kiartan turned round, 

And said : " Yea, good sooth, love doth much abound 
In this kind world ! Lo ! one more loved my love 
Than I had deemed of thus it oft shall prove ! 

So spake he sneering and high-voiced, then said, 
As he beheld his father's grizzled head 
And puckered brow : " What wouldst thou, father ? see 
Here in thy house do I sit quietly, 
And let all folk live even such-like life 
As they love best ; and wilt thou wake up strife ? " 

" Nay, nay, son ; but thou knowest that thy mood, 
So lonely here, shall bring thee little good ; 
Thy grief grows greater as thou nursest it, 
Nor 'neath thy burden ever shalt thou sit 
As it increases on thee ; then shall come 
A dreadful tale on this once happy home. 
Come rather, show all men thou wilt have peace 
By .meeting them, and it shall bring thee ease, 
That sight once over, to think how thou art 
A brave man still, not sitting with crushed heart 
Amid the stirring world." 

Then Kiartan gazed 



i 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 323 

Long on his father, as a man amazed, 

But said at last : "Ah, thou must have thy will ! 

God wot I looked that the long days would kill 

This bitter longing, if unfed it were 

By sights and sounds. Now let the long days bear 

Their fated burden ! I will go with thee." 

So like a dreaming man did Kiartan see 
That place which once seemed holy in his eyes ; 
No cry of fury to his lips did rise 
When o'er the threshold first he went, and saw 
Bodli the son of Thorleik towards him draw, 
Blood-red for shame at first, then pale for shame, 
As from his lips the old kind speeches came, 
And hand met hand. Coldly he spake, and said : 

" Be merry, Bodli ; thou art nobly wed ! 
Thou hadst the toil, and now the due reward 
Is fallen to thee." 

Then, like a cutting sword, 
A sharp pain pierced him, as he saw far off 
Gudrun's gray eyes turn, with a spoken scoff, 
To meet his own ; and there the two men stood, 
Each knowing somewhat of the others mood, 
Yet scarce the master-key thereto ; still stared 
Kiartan at Gudrun ; and his heart grew hard 
With his despair : but toward him Bodli yearned, 
As one who well that bitter task had learned ; 
And now he reached once more to him his hand, 
But moveless for a while did Kiartan stand, 
And had in heart to get him back again : 
Yet with strong will he put aback his pain, 
And passed by Bodli, noting him no whit, 
And coldly at the feast that day did sit, 
In outward seeming ; and Gudrun no less 
Sat in her place in perfect loveliness, 
Untouched by passion : Bodli in mean while 
From Kiartan's grave brow unto Gudrun's smile 
Kept glancing, and in feverish eager wise 
Strove to pierce through the mask of bitter lies 



324 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

That hid the bitter truth ; and still must fear, 
Lest from the feast's noise he a shriek should hear, 
When the thin dream-veil, torn across, should show 
That in the very hell he lay alow. 

Men say that when the guests must leave the place, 
Bodli with good gifts many a man did grace, 
And at the last bade bring up to the door 
Three goodly horses such as ne'er before 
Had Iceland seen, and turned his mournful eyes 
To Kiartan's face, stern with the memories 
Of many a past departing, bitter-sweet, 
And said : 

" O cousin, O my friend, unmeet 
Is aught that here I have, for thy great fame, 
Yet if it please thee still to be the same 
As thou hast been to us, take these of me." 

But as men crowded round about to see 
The goodly steeds, spake Kiartan in low voice : 
" Strive not with fate, for thou hast made thy choice ; 
Thy gifts, thy love, may scarce now heal my heart 
Look not so kind God keep us well apart ! " 

No more they spake as then, but straightway rode 
The Herdholt men unto their fair abode ; 
And so it fell that on the homeward way 
'Gan Olaf to his well-loved son to say : 

" Kiartan, howe'er the heart in thee did burn, 
Unto no evil did this meeting turn ; 
Yet would that thou hadst taken gifts from him ! 
Now thou wilt go again ?" 

" My eyes are dim, 

Belike, O father, with my bitter pain ; 
Yet doubt thou not but I shall go again, 
E'en as I doubt not that fresh misery 
I there shall gather as the days pass by. 
Would I could tell thee all I think, and how 
I deem thy wise hand dreadful seed doth sow ! " 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 325 



Kiartan weds Refna. 

I THINK that Gudrun on the morrow morn 
Deemed herself yet more wretched and forlorn 
Than e'er before ; I deem that Kiartan woke 
And found it harder yet to bear the yoke 
Than in past clays their eyes had met at last, 
No look of anger from them had been cast 
Sweet words might take away ; no look of woe 
A touch might turn to pleasure, none can know 
But those who know the torturer Love, the bliss 
That heals the stripes those bear who still are his. 
Who knows what tale had been to tell, if she 
Had met his first proud look all tearfully, 
With weak imploring looks ? Ah, sore she yearned 
To cry aloud the things that in her burned, 
To cast aside all fear and shame, and kneel 
Before his feet, so she his lips might feel 
Once more as in the old days ; .but, alas ! 
A wall of shame and wrong betwixt them was, 
Nor could the past deeds ever be undone. 

Sometimes it might be when they were alone 
In quiet times in evening twilight, when 
Far off and softened came the voice of men ; 
Or, better yet, the murmur of the sea 
Smote on the hearts of either peacefully, 
Each to each kind would seem ; until there came 
The backward rush of pain and bitter blame 
Unanswerable, cold, blighting, as the sea, 
Let in o'er flowers " Why didst thou so to me, 
To me of all the world ? while others strove 
We looked to hold the sweetness of our love. 
Yea, if earth failed beneath our feet and now 
How is the sweet turned bitter ! yea, and thou 
Art just so nigh to me, that still thou art 
A restless anguish to my craving heart." 

Take note too midst all this, that Gudrun heard 
Rumored about this added bitter word, 



326 THE EARTHLY PARADISE, 

That Refna, Asgeir's daughter, looked to wear 
The coif the Norway Queen had meant for her, 
When Kiartan left that broken heart behind ; 
For that tale too her hungry ears must find. 
Then would she clean forget all other woe, 
In thinking how she dreamed the days would go, 
That while she waited doubting naught of him ; 
Then would the past and future wax all dim 
In brooding o'er that unaccomplished bliss, 
In moaning to herself, 'twixt kiss and kiss 
The things she would have said, in picturing, 
As in the hopeful time, how arms would cling 
About her, and sweet eyes, unsatisfied 
E'en with the fulness of all bliss, would hide 
No love from her and she forgot those eyes 
What they were now, all dulled with miseries ; 
And she forgot the sorrow of the heart 
That fate and time from hers had thrust apart. 
Still wrong bred wrong within her, day by day 
Some little speck of kindness fell away, 
Till in her heart naked desire alone 
Was left, the one thing not to be undone. 
Then would the jealous flame in such wise burn 
Within her, that to Bodli would she turn, 
And madden him with fond caressing touch 
And tender word ; and he, worn overmuch 
With useless striving, still his heart would blind, 
Unto the dread awaking he should find. 

Doubt not, that of this too had Kiartan heard, 
If naught but idle babbling men had stirred, 
But more there was ; for the fierce-hearted fools, 
The sons of Oswif, made these twain their tools 
To satisfy their envious hate ; for they 
Waxed eviller-hearted as day followed day, 
Grudging the Peacock's House its luck and fame 
And when into their household Bodli came, 
In such wise as ye know, with hate and scorn, 
Which still they had, of his grave face and worn, 
A joy began to mingle presently, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 327 

A thought that they through him might get to see 
Herdholt beneath their feet in grief and shame ; 
So cunningly they turned them to the game 
As such men will, and scattered wide the seeds, 
Lies, and words half true, of the bitterest deeds. 
For doubt not, kindly-nattired though he were, 
That Kiartan too was changing : who would hear 
Such things as once he heard, from one who went 
'Twixt the two houses, with no ill intent, 
But blabbing and a fool, well stuffed with lies, 
At Ospalcs hands for in most loving wise 
The new-wed folk lived now, he said ; soon too 
He deemed would Bodli draw to him a crew, 
And take ship for the southlands : v Naught at all 
Was talked of last night in the Bathstead hall, 
But about England and King Ethelred." 

" Well, and was Gudrun merry ? " Haldor said, 
Yet stammered saying it, 'neath Kiartan's frown, 
Who cleared his brow though, nor e'en looked adown 
As the man answered, smiling, pleased to show 
That he somewhat of great folk's minds did know : 

" Yea, marry, was she merry. Good cause why, 
For she will go with Bodli certainly, 
And win such fame as women love to do ; 
Ye well may wot he saith no nay thereto, 
If she but ask him ; they sat hand in hand 
As if no folk were left in all the land 
Except themselves.'' 

He stayed his talk hereat, 
For men looked strangely on him as he sat 
Smiling and careless, casting words that bit 
Like poisoned darts : no less did Kiartan sit 
With unchanged face, nor rose to go away, 
Yea, even strove within himself to say : 
" Good luck go with them ! mine she cannot be, 
May she be happy, here, or over sea ! 
Why should I wish aught ill on them to fall." 



328 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And yet, indeed, a flood of bitterest gall 
Swept o'er his heart ; despite himself he thought : 
" So now, to lonely ways behold me brought, 
She will not miss me more so change the days, 
And Bodli's loving looks and Bodli's praise 
Shall be enough for her. I am alone, 
And ne'er shall be aught else would I were gone 
From where none need me now belike my fame 
Shall be forgotten, wrapped in Bodli's name, 
E'en as my kisses on the lips, that once 
Trembled with longing through the change of suns 
Those years in Norway shall be blotted out 
From song and story yea, or men shall doubt 
If I or Bodli there that praise did win 
What say I. for I deem that men begin 
To doubt if e'er I loved my love at all ! " 

So thought he, mid the clamor of the hall, 
Where few men knew his heart, but rather thought 
That he began now somewhat to be brought 
From out his gloom ; withal, time wore away, 
And certainly as day comes after day, 
So change comes after change in minds of men ; 
So otherwise he 'gan to be, than when .' 
In early days his pain, nigh cherished, clung 
Unto his wounded heart ; belike it stung 
Bitterer at whiles, now that he knew his life, 
And hardened him to meet the lingering strife 
Gainst the cold world that would not think of him, 
Too much. The kindness of old days waxed dim 
Within his heart; he hearkened when men spake 
Hard things about his love, for whose dear sake 
Had fame once seemed so light a thing to win. 
A blacker deed now seemed his fellow's sin 
When lesser seemed the prize that it did gain ; 
Little by little from his bitter pain 
Fell off the softening veil of tenderness ; 
Moody and brooding was he none the less, 
And all the world, with all its good and ill, 
Seemed nothing meet to move his sluggish will. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 329 

And now a whole long year had passed, since he 
Stood wildered by the borders of the sea 
Neath his first sorrow. Herdholt late had seen 
A noble feast, and thereat had there been 
Among the guests Refna, the tender maid ; 
Gentle of mood, and pale, with head down-weighed 
She sat amidst the feast; and Kiartan saw 
That much she changed as he anigh did draw, 
That her eyes brightened, and a sprightlier grace 
Came o'er her lips, and color lit her face. 
And so when all the guests therefrom were gone, 
Thurid, his sister, sat with him alone 
Close upon sunset ; thoughtful now was she, 
He gayer than it was his wont to be, 
And many things he spake to her; at last 
The absent look from off her face she cast, 
For she had listened little ; and she said : 
" Yea, brother, is she not a lovesome maid ? " 

He started : " Who," he said, " I noted not." 

She smiled : " Nay, then is beauty soon forgot ; 
Yet if I were a man, not old or wise, 
Methinks I should remember wide gray eyes, 
Lips like a scarlet thread, skin lily-white. 
Round chin, smooth browneath the dark hair's delight, 
Fair neck, slim hands, and dainty limbs, well hid, 
Since unto most of men doth fate forbid 
To hold them as their own." 

A dark cloud spread 

O'er Kiartan's face, " Sister, forbear," he said; 
" I am no lover, unto me but naught 
Are these things grown." 

Nigher her face she brought 
To his, and said : " And yet were I a man, 
And noted how the love of me began 
To move within the heart of such a maid 
As Refna is, not soon her face would fade 
From out my memory." 

" Nay, nay, thou sayst 



330 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Fools' words," he said, "and every word dost waste ; 
Who shall love broken men like unto me ?" 

And therewithal he sprang up angrily 
And would be gone : she stayed him : " Were it so 
That over well she loved ; what wouldst thou do ?" 

" What should I do ? " he said : " I have no heart 
To give away, let her e'en act my part 
And find the days right dreary, yet live on." 

" Methinks," she said, " the end will soon be won 
For her, poor maid ! surely she waneth fast." 

And Thurid sighed withal ; but Kiartan passed 
Swiftly away from her: and yet he went 
Unto his bed that night less ill-content, 
And ere he slept, of Ingibiorg he thought, 
And all the pleasure her sweet love had brought 
While he was with her ; and this maid did seem 
Like her come back amidst a happy dream. 
The next morn came, and through his dreariness 
A sweet thought somewhat did his heart caress ; 
Howe'er he put it from him, back it came 
Until it gathered shape, and took the name 
Of pity, and seemed worthy to be nursed. 

So wore the days, and life seemed not so curs 
With this to think of this so set apart 
From all the misery that wrung his heart ; 
Until the sweet ruth grew, until he deemed. 
That yet perchance her love was only dreamed, 
That she was heart-whole, yea, or loved indeed 
But for another man was in such need : 
And at that thought blank grew the world again, 
And his old pain was shot across with pain 
As woof hides warp. Ah, well ! what will you have ? 
This was a man some shreds of joy to save 
From out the wreck, if so he might, to win 
Some garden from the waste, and dwell therein. 
And yet he lingered long, or e'er he told 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 331 

His heart that it another name might hold 
With that of the lost Gudrun. Time and sight 
Made Refna's love clear as the noonday light ; 
Yea, nowise hard it was for him to think 
That she without this joy would quickly sink 
Into death's arms and she, she to fade thus 
God's latest marvel ! eyes so piteous 
With such sweet longing, midst her beauty rare, 
As though they said, " Naught worthy thee is here, 
Yet help me if thou canst : yet, if I die, 
Like sweet embalmment round my heart shall lie 
This love, this love, this love I have for thee ; 
Look once again before thou leavest me ! " 

She died not wholly joyless ; they were wed, 
When twenty changing moons their light had shed 
On the dark waves of Burgfirth, since in trust 
Of Gudrun's love, over the bridge new thrust 
From out the ship, the much-praised Kiartan ran. 
So strangely shift men's lives in little span. 



The Sword comes back without the Scabbard. 

WHEN of this wedding first came tidings true 
To Bathstead, then it was that Gudrun knew 
How much of hope had been before that day 
Within her heart ; now, when a castaway 
Upon the lonely rocks of life, she was 
With naught to help whate'er might come to pass ; 
Deaf, dumb, and blind, long hours she went about 
Her father's house, till folk began to doubt 
If she would ever speak a word again ; 
Nay, scarce yet could she think about her pain, 
Or e'en know what it was, but seemed to face 
Some huge blank wall within a lonely place. 
And Bodli watched her with a burning heart 
Baffled and beaten back, yet for his part 
Something like hope 'gan flit before his eyes. 



332 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Hope of some change e'en if new miseries 
Wrapped it about 

As on a day she went 

Slow-footed through the hall without intent, 
Taking no heed of aught, of Kiartan's name 
She heard one speak, and to her stunned heart came 
A flash of hope and pain, against her will 
Her foot must stay her, and she stood there still, 
And turning round she saw where Ospak stood, 
And slowly talking in a sullen mood 
Unto his brother Thorolf; but they made 
As though they saw her not, and Ospak said : 

" Thou art young, Thorolf, and thy words are vain, 
So it has been, so it shall be again, 
One man shall deem all others made for him, 
And 'neath his greatness shall all fame grow dim ; 
Till on a day men try if he is man 
Eh ! what then falleth let him, if he can 
Play Thor among the mannikins, and cast 
The swords aback when he is caught at last." 

" Hist !" Thorolf said, " there sister Gudrun goes ! 
Kiartan has froze her heart up : stand we close ! " 

Then Ospak laughed : " She will not hear us yet, 
She hath a hope she cannot quite forget. 
That he who twice has flung her love aside, 
Will come some day to claim her as his bride, 
When he has slain our long-faced champion there ! 
Good sooth, the house of Hauskuld waxeth fair, 
We shall have kings in Iceland ere our day 
Is quite gone by." 

Slowly she gat away 

Stung to the heart by those coarse words of hate, 
Wondering withal what new thought lay in wait 
To change her life ; she sat her down alone 
And covered up her face, and one by one 
Strove to recall the happy days past by, 
And wondering why they past so happily 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 333 

While yet none strove for happiness ; at last 
She raised her head up and a glance she cast 
Unto the open door and down the hall 
A streak of sun on Bodli's head did fall 
As he turned round and saw her ; then she said 
Unto herself, " Nay, then, love is not dead 
Since Bodli lives : why should I hate him then 
Because he heeded not the shame of men 
Amidst his love ? but thou, I once called love, 
On whom I flung my heart, with whom I strove 
Forever, thy weak measured love to make 
Equal to mine, what didst thou for my sake ? 
Thy soul is saved, thy fame is won, and thou 
Hast a fair damsel's arms about thee now 
Not mine and thou art happy. Who can tell, 
O Bodli Thorleikson, but down in hell 
We twain shall love, and love, and love again, 
When the first wave of the eternal pain 
Has washed our folly from us, and 1 know 
Why upon earth I loved a weak heart so 
That loved me not, while I was ice to thee, 
O loving lovesoma traitor." 

Wearily 

She hung her head with parted lips awhile, 
Silent she sat, until a bitter smile 
Bemocked her face : " Yet if I call thee love, 
And kiss thee with sweet kisses, such as move 
Great men to great deeds, trust me not too much, 
But think of honeyed words and tremulous touch 
As things that slay. If Kiartan lay there dead, 
How I should love him ! " 

Once more sank her head, 
And long she sat in silence, till at last 
She heard how Bodli toward her bower past, 
And rose and met him coldly, with no sign 
That any wise her vexed heart did incline 
To ease the bitter burden Wat he bore. 

Unheeding all, the year moved as before, 
And autumn came again. What hearts soe'er 



334 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The younger folk each unto each might bear 

Olaf and Oswif chose to shut their eyes, 

And close their ears, as peaceful men and wise, 

And make believe that naught amiss there was 

'Twixt the two houses ; so it came to pass 

That Bathstead to the Herdholt feast did go 

At autumn-tide once more at least, and though 

Kiartan was loath enow those folk to face, 

Yet so hard Olaf prayed that he would grace 

His father's house with his great fame, and sit, 

Yet once again while he might look at it, 

A glory to the feast, that he put by 

His doubts once more, and there with troubled eye 

Noted the twain among the Bathstead crowd, 

And Oswif 's ill sons, insolent and loud, 

And turned pale when the words of greeting came 

From out his lips. Meanwhile, with shrinking shame 

And anxious heart, did Refna gaze upon 

Gudrun's great beauty, deeming she had won 

A troublous lot ; and Kiartan noting that, 

And how scarce like the mistress there she sat, 

Yet to his eyes seemed fairer, because love 

Had forged the fear that so her heart did move, 

Grew wroth that still so many memories 

Must vex his heart, and turn aside his eyes 

To Gudrun, the world's wonder there, whose face, 

Now coldly watchful, scanned the busy place. 

Men say that at this feast three things betid, 
Whereby the flame the elders deemed well hid, 
Showed through the heap of smouldering love and hate. 
First, when the new-come guests did stand and wait 
Till they were marshalled to their seats, the maid 
Who did this for the women turned and said 
To Kiartan, " Who the high-seat fills to-day 
Beside the goodwife ? " 

In most bright array 
Stood Gudrun, gazing ever at the bride, 
As though she saw not anything beside ; 
And Kiartan noted her, and therewith deemed 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 335 

That in her eyes a look of hate there gleamed, 
And saw withal Refna's soft eyes fall down 
Before hers ; then he spake out, with a frown : 

" Nay, thou art foolish, damsel : who shall sit 
In the best place, if I may deal with it, 
Saving my wife ? " But as he said the word, 
The struggling devil so his vexed heart stirred, 
That he must look at Gudrun ; their eyes met, 
Paler she grew than he had seen her yet, 
Then red as blood ; but he waxed wroth and said : 

" Ah, wert thou e'en so foolish, then, O maid ? 
For such a guest belike we have got here 
As thinketh everything of great or dear, 
Honor, and hearts of men, and women's tears 
Are but for her." Then tingling took the ears 
Of those that stood thereby ; as he strode off, 
Gudrun's cold smile was bitterer than a scoff 
Spoken aloud : but Ospak laughed, and said 
In a loud whisper, close to Bodli's'head : 

" Nay, thou shalt have to fight for Gudrun yet, 
Even though Refna did the bride-bed get. 
He deems our sister may not quench the thought 
Of all the joy she erst to Herdholt brought. 
Ah. we shall yet see Refna lie a-cold, 
Brother-in-law, unless thou waxest bold." 

Such a beginning to the feast there was. 

Moreover, the next day it came to pass, 
As folk ere supper sported in the hall, 
That unto her did goodwife Thorgerd caU 
The gentle Refna, bidding her as one 
Who well might bid, to do the rich coif on, 
The wonder of the Greeks, the fair Queen's gift : 
Then Refna reddened, and her eyes did lift 
To Kiartan, e'en as asking him thereof; 
But he spake naught, her soft look might not move 



336 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

His heart from deep thought ; so she went her ways, 

Scarce happy 'neath his far-off moody gaze, 

And came back glittering like a new-born star, 

And sat upon the dais seen afar 

Down the dusk hall. Then Ospak noted how 

Gudrun turned pale, and he his teeth did show 

Like a crossed hound, and muttered : 

" Past belief, 

As men may deem it, sister, yet a thief 
Asgeir begat ; for longeth not that gold 
To Bathstead, if the tale be rightly told ? " 

Now Kiartan seemed to wake as from a dream, 
When in the torches' flare that gold did gleam, 
And went across to Refna's side, and said, 
Smiling and whispering : " More I love thy head 
Uncovered, O my love ; yea, and withal, 
Sharp swords thy helm from out their sheaths may 

call: 

Look down there, how the sons of Oswif scowl 
Around poor Bodli's face ; the storm doth growl 
Afar already nay, nay, fear thee naught ! 
But good I deemed it thou shouldst know my thought." 

Sour and sick-hearted Gudrun turned away, 
Noting how Kiartan 's hand on Refna's lay, 
And how their cheeks were close each unto each. 
And Refna's eyes that love did so beseech, 
Her soft mouth, tremulous with longing sore 
For yet more kisses, long time hung before 
Her weary eyes upon that weary night, 
Yea, and till mirth of men was slain by light. 

Hearken once more : the morn the guests should go, 
About the stead Kiartan went to and fro, 
Busied in such things, as his father's son, 
For honor's very sake, must see well done ; 
And as he ordered how the folk should ride, 
His sword, " The King's Gift" named, which by his 
side 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 337 

Was ever wont to hang, upon his bed 
He left awhite, and, when the guests were sped, 
Came back to seek the same, and found it gone. 
Then questioning there was of every one, 
And mighty trouble ; An the Black meanwhile, 
A sturdy house-carle, slipped out with a smile, 
Just as old Olaf to his son 'gan talk 
In such wise : 

" Son, hate far abroad will walk 
E'en when new-born, although we nurse it not : 
Now my heart tells me much must be forgot, 
Many words hidden, many sights be seen 
By thine eyes only, son, if I, between 
Death and the end of life shall see thee last ; 
And hold thy living hands as life goes past, 
Mine eyes a-waxing dim : wait then, and hope : 
Thou shalt grow stronger with the world to cope, 
If thou sitstdown with patience, casting not 
Long days and sweet on drawing of a lot." 

Such things and more he spake, and Kiartan heard 
With kind eyes, if his heart were little stirred. 
But, as they sat and talked thereof, came back, 
Smiling, but panting sorely, An the Black, 
And in his cloak he carried something wrapped. 

"Well," Olaf said, "and what new thing hath happed?" 

" Soon told," said An ; " I followed them afar, 
Knowing what thieves those Bathstead skinkers are, 
And at the peat moss where the road doth wind 
About the dale, young Thorolf lagged behind; 
I saw him take a something from his cloak, 
And thrust it down just where the stream doth soak 
The softest through the peat ; then swift again 
Ride on : so when they might not see me plain, 
O ho, says I, and comes up to the place, 
And here and there I peer with careful face 
Until at last I draw this fair thing forth ; 
A pity though, the scabbard is of worth ! 
Clean gone it is." 

22 



338 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Then from his cloak he drew 
" The King's Gift " bright and naked. Olaf grew 
Joyous thereover, praising An right well. 
But Kiartan 'gan to bloom : " Ah, who can tell," 
He muttered as he took the sword to him, 
" But this shall end the "troublous tale and dim 
Well, I at least cast not the sheath away ; 
Bewail hot ye too much, who have to pay 
For pleasure gained ; his may the worst hap be, 
Who best can bear the pain and misery." 



The Stealing of the Coif. 

NOW howso Olaf bade An hold his peace, 
And Kiartan promised he would nowise cease 
To show a good face to the world on all 
That 'twixt the houses yet might chance to fall, 
Certain it is, that erelong, far and wide 
The tale was known, throughout the country-side ; 
Nay, more than this, to Kiartan's ears it came 
That Oswif's sons deemed they had cast a shame 
On Herclholt, and must mock him openly 
And call him " Mire-blade," e'en when those were by 
Who held him of the most account ; no less 
Kiartan was moved not from his quietness, 
Nor did aught hap 'twixt autumn and Yule-tide ; 
Then men at Herdholt busied them to ride 
To Bathstead once again, and Olaf said : 

" Wilt thou once more be guided by my head, 
Son Kiartan, and with brave heart go to 'face 
The troublous things that wait thee in that place ? " 

" Well," Kiartan said, " if so I deemed, that fate 
Might be turned back of men, or foolish hate 
Die out for lack of fuel, no more would I 
Unto the Bathstead hall-door draw anigh ; 
But forasmuch as now I know full well, 



THE LOVERS OF CUD RUN. 339 

That the same story there shall be to tell 
Whether I go, or whether I refrain, 
Let all be as thou wilt ; and yet we twain 
Not oft again, O father, side by side 
Unto this merry-making place shall ride." 

Then Olaf sighed, as though indeed he knew 
To what an end his latter days now drew. 

So now all folk were ready there, but when 
The women came their ways to meet the men, 
Said Thorgerd unto Refna : " Well, this tide 
Thou hast the coif, no doubt, and like a bride 
Hast heart to look midst those whose hearts are cold 
To thee and thine." 

Then Refna did behold 

Thorgerd's stern face in trembling wise, and said : 
" Nay, goochvife, what fair cloth may coif my head 
Shall matter little mid the many things 
Men have to talk of: rise and fall of kings 
And changes of the world : within my chest 
The coif lies." 

" There," said Kiartan, " might it rest 
For thee and me, sweet ; yet I mind indeed 
When I, a froward child, deemed I had need 
Of some sharp glittering thing, as axe or knife, 
But little would my mother raise up strife 
With me therefor, and even as I would 
I cut myself: so if she think this good 
Let fetch the Queen's Gift." 

Refna looked adown 

Shamefaced and puzzled, Thorgerd with a frown 
Turned upon Kiartan, but he smiled in turn, 
And said, " Yea, mother, let the red gold burn 
Among the lights at Bathstead ; great am I 
E'en as thou deenrst ; and men must let pass by 
Their hatred to me, whatso say their hearts ; 
Come, open-handed let us play our parts." 

So was the coif brought, and once more they rode 



340 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Unto the door of OswiPs fair abode ; 
And there they feasted merrily enow 

Such of them as were fools, or cared not how 
The next week went and at the highest tide 
Of all the feast, sat Refna as a bride 

Coifed with the Queen's Gift ; Gudrun stern and cold 

Scarce would the tender face of her behold, 

Or cast a look at Kiartan ; rather she 

Did press the hand of Bodli lovingly, 

Softening her face for him alone of all : 

Then would strange tumult on his spirit fall, 

Mingled of pain and uttermost delight 

To think the whole world had so swerved from right 

To give him pleasure for a little while, 

Nor durst he look upon his old friend's smile, 

Who, glad with his own manhood seemed to be 

Once more, once more the brave heart frank and free ; 

As though at last the trouble and the coil 

That wrapped him round, and made him sadly toil 

Through weary days, had fallen all clean away, 

And smiling he might meet the bitterest day. 

So passed the high-tide forth unto its end, 
But when at last folk from the place would wend, 
And Refna fain would have the coif of her 
Whose office was to tend the women's gear 

Lo, it was gone then Refna trembled sore, 
And passing through the crowd about the door 
Whispered to Kiartan : Ospak stood anigh 
And bit his lips, and watched her eagerly, 
And Kiartan with a sidelong glance could see 
His color come and go, and cried : 

" Let be, 

Light won, light gone ! if still it is 'bove ground, 
Doubt thou not, Refna, it shall yet be found." 

Folk looked on one another ; Thorgerd said, 
Turning on Gudrun : " Small account is made 
Of great folk's gifts, then ; I have seen the day 
When Egil's kin a man or two would slay 
For things less worth than this." 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 341 

Her angry frown 

Gudrun met calmly : " Was the thing his own ? 
Then let him do e'en as he will with it ; 
Small loss it is methinks for her to sit 
Without his old love's gift upon her head ! " 

Ere Thorgerd answered, Kiartan cried, and said : 
" Come swift to saddle ! Cousin, ride with me, 
Until we turn the hill anigh the sea ; 
I fain would speak with thee a word or twain 
That I have striven to think about in vain 
These last days that we met." 

Bodli flushed red 

And looked adown ; " So be it then," he said. 
Then stammered and turned pale, and said : " Enow 
Shall one sword be to-day betwixt us two ; 
Take thou the rover's weapon, O fair wife." 

She looked on him, her lovely face was rife 
With many thoughts, but Kiartan's kindly gaze 
Seemed to bring back the thoughts of happier days 
To both of them, and swift away she passed 
Unto her bower ; and men were horsed at last, 
And sharp the hoofs upon the hard way rung. 
So as into the saddle Kiartan swung, 
He leant toward Ospak, and said mockingly : 
" I love thee I would not that thou shouldst die ; 
So see me not too oft, because I have 
A plague sometimes, that bringeth to the grave 
Those that come nigh me ; live on well and whole ! " 

Then to his face rushed Ospak's envious soul, 
His hand fell on his sword-hilt as he shrank 
Back to the doorway, while the fresh air drank 
Kiartan's clear laughter, as their company 
Rode jingling down unto the hoary sea. 

But the last smile from off his face was gone, 
When silent, in a while he rode alone 
With Bodli silent : then he said .to him : 



342 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Thou seest, Bodli, how we twain must swim 
Adown a strange stream thou art weaponless 
To-day, and certes bides my sword no less 
Within its scabbard how long shall it last ? " 

Then Bodli cried : " Until my life is past 
Shall I take life from thee as well as love ? " 

" Nay," Kiartan said, " Be not too sure thereof, 
Bethink thee where by thine own deed thou art 
Betwixt a passionate woman's hungry heart, 
And the vile envy of a dangerous fool ; 
Doubt not but thou art helpless, and the tool 
Of thy mad love, and that ill comes from ill, 
And as a thing begins, so ends it still 
Nay, not to preach to thee I brought thee here, 
Rather to say that the old days are dear, 
Despite of all, unto my weary heart. 
And now methinks from them and thee I part 
This day ; not unforgiven, whatsoe'er 
Thou at my hands, or I of thine may bear. 
For I too shall I guide myself indeed, 
Or rather be so driven by hard need 
That still my hand as in a dream shall be, 
While clearly sees the heart that is in me 
Desires I may not try to bring to pass ? 
So since no more it may be as it was 
In the past days, when fair and orderly 
The world before our footsteps seemed to lie, 
Now in this welter wherein we are set, 
Lonely and bare of all, deem we not yet 
That each for each these ill days we have made ; 
Rather the more let those good words be weighed 
We spake, when truth and love within us burned, 
Before the lesson of our life was learned. 
What say'st thou ? are the days to come forgiven, 
Shall folk remember less that we have striven, 
Than that we loved, when all the tale is told? " 

Then long did Bodli Kiartan's face behold, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 343 

Striving for speech : then said, " Why speak'st thou so ? 

Twice over now I seem my deed to do, 

Twice over strive to wake as from a dream, 

That I, once happy, never real may deem, 

So vile and bitter is it ; may thy sword 

If ere we meet be sharper than thy word, 

And make a speedy end of doubt and strife ; 

Fear not to take much from me, taking life ! " 

Still seemed the air filled with his words when he 
Turned back to Bathstead, and the murmuring sea 
Seemed from afar to speak of rest from pain. 
Then on a little knoll he shortened rein, 
And turned about, and looking toward the hill 
Beheld the spear of Kiartan glittering still, 
When all the rest of him behind the brow 
Was sunken ; but the spear sank quickly now, 
And slowly home withal did Bodli ride, 
E'en as he mi<iht the coming end to bide. 



Refna hears Women talking. 

SO the days wore with nothing new to tell, 
Till spring-tide once more on the country fell, 
Then on a night as Kiartan to his bed 
Would go, still Refna sat with bowed-down head 
And stirred not, nor awhile would speak, when he 
Spake to her in kind words and lovingly ; 
At last she lifted up a face, wherein 
Somewhat did trouble upon sorrow win, 
And said : 

" Indeed of all thy grief I knew, 
But deemed if still thou saw'st me kind and true, 
Not asking too much, yet not failing aught 
To show that not fer off need love be sought, 
If thou shouldst need love if thou sawest all this, 
Thou wouldst not grudge to show me what a bliss 
Thy whole love was, by giving unto me 
As unto one who loved thee silently, 



344 TPIE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Now and again the broken crumbs thereof : 

Alas ! I, having then no part in love, 

Knew not how naught, naught can allay the soul 

Of that sad thirst, but love untouched and whole ! 

Kinder than e'er I durst have hoped thou art, 

Forgive me then, that yet my craving heart 

Is so unsatisfied ; I know that thou 

Art fain to dream that I am happy now, 

And for that seeming ever do I strive ; 

Thy half-love, dearest, keeps me still alive 

To love thee ; and I bless it but at whiles " 

So far she spake till her weak quivering smiles 
Faded before the bitterness of love. 
Her face changed, and her passion 'gan to move 
Within her breast until the sobs came fast, 
And down upon her hands her face she cast, 
And by the pain of tears her heart did gain 
A little respite ; nor might she refrain 
From weeping yet, when Kiartan's arms she felt 
About her, and for long her fair lips dwelt 
With hungry longing on his lips, and he 
Spake to her : 

" O poor lover, long may we 
Live upon earth, till lover and beloved 
Each is to each, by one desire moved ; 
And whereas thou dost say to rne, forgive, 
Forgive me rather ! A short while to live 
Once seemed the longest life of man to me, 
Wherein my love of the old years to see ; 
But could I die now, and be born again 
To give my whole heart up to ease thy pain, 
A short while would I choose to live indeed. 
But is it not so, sweet, that thou hast need 
To tell me of a thing late seen or heard ? 
Surely by some hap thy dear heart is stirred 
From out its wonted quiet ; ease thine heart 
And 'twixt us twain thy fear and grief depart ! " 

She looked up : " Yea, kind love, I thought to tell 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 345 

Of no great thing that yesterday befell. 
Why should I vex thee with it ? Yet thy fame, 
If I must say the word, in question came 
Therein. Yet prythee, mark it not too much ! " 

He smiled and said : " Nay, be the tidings such 
As mean my death, speak out and hide not aught ! " 

She sat a little while, as though she thought 
How best to speak, then said : " The day being good, 
About noon yesterday in peaceful mood 
I wandered by the brook-side, and at last 
Behind a great gray stone myself I cast, 
And slept, as fate would have it ; when I woke 
At first I did but note the murmuring brook, 
But as my hearing and my sight did clear 
The sound of women's voices did I hear, 
And in the stream two maidens did I see, 
Our housefolk, and belike they saw not me, 
Since I lay low adown, and up the stream 
Their faces turned ; I from a half-sweet dream, 
I know not what, awaked, no sooner heard 
Their first word, than sick-hearted and afeard 
I grew, the cold and evil world to feel ; 
So hard it seemed, love, with my life to deal : 
Bitterly clear I saw ; as if alone 
And dead, I saw the world ; by a gray stone 
Within the shallows, washing linen gear 
They stood ; their voices sounded sharp and clear ; 
Half smiles of pleasure and of goodlihead, 
Shone on their faces, as their rough work sped ; 
O God, how bright the world was ! " 

A flush came 

Across her face ; as stricken by some shame 
She stammered, when she went on : " Thus their speech, 
Broken amid their work mine ear did reach 
As I woke up to care, for the one said : 
' Yea, certes, now has Kiartan good end made 
Of all his troubles, things go well enow.' 
' Over well,' said the other, ' didst thou know ? ' 



346 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

' Know what ? ' the first one said, ' What know'st thou 

then ? ' 

' Nay, naught except the certain talk of men.' 
' Well, hear I not men too, what wilt thou say ? ' 
She said, ' Men talk that this is latter May, 
And Kiartan sitteth still and naught is done 
For the two thefts of Bathstead to atone.' 
' Fool ! ' saith the first one, ' shall all fall to strife 
For what in no wise maketh worse their life ? ' 
' Well, well, and what will Refna say thereto ? 
Things had been otherwise a while ago ; 
Scarce Kiartan's brother had stripped Gudrun's head 
Of what she loved, and yet 'scaped lying dead 
By this time. Ospak, sure, is safe enow.' 
' Ah ! ' said the other, ' great things sayest thou ! * 
' True words I speak, when this I say to thee, 
That glad would Gudrun and our Kiartan be 
If Bodli Thorleikson and Refna lay 
Dead on the earth upon the selfsame day ; 
And this from all men's daily talk I draw ; 
Old friends are last to sever, saith the saw.' 

" This was the last word that I heard, O love, 
For from the place softly I 'gan to move 
Ere they might see me, and my feet, well taught 
To know the homeward way, my body brought 
Unto my bower ; yet scarce I saw the way, 
Rather some place beneath the sod, where lay 
A few white bones, unnamed, unheeded, while 
Hard by within this bower 'twixt word and smile 
Was breast strained unto breast of twain I knew 
And needs must part awhile, that I might rue 
My life, my death, my bitter useless birth. 
O Kiartan, over-weary seemed the earth 
Yesterday and to-day ; too hard to bear 
Within thine home to be, and see thee near, 
And think that but for very kindness thou 
Must wish me dead thou didst not note me, how 
My face was worn with woe throughout that tide, 
Though most men looked on me for thou must bide 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 347 

A weary waiting, and thy woe untold 
Must make thy face at whiles seem hard and cold. 
Ah me ! forgive me that I talk of this ! 
Think how my heart ached ! " 

For now kiss on kiss 

Did Kiartan shower upon her quivering face, 
Yet, even as their arms did interlace, 
Despite his love and pity, of past years. 
He needs must think, of wasted sighs and tears 
And hopes all fallen to naught, and vows undone, 
And many a pleasure from his life seemed gone ; 
And sorely his heart smote him for her faith 
So pure and changeless ; her love strong as death, 
As kind as God, that naught should satisfy 
Till all the shows of earth had passed her by. 



Kiartan fetches the Price of the Coif from Bathstead. 

AND now a day or two with brooding face 
Did Kiartan go about from place to place 
And speak few words to any, till one day 
He bade his men see to their war-array, 
For two hours after midnight all and some 
Into the hall to wait his word should come, 
And whoso blabbed, he said, the deed should rue. 
So thitherward in arms that night they drew ; 
And Refna trembling lay, while Kiartan clad 
His body in the best war-gear he had, 
And through the hangings did she watch the spears, 
And dreadful seemed the laughter to her ears, 
And red the lamps burned, as with twilight gray 
They mingled : then he turned to go away, 
And kissed her as he spake : 

" Refna, this eve, 

Most like, a noble gift shalt thou receive ; 
Do thou thy part to meet it with good grace, 
And gather what thou canst into this place 
Of fiddlers and of glee-men, and with song 
Meet that good gift that comes to heal thy wrong. 



348 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Now Refna durst not ask, What wilt thou then, 
And whither go to-night these all-armed men ? 
Because she deemed she knew what word it was 
Thai all this clash of arms had brought to pass, 
And sick at heart she grew to think thereof, 
And with her fair white arms made strong by love 
She clung to Kiartan, but he drew her hold 
With gentle hands from off the mail rings cold. 
And kissed her sweet mouth opened now to speak, 
And gat him gone ; and she fell back all weak 
Upon her bed, and lying there alone, 
Saw how his war-gear in the bright light shone, 
And heard his cheery voice as he cried loud, 
"To Bathstead, ho ! " and then the noisy crowd 
Passed clashing from the hall, and nothing there 
Within a little while might Refna hear, 
But the dawn's noises, and the loitering tread 
Of some maid getting slowly back to bed ; 
So there she lay alone in grief and fear, 
But hope's fresh voice shuddering she needs must hear 
W T hispering wild words, yet sweet, of chance and 

crime, 
Telling the wondrous ways of slowfoot time. 

But now at Bathstead ere they rose that morn, 
Men deemed they heard the winding of a horn, 
And, running straightway to the door, could see 
About the stead a goodly company, 
And there were Olaf's sons with sixty men 
Besetting every gate and door ; but when 
The men of Bathstead were all armed and went 
Unto the door, they saw a gay-striped tent 
Just raised upon the slope-side 'gainst the hall 
And armed men round about it ; one man, tall 
Beyond his fellows, stood some yards more near 
The hall-door, leaning on a pennoned spear, 
Clad in a glittering mail-coat, with a shield 
About his neck, where, on a golden field 
The holy Rood of God was painted fair ; 
From 'neath his gilded helm his golden hair 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 349 

Fell waving down, but hidden were his eyes 
By the wide brim : then did great fear arise 
Within their hearts, despite their fiery hate, 
Because they knew that now at last, if late, 
Was Kiartan's might aroused and in the field. 
But none the less little would Ospak yield 
To any fear ; before the rest he strode, 
And cried aloud : 

" Within this fair abode 
'Has been thy place, O Kiartan Oiafson, 
And not without ; what ill deed hast thou done 
That father Oswif has forbidden thee 
Thy honored seat where it was wont to be ?" 

The tail man moved not, but a deep voice came 
From 'neath his helm : " Thou art right wise to name 
A hidden head ; grow wiser! sick am I, 
And somewhat deadly now to come anigh ; 
My sword has lost its scabbard 'gainst my will, 
Beware then, for its naked edge may kill ! " 

Then Ospak raised the spear in his right hand 
And shook it, but the tall man forth did stand 
And pushed his helm aback and showed the face 
Of Kiartan, and across the grassy space 
Cried mightily : " Be wise, and get ye back ! 
Of fighting one day shall ye have small lack ; 
But now beware, because my father's sons 
Have sworn to spare no man of you, if once 
A drop of blood is spilt ! Come ye not forth 
Until I bid you, if of any worth 
Ye hold your lives ; and meantime for the sake 
Of what I had and have not, I will take 
My due from mead and byre." 

And therewithal 

He let his helm down o'er his visage fall, 
And turned back toward the tent. Back shrank again, 
Cowed into sullen rage, the Bathstead men, 
And armed but helpless there within the hall 
Silent they sat, hearkening the raiders call 



350 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The cattle o'er the meads : in high-seat there 

Sat Bodli, but his visage, worn with care 

Of the past days, was sad, but calm and soft, 

As if he thought of gentle things, though oft 

Fierce eyes would scowl upon his dreamy face 

Unnoted of him ; in that dreary place 

He seemed like some dead king, condemned in hell 

For his one sin among such men to dwell 

As for their wickedness he hated most 

Ere righteous ways and life and all were lost. 

And in mean time, 'twixt silent trembling bower 
And silent cursing hall, hour after hour 
Did Gudrun pace with restless feet, and heart 
Betwixt two nameless miseries torn apart, 
Whence cold despair was being well fashioned now. 
And Oswif sat apart with wrinkled brow, 
Unnoted in that house of grief and wrong. 
But midst their shame, from outside, laugh and song 
Came loud and louder, mingled with the clank 
Of mead-horns ; the feast's clamor never sank 
Till midday was well past ; then quieter 
It grew without, and yet they still might hear 
Lowing of neat and men's shouts. Then a voice 
Cried from the slope-side : 

" Bathstead men, rejoice 
That ye no autumn-feast need hold this year, 
For certes else should ye find victuals dear 
And hard to come by ! Oswif 's sons, come out, 
Unharmed and peaceable, and have no doubt 
Of hurt from us ! " 

They stirred not for a space ; 

Then cried the voice : " Lives none within the place ? 
Are ye all dead of fear ? Come out, I say, 
Else o'er your roof the red cock crows to-day ! " 

Then Ospak, cursing, on the pavement cast 
His shield and spear, and toward the doorway passed, 
And in like wise the others one by one, 
Till Bodli and Gudrun were left alone : 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 351 

And then she said : " And thou wilt thou not go ? 
Knowst thou the name of him who shames us so ? " 

" Yea, yea, I know it ! " Bodli cried ; " farewell ! 
Of me, too, shall there be a tale to tell : 
I will go forth, but not without my sword." 

He drew the thing he named with that last word, 
And rah unto the door ; against the wall 
There stood the sons of Oswif, stout and tall, 
Foaming, but helpless : in his saddle now 
Sat Kiartan, unhelmed, his bright hair aglow 
With the May sun. His brethren stood around 
Beside their horses, and a mighty sound 
Came from the herd of neat that thronged the way 
Beneath the hillside ; spears with pennons gay 
Glittered about them in the sunlight fair, 
For Kiartan's company was gathered there 
Ready to set forth. 

So there Bodli stood 

One moment, thinking that the world was good, 
Though not for him ; then he cried out : " O thou, 
Thou son of Olaf, come and meet me now 
For long have I been weary of the earth, 
And now to me but one thing seems of worth 
That I should win death of such hands as thine." 

Then in the sunlight did the bright steel shine, 
And Kiartan's brethren soon had ended all, 
For Bodli ran forth ; yet heard Kiartan call 
Across the clash of arms : " Nay, point nor edge 
His blood shall redden not ; make ye a hedge 
Of your strong shields and thrust him back again 
Since he knows not that all his might is vain, 
E'en to win death ; live, foster-brother, yet, 
And get despite of all, what thou mayst get 
Of joy and honor." 

Midway, Bodli stayed, 
And in his hand he poised the heavy blade 
As he would cast it from him, slowly then 



352 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Did he give back face foremost from the men, 
Till in the doorway once again he stood. 

Then Kiartan said : " Yea, cousin, it is good, 
If thou must die by me, that thou shouldst bide 
Some noble fight, some glorious reaping-tide, 
Where each of each fair fame at least may gain 
God grant a little bliss ere that last pain ! 
But hearken, thievish sons of a wise man ! 
Be taught ye blustering fools if yet ye can ! 
From Yule till now I gave you, a long day, 
To pay the debt that needs was ye must pay ; 
Twice told I take it now, and leave behind 
What shall seem shame indeed to most men's mind. 
This is my bridal gift, think well of it ; 
In your own fields it waxed, while ye did sit 
Plotting across the mead-horns. Now take heed 
That oft henceforth your manhood shall ye need 
If ye would live in peace. Blow loud and clear, 
O horns, for Refna waiteth for us there, 
And merry shall we be to-night in hall 
What things soever afterwards may fall ! " 

Still Bodli stood with drawn sword in the door 
While midst the clang of arms and horn's loud roar, 
He saw the herd move up the dusty road ; 
He saw how Kiartan for a while abode 
Behind the rest, and stared at the gray stead 
Whose roof so often had been o'er his head ; 
He saw him turn, and well might deem he sighed, 
Then muttered he, " Ah, would God I had died 
By thee to-day ! " and sheathed his sword, and then 
Was hustled by the sullen baffled men 
Who shouldered past him back into the hall, 
Who heeded him just as they did the wall 
Past which they rubbed ; but with the last of these 
He went in, casting by all hope of peace. 

But Refna looking from the Herdholt knoll 
That evening, saw a dust-cloud upward roll 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 353 

And move toward Herdholt, and her heart beat fast 

When from the midst thereof bright spear-heads passed, 

And then men's helms, and then the guarded herd ; 

And she bethought her of her mate's last word, 

And bade the women in their best array, 

And minstrels, stand on either side the way 

To greet the new-comers, whose horns blew loud 

Close by the garth now, while the beasts 'gan crowd 

About the garth-gate ; so, the gate past through, 

Over the homefield toward the wall they drew, 

Tended by gay-clad men-at-arms, who wore 

About their helms fair flowers that Bathstead bore, 

While of the beasts, sharp horn and curl-browed head, 

And dew-lapped neck were well begarlanded. 

Then from the close loud joyful cries arose, 

Tinkle of harps, sharp noise of fiddle-bows, 

And all along the line there ran a shout : 

Therewith old Olaf to the door came out, 

And saw his sons swift from the cattle ride, 

Till Kiartan leapt adown by Refna's side 

And cast his arms about her, and 'gan cry : 

" Now is the Queen's-Gift paid for fittingly ; 
For these are thine, e'en as my hand and sword, 
To put from thee all care, and every word 
That grieves thee, sweet. O love, but I am gay ! 
Sure a fair life beginneth from to-day ! " 

She gazed at him, and knew not why her heart 
Scarce in that joyous scene might play its part 
Why it was not enough these words of love, 
His bright fair face her longing eyes above ? 
Yet with a loving cry she hid her face 
Upon his breast. 

Thereat did Olaf gaze 

And muttered low : " A goodly price in sooth 
For a girl's coif! but yet, for Kiartan's youth, 
For his fair hope and glory, and increase 
Of good deeds, and mine own old age of peace 
Not too much, not too much ! Ah, woe is me 
That I should live these latter days to see ! " 
23 



THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 



Thorhalla tells of Kiartarfs Comings and Goings. 

WHAT should the next move in the strange game 
be ? 

Kiartan rode through the country carelessly 
With few behind him, but naught hitherto 
The sons of Oswif durst against him do, 
While he his hand withheld not utterly 
From them ; so doubtful did the days go by. 

And Gudrun ? Ah, the black spot in her heart 
That rose when first she knew that one had part 
In Kiartan's life, and ever greater grew, 
When of his love toward this new love she knew. 
Now at the last, when over sure she felt 
That she no longer in his memory dwelt, 
O'erspread her life, till from the foiled desire 
Cast back upon her heart, there sprang a fire 
Of very hate : true was it, that at first 
Bodli, herself, and all around she cursed 
Rather than Kiartan well, what will you have 
That was ere hope had sunk into his grave, 
While yet some pleasure clung round Kiartan's naive. 
Then came the feast at Herdholt ; then the shame 
About the coif, and fear of shame again, 
And many a tale told to make over plain 
His love for Refna ; then the evil hour, 
When she within the darksome hall must cower 
Among her trembling brethren : then, when she 
Had looked at least a noble death to see, 
Of one who loved her, Kiartan sent him back 
A baffled man, as who all might did lack. 
Yea, even the might to die ; still, at each turn 
Afresh this weary lesson must she learn ; 
With the wrong-doers hast thou taken part, 
Live then, and die with them, for thy love's heart 
Is now no more for thee ! still everywhere 
Did Kiartan's image meet her ; the warm air 
Of summer seemed but sent her from his hand, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 355 

The sea that beat the borders of the land 
Still seemed to bear his fame unto her feet ; 
All summer sights and sounds, and odors sweet, 
Were heavy with his memory : no least way 
To 'scape from thought of him from day to day. 
Withal, the sight of faces dull with hate 
Of that same man, on every step did wait. 
Familiar grew the muttering sullen voice 
Of those who in no goodhap could rejoice, 
Until the very thought and hope of strife, 
The use of hate, must grow to be her life. 
And shaped therefrom a dreadful longing rose, 
That some fell end the weary way would close, 
Unto herself she scarce durst whisper what. 

Now on a day three of her brothers sat 
Within the hall, and talked, and she stood by 
Hearkening their eager speech most wearily. 
" The gabbling crone Thorhalla has just been," 
Said Ospak, " And whom think you she has seen ? " 

" Nay, by thy scowl I know well," Thorolf said, 
" 'T was Kiartan Olafson, upon my head." 

"Well, Thorolf, thou grow'st wise now, said the 

crone, 

That in her life she ne'er saw such an one, 
As Kiartan looked, a loving maiden's dream 
Of a great king, she said, the man did seem. 
'Well,' said I, 'and how long then will it last? ' 
' Ah,' said the crone, ' till after ye are past ; 
Why, the whole country-side is ringing now 
With this, that ye had best be wise and bow 
Before him humbly, since most kind is he ; 
Kind,' says the crone, ' certes he was to me.' 
' Well, well,' says I, ' but these are fools' words here.' 
' Nay, let me speak,' she says, 'for he will fare 
Unto the west to Knoll ; this know I well, 
Because to him therewith I needs must tell 
Of one who owed me half a mark thereby. 



356 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Well, goody, says he, I shall pass anigh, 
And I will fetch it for thee lo, how kind.'" 

" Now may God strike the gabbling idiot blind ! " 
Said Thorolf. " Nay," said Ospak, " not so wise 
Thou growest now ; rather, God keep her eyes ! 
Tidings she told me, saying he would bide 
For just three days at Knoll, and thence will ride 
Through Swinedale home, close here, nor like that he 
Will ride by us with a great company, 
Say two at most good luck go with his pride, 
Whereby so fair a chance doth us betide ! 
Bodli shall lead or die." 

Then Gudrun turned 

Sick-hearted from them ; how her longing burned 
\Vithin her heart ! ah, if he died not now, 
How might she tell whereto his hate would grow ? 
Yet a strange hope that longing shot across, 
As she got thinking what would be the loss 
If Bodli fell 'neath Kiartan's hand. That day, 
Like years long told, past Gudrun wore away, 
She knew not how ; but \vhen the next day came 
She cried aloud, " The same, ah, still the same, 
Shall every day be, now that he is dead ! " 
She started as she heard her voice, her head 
Seemed filled with flame : she crawled unto her 

bower 

And at her mirrored face hour after hour 
She stared, and wondered what she really was, 
The once-loved thing o'er which his lips would pass. 
Her feet grew heavy at the end of day, 
Her heart grew faint, upon her bed she lay 
Moveless for many an hour, until the sun 
Told her that now the last day was begun ; 
Then she arose as one might in a dream 
To clothe herself, till a great cloud did seem 
To draw away from her ; as in bright hell, 
Sunless but shadovvless she saw full well 
Her life that was and would be, now she kre-v 
The deed unmasked that summer d-v t;hou!d do. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 357 

And then she gnashed her teeth and tore her hair, 

And beat her breast,' nor lightened thus despair, 

As over and over the sweet names she told 

Whereby he called her in the days of old ; 

And then she thought of Refna's longing eyes, 

And to her face a dreadful smile did rise 

That died amidst its birth, as back again 

Her thoughts went to the tender longing pain 

She once had deemed a sweet fair day would end; 

And therewith such an agony did rend 

Her body and soul, that all things she forgat 

Amidst of t ; upon the bed she sat 

Rigid and stark, and deemed she shrieked, yet made 

No sound indeed ; but slowly now did fade 

All will away from her, until the sun 

Risen higher, on her moveless body shone, 

And as a smitten thing beneath its stroke 

She shrank and started, and awhile awoke 

To hear the tramp of men about the hall. 

Then did a hand upon the panel fall ; 

And in her very soul she heard the ring 

Of weapons pulled adown, and everything, 

Yea, even pain, was dead a little space. 

At last she woke to see the haggard face 
Of Bodli o'er her own : " I go," he said, 
" Would God that thou mayst hear of me as dead 
Ere the sun sets to-day." 

She passed her hand 
Across her eyes, as he in arms did stand 
Before her there, and stared but answered not, 
As though indeed his face were clean forgot ; 
Yet her face quickened as his eyes she saw 
So full of ruth yet nigher to her draw : 
She shrank aback, but therewith suddenly 
A thought smote through her, with an angry cry 
She sprang up from the bed, naked and white, 
Her gold hair glittering in the sunshine bright 
That flooded all the place ; his arm she caught 
And stared into his eyes : 



358 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

"What is thy thought?" 
She said, " Why goest thou with these murderous 



men 



Ah ! dost thou think thou yet mayst save him then ? 
Ah ! dost thou think that thou mayst still be kind 
To every one, fool as thou art and blind, 
Yet work thy wicked will to pleasure thee ? " 

Across her passion he began to see 
That now she doubted him ; he muttered low : 
" The work of these my hands what man can know ? 
And yet at least the end shall be to-day." 

She fell aback nor noted more, but lay 
All huddled up upon the bed, her hair 
O'er her white body scattered here and there, 
And as he gazed on her he saw she wept, 
And a wild passion o'er his heart there swept, 
And twice he stretched his arms out, to embrace 
His curse and his delight, twice turned his face 
Unto the door that led unto the hall, 
Then with a cry upon her did he fall 
And, sobbing, strained her to his mail-clad breast, 
And to her writhen lips his lips he pressed, 
And moaned o'er her wet cheeks, and kissed her eyes 
That knew him not ; till in his heart 'gan rise, 
Now at the last, a glory in his shame, 
A pride to take the whole world's bitter blame ; 
And like a god he felt, though well he deemed 
That to an end at last his dream was dreamed. 
And she, she knew him not, her arms fell down 
Away from him, her drawn mouth and set frown 
Were not for him, she did not shrink from him, 
She turned not round to curse or bless, when dim 
She lay before his burning eyes once more, 
Her lo'ng hair gilding the white bedclothes o'er, 
As midst low restless moaning there she tossed. 

Wildly he cried : " O Gudrun, thou hast lost, 
But look on me for I have never won ! " 
Then from the place he rushed, and with the sun 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 359 

Burst into the dusk hall, a stream of light, 
Neath his dark hair, his face so strange and white 
That a dead man dragged up into the day 
By wizard's arts h-e seemed to be, and they 
Who waited armed there, and the last cup drank 
Looked each at each, and from his presence shrank. 

For there were gathered now the murderous band, 
Long to be cursed thereafter through the land, 
Gudrun's five brethren, and three stout men more. 
Then Ospak cried : " Soon shall our shame be o'er, 
And thou and we shall be great men and famed, 
And Bathstead free ; come now, since thou art named 
Our leader, husband of Gudrun, lead forth ! 
For this day shall be called a day of worth, 
By those that tell the story of our house." 

Flushed were the men, and fierce and boisterous, 
And Bodli trembled in his helpless rage 
To be among them, but his sin's strong cage 
Was strait and strong about him : with no word 
He girt to him the rover's deadly sword, 
And did his helm on : and so forth they wend 
Through the bright morn to bring about the end. 



The Slaying of Kiarlan Olafson. 

NOW Kiartan rode from Knoll betimes that day, 
And goodman Thorkel brought him on the way 
With twelve men more, and therewithal they ride 
Fast from the west, but where the pass grew wide 
And opened into Swinedale, Kiartan stayed 
His company, and unto Thorkel said : 
" Thanks have thou, goodman, for thy following ; 
Now get thee back, I fear not anything 
'Twixt this and Herdholt." 

"Well," the goodman said, 
" Time enow is there yet to be waylaid 
Ere thou art safe at home ; let us ride on." 



360 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Nay," Kiartan said, " the thing shall not be done, 
All men of heart will say that heart I lack, 
If I must have an army at my back 
Where'er I go, for fear of Oswif 's sons. 
Fare thee well, goodman, get thee back at once I 
And therewithal take this to comfort thee, 
That Bodli yet is scarce mine enemy, 
And holds aback those brethren ; wot ye well, 
Too strange a story would it be to tell, 
If these should overcome my father's son, 
Besides, without thee I ride not alone." 

So back the goodman turned, misdoubting though, 
In spite of all how yet the day would go, 
And up the dale rode Kiartan : An the Black, 
The man who erst the stolen sword brought back, 
Was with him there, and one named Thprarin, 
As slowly now the midway dale they win. 

Now, as I find it written in my tale, 
There went that morn a goodman of the dale, 
About those bents his mares and foals to see, 
His herdsman with him ; these saw presently 
Up from the east the men of Bathstead ride, 
And take their stand along a streamlet's side 
Deep sunken in a hollow, where the mouth 
Of the strait pass turns somewhat to the south, 
From out the dale ; now, since the men they knew, 
Much they misdoubted what these came to do ; 
But when they turned them from the sunken stream, 
And saw the sun on other weapons gleam, 
And three men armed come riding from the west ; 
And when they knew the tallest and the best 
For Kiartan Olafson, therewith no more 
They doubted aught. 

Then said the herdsman, " Sore 
The troubles are that on the country-side 
Shall fall, if this same meeting shall betide ; 
He is a great chief; let us warn him then ! " 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 361 

" Yea, yea ! " his master said, " and all such men 
As fate leads unto death, that we may be 
'Twixt the two millstones ground right merrily, 
And cursed as we cry out ! thou art a fool, 
Who needs must be the beaker and the stool 
For great men's use ; emptied of joys of life 
For others' joy, then kicked by in the strife 
When they are drunken ; come, beside the way, 
Let us lie close to see the merry play ! 
For such a swordsman as is Kiartan, we 
Shall scarce behold on this side of the sea ; 
And heavy odds he hath against him too. 
These are great men good, let them hack and hew 
Their noble bodies for our poor delight ! " 

So down the bent they slipped, and as they might 
Lurked by the road, and thus they tell their tale : 

Ere Kiartan reached the strait place of the dale, 
High up upon the brook-bank Bodli lay, 
So that his helm was just seen from the way ; 
Then Ospak went to him, and clear they heard 
Across the road his rough and threatening word : 
" What dost thou here ? thou hast bethought thee then 
To warn thy friend that here lurk all-armed men. 
Thou knowest Gudrun's mind or know'st it not, 
But know'st that we within a trap have got 
Thee and the cursed wretch, the proud Mire-blade, 
The Thief, the King's-pimp, the white Herdholt maid. 
Come, sister's husband, get thee lower down ! " 

The foam flew from the lips of the fierce clown, 
As thus he spake, but Bodli rose and said : 
" Think'st thou I armed because I was afraid 
Of thee and thine this morn? If thou knewst well 
Of love or honor, somewhat might I tell 
Why I am here with thee If will I have, 
Kiartan, who was my friend, this day to save, 
Bethink thee I might do it otherwise 
Than e'en by showing what in ambush lies ! 
How if I stood beside him ? " 



362 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" Down with th.ee 
And hold thy peace ! or he will hear and see." 

For so it was that Kiartan drew so near 
That now the herd their clinking bits might hear, 
Borne down upon the light wind : on he came, 
Singing an old song made in Odin's fame, 
Merry and careless on that sunny morn ; 
When suddenly out rang the Bathstead horn, 
And sharply he drew rein, and looked around ; 
Then did the lurkers from the gully bound 
And made on toward them, and down leapt all three, 
And Kiartan glanced around, and speedily 
Led toward a rock that was beside the way, 
And there they shifted them to stand at bay. 

Most noble then looked Kiartan, said the herd, 
Nor ever saw I any less afeard ; 
Yet, when his watchful eye on Bodli fell, 
A change came o'er him, that were hard to tell, 
But that he dropped" his hands at first, as one 
Who thinks that all is over now and done ; 
Yet, says the neatherd, soon his brows did clear, 
And from his strong hand whistled forth his spear, 
And down fell Thorolf clattering on the road. 
He cried, " Down goes the thief beneath his load, 
One man struck off the tale ! I have heard tell 
Of such as dealt with more and came off well." 

Silence a space but for the mail rings ; then 
Over the dusty road on rushed those men ; 
And, says the herd, there saw I for a space 
Confused gleam of swords about that place, 
And from their clatter now and then did come 
Sharp cry, or groan, or panting shout, as home 
Went point or edge : but pale as death one stood, 
With sheathed sword, looking on the clashing wood, 
And that was Bodli Thorleikson. Then came 
A lull a little space in that wild game. 
The Bathstead men drew off, and still the three 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 363 

Stood there scarce hurt as far as I could see ; 
But of the Bathstead men I deem some bled, 
Though all stood firm ; then Ospak cried and said : 

" O Bodli, what thing wilt thou prophesy 
For us, since like a seer thou standest by 
And see'st thine house beat back ? well then for thee 
Will I be wise, foretelling what shall be 
A cold bed, and a shamed board shalt thou have, 
Yea, and ere many days a chased dog's grave, 
If thou bringst home to-day a bloodless sword ! " 

But yet for all that answered he no word, 
But stood as made of iron, though the breeze 
Blew his long black hair round his cheek-pieces 
And fanned his scarlet kirtle : 

" Time we lose," 

Another cried, "if Bodli so shall choose, 
Let him deal with us when this man is slain." 
Then stoutly to the game they gat again 
And played awhile, and now withal I saw 
That rather did the sons of Oswif draw 
Toward Thorarin and An, until the first, 
From midst the knot of those onsetters burst, 
And ran off west, followed by two stout men, 
Not Oswif's sons ; and An the Black fell then 
Wounded to death, I deemed, but over him 
Fell Gudlaug, Oswif's nephew, with a limb 
Shorn off by Kiartan's sword : then once again 
There came a short lull in the iron rain ; 
And then the four fell on him furiously 
Awhile, then gave aback, and I could see 
The noble Kiartan, with his mail-coat rent, 
His shield hung low adown, his sword-blade bent, 
Panting for breath, but still without a wound. 

While as a man by some strong spell fast bound, 
Without a will for aught, did Bodli stand, 
Nor once cast eyes on the waylayers' band, 
Nor once glanced round at Kiartan, but stared still 



364 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Upon the green side of the grassy hill 
Over against him, e'en as he did deem 
It yet might yawn as in a dreadful dream, 
And from its bowels give some marvel birth, 
That in a ghostly wise should change the earth, 
And make that day naught. But as there he stood 
Ospak raised up his hand, all red with blood, 
And smote him on the face, and cried : 

" Go home, 

Half-hearted traitor, e'en as thou hast come, 
And bear my blood to Gudrun ! " 

Still no word 

Came from his pale lips, and the rover's sword 
Abode within the scabbard. Ospak said, 
" O lover, art thou grown too full of dread 
To look him in the face whom thou feared'st not 
To cozen of the fair thing he had got ? 
O faint-heart thief of love, why drawest thou back, 
When all the love thou erst so sore didst lack 
With one stroke thou mayst win ? " 

He did not hear, 

Or seemed to hear not ; but now loud and clear 
Kiartan cried out his name from that high place, 
And at the first sound Bodli turned his face 
This way and that, in puzzled hapless wise. 
Till 'twixt the spears his eyes met Kiartan's eyes ; 
Then his mouth quivered, and he writhed aside, 
And with his mail-clad hands his face did hide, 
And trembled like one palsy-struck, while high 
Over the doubtful field did Kiartan cry : 

" Yea, they are right ! be not so hardly moved, 
O kinsman, foster-brother, friend beloved 
Of the old days, friend well forgiven now ! 
Come nigher, come, that thou my face mayst know, 
Then draw thy sword and thrust from off the earth 
The fool that so hath spoilt thy days of mirth, 
Win long lone days of love by Gudrun's side ! 
My life is spoilt, why longer do I bide 
To vex thee, friend strike then for happy life ! 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 365 

I said thou mightst not gaze upon the strife 
Far off; bethink thee then, who sits at home 
And waits thee, Gudrun, my own love, and come, 
Come, for the midday sun is over bright, 
And I am wearying for the restful ni-ght ! " 

And now had Bodli dropped his hands adown, 
And shown his face all drawn into a frown 
Of doubt and shame ; his hand was on his sword, 
Even ere Kiartan spake that latest word ; 
Still trembling, now he drew it from its sheath, 
And the bright sun ran down the fated death, 
And e'en the sons of Oswif shuddered now, 
As with wild eyes and heavy steps and slow 
He turned toward Kiartan ; beat the heart in me 
Till I might scarce breathe, for I looked to see 
A dreadful game ; the wind of that midday 
Beat 'gainst the hillsides ; a hound far away 
Barked by some homestead's door ; the gray ewe's 

bleat 

Sounded near by ; but that dull sound of feet, 
And the thin tinkling of the mail-coat rings 
Drowned in my ears the sound of other things, 
As less and less the space betwixt them grew ; 
I shut my eyes as one the end who knew, 
But straight, perforce, I opened them again 
Woe worth the while ! 

As one who looks in vain 

For help, looked Kiartan round ; then raised his shield, 
And poised his sword as though he ne'er would yield 
E'en when the earth was sinking ; yet awhile, 
And o'er his face there came a quivering smile, 
As into Bodli's dreadful face he gazed ; 
Then my heart sank within me, as all dazed, 
I saw the flash of swords that never met, 
And heard how Kiartan cried : 

" Ah, better yet 

For me to die than live on even so ! 
Alas ! friend, do the deed that thou must do ! 
O lonely death ! farewell, farewell, farewell ! " 



366 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

And clattering on the road his weapons fell, 
And almost ere they touched the bloody dust, 
Into his shieldless side the sword was thrust, 
And I, who could not turn my eyes away, 
Beheld him fall, and shrieked as there I lay, 
And yet none noted me ; but Bodli flung 
Himself upon the earth, and o'er him hung, 
Then raised his head, and laid it on his knee, 
And cried : 

" Alas ! what have I done to thee ? 
Was it for this deed, then, that I was born ? 
Was this the end I looked for on this morn ? 
I said, to-day I die, to-day I die, 
And folk will say, an ill deed, certainly, 
He did,' but living had small joy of it, 
And quickly from him did his weak life flit 
Where was thy noble sword I looked to take 
Here in my breast, and die for Gudrun's sake, 
And for thy sake O friend, am I forgot ? 
Speak yet a word ! " 

But Kiartan answered not, 
And Bodli said, " Wilt thou not then forgive ? 
Think of the days I yet may have to live 
Of hard life ! " 

Therewith Kiartan oped his eyes, 
And strove to turn about as if to rise, 
And could not, but gazed hard on Bodli's face, 
And gasped out, as his eyes began to glaze : 

" Farewell, thou joyous life beneath the sun, 
Thou foolish wasted gift farewell, Gudrun ! " 
And then on Bodli's breast back fell his head, 
He strove to take his hand, and he was dead. 

Then was there silence a long while, wellnigh 
We heard each other breathe, till quietly 
At last the slayer from the slain arose, 
And took his sword, and sheathed it, and to those 
Four sons of Oswif, e'en as one he spake 
Who had good right the rule o'er them to take. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 367 

" Here have we laid to earth a mighty one, 
And therein no great deed, forsooth, have done, 
Since his great heart o'ercame him, not my sword ; 
And what hereafter may be our reward 
For this, I know not : he that lieth here 
By many a man in life was held right dear, 
As well as by the man who was his friend, 
And brought his life and love to bitter end ; 
And since I am the leader of this band 
Of man-slayers, do after my command. 
Go ye to Bathstead, name me everywhere 
The slayer of Kiartan Olafson, send here 
Folk who shall bear the body to our stead ; 
And then let each man of you hide his head, 
For ye shall find it hard from this ill day 
To keep your lives : here, meanwhile will I stay, 
Nor think myself yet utterly alone." 

Then home turned Oswif 's sons, and they being gone, 
We slunk away, and looking from the hill 
We saw how Bodli Thorleikson stood still 
In that same place, nor yet had faced the slain. 
And so we gat unto our place again. 

So told the herd, time long agone, the tale 
Of that sad fight within the gray-sloped vale. 



Kiartan brought dead to Bathstead. 

MEN say that those who went the corpse to bring 
To Bathstead thence, found Bodli muttering 
Over the white face turned up to the sky, 
Nor did he heed them as they drew anigh, 
Therefore they stood by him, and heard him say : 

" Perchance it is that thou art far away 
From us already ; caring naught at all 
For what in after days to us may fall 



368 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

O piteous, piteous ! yet perchance it is 

That thou, though entering on thy life of bliss, 

The meed of thy great heart, yet art anear, 

And somewhat of my feeble voice can hear ; 

Then scarce for pardon will I pray thee, friend, 

Since thus our love is brought unto no end, 

But rather now, indeed, begins anew ; 

Yet since a long time past naught good or true 

My lips might utter, let me speak to thee, 

If so it really is that thou art free, 

At peace and happy past the golden gate ; 

That time is dead for thee, and thou mayst wait 

A thousand years for her and deem it naught. 

O dead friend, in my heart there springs a thought 

That, since with thy last breath thou spakst her name, 

And since thou knowest now how longing came 

Into my soul, thou wilt forgive me yet 

That time of times, when in my heart first met 

Anger against thee, with the sweet, sweet love 

Wherewith my old dull life of habit strove 

So weakly and so vainly didst thou quite 

Know all the value of that dear delight 

As I did ? Kiartan, she is changed to thee ; 

Yea, and since hope is dead changed too to me, 

What shall we do, if, each of each forgiven, 

We three shall meet at last in that fair heaven 

The new faith tells of? Thee and God I pray 

Impute it not for sin to me to-day, 

If no thought I can shape thereof but this : 

friend, O friend, when thee I meet in bliss, 
Wilt thou not give my love Gudrun to me, 
Since now indeed thine eyes made clear can see 
That I of all the world must love her most ? " 

Then his voice sank so that his words were lost 
A little while ; then once again he spake, 
As one who from a lovesome dream doth wake : 

" Alas ! I speak of heaven who am in hell ! 

1 speak of change of days, who know full well 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 369 

How hopeless now is change from misery : 
I speak of time destroyed, when unto me 
Shall the world's minutes be as lapse of years ; 
I speak of love who know how my life bears 
The bitter hate which I must face to-day 
I speak of thee, and know thee passed away, 
Ne'er to come back to help or pity me." 

Therewith he looked up, and those folk did see, 
And rose up to his feet, and with strange eyes 
That seemed to see naught, slunk in shamefast wise, 
Silent, behind them, as the corpse they laid 
Upon the bier; then, all things being arrayed, 
Back unto Bathstead did they wend once more, 
As mournful as though dead with them they bore 
The heart of Iceland ; and yet folk must gaze 
With awe and pity upon Bodli's face, 
And deem they never might such eyes forget. 

But when they reached the stead, anigh sunset, 
There in the porch a tall black figure stood, 
Whose stern pale face, 'neath its o'erhanging hood, 
In the porch shadow was all cold and gray, 
Though on her feet the dying sunlight lay. 
They trembled then at what might come to pass, 
For that gray face the face of Gudrun was, 
And they had heard her raving through the day 
As through the hall they passed ; then made they stay 
A few yards from the threshold, and in dread 
Waited what next should follow ; but she said, 
In a low voice and hoarse : 

" Nay, enter here, 

Without, this eve is too much change and stir, 
And rest is good, is good, if one might win 
A moment's rest; and now none is within 
The- hall but Oswif : not much will he speak, 
And as for me behold, I am grown weak ! 
I cannot vex him much." 

She stepped aside, 

And the dark shade her raiment black did hide 
As they passed through into the dusky hall, 
24 



370 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

Afraid to see her face, and last of all 
Went Bodli, clashing through the porch, but he 
Stayed in the midst, and turned round silently, 
And sought her face and said : 

" Thy will is done. 

Is it enough ? Art thou enough alone 
As I am V " 

Never any word she spake. 
No hate was in her face now : " For thy sake 
I did it, Gudrun. Speak one word to me 
Before my bitter shame and misery 
Crushes my heart to death." 

She reached a hand 

Out toward the place where trembling he did stand, 
But touched him not, and never did he know 
If she had mind some pity then to show 
Unto him, or if rather more apart 
She fain had thrust him from her raging heart, 
For now those men came tramping from the hall, 
And Bodli shrank aback unto the wall 
To let them pass, and when the last was gone, 
In the dim twilight there he stood alone, 
Nor durst he follow her, but listened there, 
Half dead, and but his breathing might he hear, 
And the faint noises of the gathering night. 
He stood so long that the moon cast her light 
In through the porch, and still no sound he heard 
But the faint clink of mail-rings as he stirred. 
" Ah, she is dead of grief, or else would she 
Have come to say some little word to me, 
Since I so love her, love her ! " 

With a wail 

He cried these words, and in the moonlight pale, 
Clashing he turned : but e'en therewith a shriek 
From out the dead hush of the hall did break, 
And then came footsteps hurrying to the porch, 
And the red flare of a new-litten torch, 
And smit by nameless horror and affright 
He fled away into the moonlit night. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 371 



What Folk did at Herdkolt after the Slaying. 

NOW in the hall next morn did Oswif bide 
The while his messengers went far and wide 
Asking for help ; and all in hiding lay 
Whose hapless hands had brought about that day, 
Save Bodli ; but for him, when back he came 
That morn, affrighted, Oswif called his name, 
Beholding him so worn and changed, and said : 

" Stout art thou, kinsman, not to hide thine head ! 
Yet think that Olaf is a mighty man, 
And though thy coming life look ill and wan 
Good reason why Yet will I ask of thee 
The staff of mine old age at least to be, 
And save thy life therefor." 

Then Bodli smiled 

A ghastly smile : " Nay, I am not beguiled 
To hope for speedy death ; is it not told 
How that Cain lived till he was very old ? " 

Therewith he sank adown into a seat 
And hid his face. But sound of hurrying feet 
Was in the porch withal ; and presently 
Came one who said : 

" Oswif, all hail to thee ! 
From Holyfell I come with tidings true, 
That little will the wily Snorri do 
To help us herein ; for he saith the deed 
Is most ill done, and that thy sons shall need 
More help than they shall get within the land ; 
Yet saith withal, he will not hold his hand 
From buying peace, if that may serve thy turn." 

" Well, well," said Oswif, " scarce now first I learn 
That Snorri bides his time, and will not run 
His neck into a noose for any one. 
Go, get thee food, good fellow. Whence com'st thou 
Who followest, thy face is long enow ? " 



372 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

" The bearer of a message back I am 
From Whiteriver, where Audun Festargram 
Has wellnigh done his lading, and, saith he, 
That so it is he feareth the deep sea 
But little, and the devil naught at all ; 
But he is liefer at hell's gate to call 
With better men than are thy sons, he saith." 

" Good," Oswif said, " that little he fears death ! 
My sight clears, and I see his black bows strike 
The hidden skerry. But thou next ; belike 
Thou hast ill tidings too : what saith my friend, 
The son of Hauskuld ? what shall be the end ?" 



" Oswif," the man said, " be not wroth with me 
If unto Herdholt nowise openly 
I went last night ; I fared with hidden head 
E'en as a man who drifts from stead to stead 
When things go ill : so shelter there I gat, 
And mid the house-carles long enow I sat 
To note men's bearing. Olaf an old man 
He looks now truly sat all worn and wan 
Within the high-seat, and I deemed of him 
That he had wept, from his red eyes and dim 
That scarce looked dry as yet ; but down the board 
Sat Thorgerd, and I saw a naked sword 
Gleam from her mantle ; round her sat her sons, 
And unto Haldor did she whisper once 
And looked toward Olaf; Haldor from its sheath 
Half drew his sword, and then below his breath 
Spake somewhat. Now looked Olaf round the hall, 
But when his eyes on Kiartan's place did fall 
His mouth twitched, though his eyes gazed steadily ; 
He set his hand unto a beaker nigh 
And drank and cried out : 

'Drink now all of you 
Unto the best man Iceland ever knew ! 
Son, I am weary that thou hast not come 
With gleesome tales this eve unto my home ; 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 373 

Yet well thou farest surely amid those 
Who are the noblest there, and not so close 
They sit, but there is room for thee beside ; 
Sure, too, with them this eve is merry tide 
That thou art come amongst them would that I, 
O son, O son, were of that company ! ' 

" With outstretched hand and fixed eyes did he stare, 
As though none other in the hall there were 
But him he named ; the while mid shout and clank 
All folk unto the man departed drank, 
And midst the noise, withal, I saw no few, 
Who from their sheaths the glittering weapons drew, 
And through the talk of Kiartan's deeds I heard, 
Not lowly spoken, many a threatening word ; 
While with the tumult of the clattering place 
So gathered white-hot rage in Thorgerd's face, 
That long it held her silent : then I saw 
A black form from the women's chamber draw 
White-faced, white-handed ; ever did she gaze 
Upon the hall-door with an anxious face, 
And once or twice as the stout door-planks shook 
Beneath the wind's stroke, a half-hopeful look 
Came o'er her face, that faded presently 
In anguish, as she looked some face to see 
Come from the night, and then remembered all ; 
And therewith did great ruth upon me fall, 
For this was Refna ; and most quietly 
She passed to Olaf's side, and with a sigh 
Sat down beside him there ; now and again 
An eager look lit up her patient pain 
As from the home-men Kiartan's name came loud, 
And then once more her heavy head she bowed 
And strove to weep and might not. In a while 
She raised her eyes, and met gray Thorgerd's smile 
Scornful and fierce, who therewithal rose up 
And laid her hand upon a silver cup, 
And drew from out her cloak a jewelled sword, 
And cast it ringing on the oaken board, 
And o'er the hall's noise high her clear voice shrilled ; 



374 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

"'If the old gods by Christ and mass are killed, 
Or driven away, yet am I left behind, 
Daughter of Egil, and with such a mind 
As Egil had ; wherefore if Asa Thor 
Has never lived, and there are men no more 
Within the land, yet by this king's gift here, 
And by this cup Thor owned once, do I swear 
That the false foster-brother shall be slain 
Before three summers have come round again, 
If but my hand must bring him to his end.' 

" Therewith a stern shout did her tall sons send 
Across the hall, and mighty din arose 
Among the home-men. Refna shrank all close 
To Olaf s side ; but he at first said naught, 
Until the cries and clash of weapons brought 
Across his dream some image of past days ; 
And, turning, upon Refna did he gaze, 
And on her soft hair laid his hand, and then 
Faced round upon the drink-flushed clamorous men, 
And in a mighty voice cried out and said : 
' Forbear, ye brawlers ! now is Kiartan dead, 
Nor shall I live long. Will it bring him back 
To let loose on the country war and wrack, 
And slay the man I love next after him ? 
Leave me in peace at least ! mine eyes wax dim, 
And little pleasure henceforth shall I have, 
Until my head hath rest within the grave.' 

"Then did he rise and stretch across the board, 
And took into his hand the noble sword, 
And said, ' In good will wert thou given, O blade, 
But not to save my son's heart wert thou made. 
Help no man henceforth ! harm no man henceforth ! 
Thou foolish glittering toy of little worth ! ' 

" Therewith he brake the sword across his knee, 
And cast it down ; and then I minded me 
How the dead man there bore not that fair blade 
When unto grass of Swinedale he was laid. 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 375 

But Olaf looked so great a man, that none 
Durst say a word against him. ' Gone is gone,' 
He said, ' nor yet on Bodli shall ye fall. 
When all is ready Kiartan's voice shall call 
For him he loved ; but if it must be so, 
Then unto Oswif's base sons shall ye show 
That him they did to death left friends behind ; 
For this thing ever shall ye bear in mind, 
That through their vile plots did all come to pass, 
And Bodli but the sword they fought with was.' 

And therewithal he sat down wearily, 
And once again belike saw naught anigh. 

" Well, Oswif, little more there happed that eve, 
And I at dawn to-day their stead did leave, 
To tell thee how things went." 

Now Bodli heard 

The man speak, and some heart in him was stirred 
When of the woman's oath was told, but when 
The tale was ended, his head sank again 
With a low moan ; but Oswif said : 

" Yea, true 

Did my heart tell me, when I thought I knew 
The nobleness of Olaf Hauskuldson. 
What shall be done now ? " 

As he spake came one 

Panting and flushed into the hall, and cried : 
" Get to your arms in haste ; Herdholt doth ride 
Unto our stead in goodly company ! " 
Then was there tumult as was like to be, 
And round the silent face of the dead man, 
Hither and thither, half-armed tremblers ran 
With poor hearts ; but old Oswif to the door 
Went forth unarmed, and Bodli scarce moved more 
Than his dead foster-brother. Soon withal 
Did quiet on the troubled homestead fall, 
For there was naught come but a peaceful train 
To bring back Kiartan to his home again ; 
And there upon the green slope did they bide, 
Whence Kiartan on that other morn had cried 



376 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

His scorn aloud ; wherefrom were six men sent, 

Who, entering now the thronged hall, slowly went, 

Looking around them, toward the bier ; but as 

They drew anear it, from the bower did pass 

A black-clad figure, and they stood aghast, 

For it was Gudrun, and wild eyes she cast 

On this and that man, as if questioning 

Mutely, the meaning of some dreadful thing 

She knew was doing there : her black gown's hem 

She caught up wildly as she gazed at them, 

Then shuddering cast it down, and seemed to seek 

The face of Oswif ; then as if to shriek 

She raised her head, and clenched her hands, but 

naught 

Of sound from out her parched lips was there brought, 
Till at her breast she clutched, and rent adown 
With trembling hands the bosom of her gown, 
And cried out, panting as for lack of air : 

" Alas, what do ye ? have ye come to bear 
My love a second time from me, O men ? 
Do ye not know he is come back again 
After a long time ? Ah, but evil heart 
Must be in you such love as ours to part ! " 

Then, crying out, upon the corpse she fell, 
And men's hearts failed them for pure, ruth, and well 
They deemed it, might she never rise again ; 
But strong are many hearts to bear all pain 
And live, and hers was even such an one. 
Softly they bore her back amidst her swoon ; 
And then, while even men must weep, once more 
Did Kiartan pass the threshold of the door, 
That once had been the gate of Paradise, 
Unto his longing heart. But in no wise 
Did Bodli move amidst all this, until 
Slow wound the Herdholt men around the hill ; 
Then stealthily his white face did he raise, 
And turned about unto the empty place 
Where erst the bier had stood ; then he arose, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 

And looked into the faces of all those 
Who stood around, as asking what betid, 
What dreadful thing the quivering silence hid ; 
And then he staggered back unto the wall, 
And such a storm of grief on him did fall, 
With sobs, and tears, and inarticulate cries, 
That men for shame must turn away their eyes, 
Nor seem to see a great man fallen so low. 



With such wild songs home to the stead came now 
The last load of that bitter harvesting, 
That from the seed of lust and lies did spring. 



Gudnui's deeming of the Men who loved her. 

THUS have I striven to show the troublous life 
Of these dead folk, e'en as if mid their strife 
I dwelt myself; but now is Kiartan slain ; 
Bodli's blank yearning, Gudrun's wearying pain, 
Shall change but little now unto the end ; 
And midst a many thoughts home must I wend, 
And in the ancient days abide no more. 
Yet, when the shipman dravveth nigh the shore, 
And slacks the sheet and lets aclown the sail, 
Scarce suddenly therewith all way doth fail 
The sea-clasped keel. So with this history 
It fareth now ; have patience then with me 
A moment yet, ere all the tale is told. 

"While Olaf Peacock lived, his sons did hold 
Their hands from Bodli ; Oswif's sons must pay 
With gold and outlawry for that ill day, 
And nothing else there happened to them worse 
Than o'er the sea to bear all people's curse, 
Nor know men aught more of their history. 
Three winters afterward did Olaf die, 
Full both of years and honor; then was not 
Thorgerd's fierce oath amidst her sons forgot ; 



378 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The golden ring, whose end old Guest foresaw, 
Worn through the weary years with many a flaw, 
Now smitten, fell asunder : Bodli died 
Manlike amidst his foes, with none beside 
To sorrow o'er him, scarcely loath maybe 
The end of his warped life at last to see. 

Turn back awhile ; of her I have to tell, 
Whose sorrow on my heart the more doth dwell, 
That naught she did to earn it, as I deem 
Unto the Ridge, where on the willowy stream 
Her father's stead looks down, did Refna go, 
That, if it might be, she some rest might know 
Within the fair vale where she wandered, when 
The bearded faces of the weaponed men 
Were wonders to her child's eyes, far away 
The wild thoughts of their hearts ; her little day 
Of hope and joy gone by, there yet awhile 
She wandered once again ; nor her faint smile 
Would she withhold, when pitying eyes did gaze 
On the deep sorrow of her lovely face ; 
For she belike felt strong, and still might deem 
That life, all turned into a longing dream, 
Would long abide with her happier she was, 
But little time over her head did pass, 
Before all smiles from off her face did fade, 
And in the grave her yearning heart was laid, 
No more now to be rent 'twixt hope and fear, 
No more to sicken with the dull despair. 

Yet is she left to tell of, some might call, 
The very cause the very curse of all ; 
And yet not I for after Bodli's death 
Too dreadful grew the dale, my story saith, 
For Gudrun longer at her house to dwell, 
Wherefore with Snorri, lord of Holyfell, 
Did she change steads. There dwelt she a long space, 
And true it is, that in her noble face 
Men deemed but little signs of woe they saw ; 
And still she lived on long, and in great awe 






THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 379 

And honor was she held, nor unfulfilled 

Was the last thing that Guest deemed fate had willed 

Should fall on her : when Bodli's sons were men 

And many things had happed, she wed again, 

And though her days of keen joys might be bare 

Yet little did they bring of added care 

As on and on they wore from that old time 

When she was set amidst mad love and crime. 

Yet went this husband's end no otherwise 
Than Guest foresaw : at last with dreamy eyes 
And weary heart from his grave too she turned. 
Across the waste of life on one hand burned 
The unforgotten sore regretted days 
Long left behind ; and o'er the stony ways 
Her feet must pass yet, the gray cloud of death 
Rolled doubtful, drawing nigher. The tale saith 
That she lived long years afterwards, and strove, 
E'en as she might, to win a little love 
From God now, and with bitter yearning prayer 
Through these slow-footed lonely days to wear. 
And men say, as to all the ways of earth 
Her soul grew blind, and other hopes had birth 
Within her, that her bodily sight failed too, 
And now no more the dark from day she knew. 

This one more picture gives the ancient book, 
On which I pray you for a while to look, 
If for your tears ye may. For it doth tell 
That on a day she sat at Holyfell 
Within the bower, another Bodli there 
Beside her, son of him who wrought her care ; 
A travelled man and mighty, gay of weed, 
Doer belike of many a desperate deed 
Within the huge wall of the Grecian king. 
A summer eve it was, and everything 
Was calm and fair, the tinkling bells did sound 
From the fair chapel on the higher ground 
Of the holy hill, the murmur of the sea 
Came on the fitful southwest soothingly ; 



3So THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

The house-carles sang as homeward now they went 
From out the home-field, and the hay's sweet scent 
Floated around : and when the sun had died 
An hour agone now, .Bodli stirred and sighed ; 
Perchance too clearly felt he life slip by 
Amid those pensive things, and certainly 
He too was passed his youth. 

" Mother," he said, 

" Awhile agone it came into my head 
To ask thee somewhat ; thou hast loved me well, 
And this perchance is no great thing to tell 
To one who loves thee." 

With her sightless eyes 
Turned on him did she smile in loving wise, 
But answered naught ; then he went on, and said : 
"Which of the men thou knewest who are dead 
Long ago, mother, didst thou love the best ?" 

Then her thin hands each upon each she pressed, 
And her face quivered, as some memory 
Were hard upon her : 

" Ah, son \ years go by. 

When we are young this year we call the worst 
That we can know ; this bitter day is cursed, 
And no more such our hearts can bear we say. 
But yet as time from us falls fast away 
There comes a day, son, when all this is fair 
And sweet, to what, still living, we must bear 
Bettered is bale by bale that follows it, 
The saw saith." 

Silent both awhile did sit 
Until she spake again : " Easy to tell 
About them, son, my memory serves me well : 
A great chief Thorkel was, bounteous and wise, 
And ill hap seemed his death in all men's eyes. 
Bodli thy sire was mighty of his hands, 
Scarce better dwelt in all the northern lands ; 
Thou wouldst have loved him well. My husband Thord 
Was a great man ; wise at the council-board, 
Well learned in law for Thorwald, he indeed, 



THE LOVERS OF GUDRUN. 381 

A rash weak heart, like to a stinging weed 
Must be pulled up ah, that was long ago !" 

Then Bodli smiled, " Thou wouldst not have me know 
Thy thought, O mother these things know I well; 
Old folk about these men e'en such tales tell." 

She said : " Alas, O son, thou ask'st of love ! 
Long folly lasteth ; still that word doth move 
My old worn heart hearken one little word, 
Then ask no more ; ill is it to be stirred 
To vain repining for the vanished days." 

She turned, until her sightless eyes did gaze 
As though the wall, the hills, must melt away, 
And show her Herdholt in the twilight gray ; 
She cried, with tremulous voice, and eyes grown wet 
For the last time, whate'er should happen yet, 
With hands stretched Out for all that she had lost : 

" I did the worst to him I loved the most." 



HPHEY too, those old men, well might sit and gaze 
JL Upon the images of bygone days, 
And wonder mid their soft self-pity, why 
Mid such wild struggles had their lives gone by, 
Since neither love nor joy, nor even pain, 
Should last forever ; yet their strife so vain 
While still they strove, so sore regretted now, 
The heavy grief that once their heads did bow, 
Had wrought so much for them, that they might sit 
Amid some pleasure at the thought of it ; 
At least not quite consumed by sordid fear, 
That now at last the end was come anear ; 
At least not hardened quite so much, but they 
Might hear of love and longing worn away 
'Twixt birth and death of others, wondering 
Belike, amid their pity what strange thing 
Made the mere truth of what poor souls did bear 



382 THE EARTHLY PARADISE. 

In vain or not in vain so sweet to hear, 
So healing to the tangled woes of earth, 
At least for a short while. 

But little mirth 

The gray eve and the strong unfailing wind 
Might ask of them that tide ; and yet behind 
That mask of pensive eyes, so unbeguiled 
By ancient folly any more, what wild 
Strange flickering hopes ineffable might lie, 
As swift that latter end of eve slipped by ! 



THE END. 



Cambridge : Printed by Welch, Bigelow, & Co. 



The American Publishers of WILLIAM MORRIS'S Books, desirous of preserving 
e many good things which the critics have said about " The Earthly Paradise," as 
jll as to aid in spreading the fame of the " rising poet," have collected these criti- 
>ms, a few of the many " Tributes " of the English and American press. 



RIBUTES 



WILLIAM MORRIS, 



ON THE PUBLICATION OF 



THE EARTHLT PARADISE. 



" It is a very good office one man does another, when he tells him tne manner of 
s being pleased," SIR RICHARD STEELE. 



The "TRIBUTES," a pamphlet of 36 pages, will be mailed free to 
ly address by the publishers, 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston. 



" TV/.? Earthly Paradise, by Mr. Morris, one of the few great poems of our cei 
tury." JOHN G. WHITTIER. 

"The largest of the late crop of poets." JOHN G. SAXE. 

"Much the most notable poem recently published." GEO. W. CURTIS. 

" The world is richer by a new poet, a genuine born maker and singer." RICI 
ARD GRANT WHITE. 

" It brings back the golden age of poetry, and is most delicious reading." HAI 
RIET PKESCOTT SPOFFORD. 

"Poems of rare and fresh excellence." CHARLES E. NORTON. 

" Since Chaucer, the most truly imaginative (narrative) poet that has appeared." - 
PAUL II. HAYXE. 

"Every page increases the wonderful charm of the poem." HARRIET McEwE 
KIMBALL. 

" Mr. Morris has made a bold and successful step towards a return to the simplicil 
and strength of nature, against which our poets have resolutely closed their eyes fc 
many a day." GEO. II. BOKER. 

" Like a reawakening of Spenser, in its long, sweet, meandering rhythms, an 
like a resurrection of the Greek gods themselves, in the life-like beauty with whic 
the familiar stories of mythology are told." Lucy LARCOM. 



Mr. MORRIS'S Poems are published in America by arrangemer. 
with him, and he receives a stated copyright on all sold. 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON. 1 
POEM, in one volume, i6mo, cloth. Price, $1.50. 



THE EARTHLT PARADISE. A POEM. 

^One 1 Volume.' j Comprising March, April, May, June, July, and August. 

In o'n^Vaiume I Com P risin & September, October, and November. 

PART IV. j Comprising December, January, and February. 
In One Volume. \ (In Preparation.) 

There are two editions of the Earthly Paradise . 

The crovm Svo (English) Edition, green vellum cloth, ffilt top. Price $3-<x 
The i6mo Edition, -vellum cloth, gilt top. Price $2.25. 



Sold by all booksellers everywhere, or mailed, post paid, on receip 
of the advertised price, by the publishers, 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, 

BOSTON. 



TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. 



The Athencetim. 

MR. MORRIS is a marvel of imaginative fecundity. While the impression left by 
his " Life and death of Jason" a poem epic alike in its character and dimensions 
is yet new, he gives us another poem, or rather a series of poems, extending to nearly 
20,000 lines. Productiveness of this sort may in itself seem somewhat suspicious; 
for very abundant growths are seldom those of the greatest worth; but in the present 
case it may truly be said that the fertility exhibited denotes not the inferiority of the 
crop, but the richness of the soil. The care, the patience, the wealth of knowledge 
which the poems before us reveal, thoroughly shut oxit the notion of haste in their 
composition, though these merits may not be appreciated at their true value, simpry 
because the ease and spontaneousness of the poet in a great measure veil the ar- 
duousness of his labor. Perhaps, indeed, that should hardly be called labor which 
has been produced with such evident pleasure. The heart of the writer has been in 
his work, and its charm for himself will be one of its great charms for his readers. 

"The Earthly Paradise" consists of legends derived from classical and mediaeval 
periods, and set in a framework which belongs to the latter period. " Certain 
gentlemen and mariners of Norway," says the author in his Prologue, " having 
considered all that they had heard of the Earthly Paradise, set sail to find it, and 
after many troubles and the lapse of many years, came, old men, to some western 
land of which they had never before heard." Missing the " Happy Isles," the fair 
Avallon of which poets had fabled, the worn and disappointed wanderers find, 
nevertheless, some comfort in the hospitality extended to them by the rulers of this 
western country. In return for the kindness shown, the wanderers not only give 
the benefit of their experience in matters of polity to their entertainers, but twice in 
each month, at solemn feasts, relate to them chronicles either of the old northern 
world from which they came, or of those fairer lands the mythology of which was 
the early poetry of Europe. Amongst the tales recited we have those of the fleet- 
footed Atalanta of the imprisonment and escape of Danae, and the exploits of 
Perseus her son of the loves of Cupid and Psyche of Admetus, his friendship 
with the god-shepherd and the devotion of Alcestis of the doomed Atys, slain by 
the hand of his protector and of the statue that woke to life and love at the prayers 
of Pygmalion. With these legends of Grecian mythology are interspersed others, 
which, as already intimated, belong rather to romantic than to classical song 
stories of royal natures winning their upward way in spite of danger and impedi- 



4 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

ment, as in "The Man Born to be King"; of pride humbled and repentant, as fi 
"The Proud King"; of cupidity brought to ruin by its own excess, as in "Th< 
Writing on the Image" (a weird fable told with startling concentration and vivid 
ness of detail); the miseries that lurk in the enchantment of unhallowed passion, a: 
in " The Lady of the Land "; the punishment that awaits those who aspire to joy: 
beyond the lot of mortality, as in "The Watching of the Falcon"; and the immorta 
rewards with which spiritual powers bless their faithful votaries, as in " Ogier th( 
Dane." 

To give in our columns anything like a systematic analysis of these dozen poems 
some of which extend to the length of an ordinary volume, would be manifest!} 
impossible. Our comments upon them must, therefore, be somewhat general, and i 
should be distinctly understood that those which are merely alluded to are not less 
worthy of the reader's attention than others from which we shall select examples 
One of the merits of the book, indeed, is that even and sustained excellence which 
makes it difficult to give a very decided preference to any of its contents in partic 
ular. The same qualities of which we had occasion to speak so highly in "The Lift 
and Death of Jason " are displayed here, with the advantage of that fuller exhibitior 
which a variety of themes affords. Of the conscientious labor which Mr. Morris 
brings to his task, and of the grace which prevents the labor from being obvious, w 
have already spoken. But these qualities combined seldom result in such a happj 
fidelity to Nature^ in such truly poetic reality as we have now to commend. I( 
may be doubted whether any poet of our day equals Mr. Morris in enabling his 
reader to see the objects which are presented to him. It is certain, however, that 
this power has never been displayed on so large a scale by any contemporary. Foi 
instance, after accompanying Mr. Morris on the ideal voyage described in his Pro< 
logue, we feel as if we had travelled with him as if we knew where this promon 
tory juts into the sea, where that bay scoops the shore, what woods skirt the coast, 
what white walls gleam through them, what quays line the strand, what countrymen 
throng them, the forms of the hills and their position, and at what point we saw 



-the Autumn moonlight fall 



Upon the new-built bastions of the wall, 

Strange with black shadow and gray flood of light." 

Of this faculty of description, which combines the sharpness of photography with 
the atmosphere and color of nature, we give a few instances. Our first shall be from 
the life of towns a picture of a plague-stricken city:- 

" It was a bright September afternoon, 
The parched-up beech-trees would be yellowing soon ; 
The yellow flowers grown deeper with the sun 
Were letting fall their petals one by one ; 
No wind there was, a haze was gathering o'er 
The furthest bound of the faint yellow shore; 
And in the oily waters of the bay 
Scarce moving aught some fisher-cobles lay s 
And all seemed peace ; and had been peace indeed 
But that we young men of our life had need, 
And to our listening ears a sound was borne 
That made the sunlight wretched and forlorn 
The heavy tolling of the minster bell 
And nigher yet a tinkling sound did tell 
That through the streets they bore our Saviour Christ 
JJy dying lips in anguish to be kissed." 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. 5 

With this added glimpse of the afflicted town as the wanderers quit it: 

" And looking down I saw the old town lie 
Black in the shade of the o'erhanging hill, 
Stricken with death, and dreary, but all still 
Until it reached the water of the bay, 
That in the dead night smote against the quay 
Not all unheard, though there was little wind. 
But as I turned to leave the place behind, 
The wind's light sound, the slowly falling swell, 
Were hushed at once by that shrilf-tinkling bell, 
That in that stillness jarring on mine ears, 
With sudden jangle checked the rising tears, 
And now the freshness of the open sea 
Seemed ease and joy and very life to me." 

Where, again, shall we find more faithful transcripts of pastoral scenery, and the 
incidents of rural life, than in the quotations which we subjoin? 

" So long he rode he drew anigh 
A mill upon the river's brim, 
That seemed a goodly place to him, 
For o'er the oily smooth mill-head 
There hung the apples growing red, 
And many an ancient apple-tree 
Within the orchard could he see, 
While the smooth mill-walls white and black 
Shook to the great wheel's measured clack 
And grumble of the gear within; 
While o'er the ronf that dulled that din 
The doves s:'t Crooning half the day, 
And round i>. lialf-cut stack of hay 
The sparrows fluttered twittering. 
* * * * 

Then downward he began to wend, 
And 'twixt the flowery hedges sweet 
He heard the hook smite down the wheat, 
And murmur of the unseen folk; 
But when he reached the stream that broke 
The golden plain, but leisurely 
He passed the bridge, for he could see 
The masters of that ripening realm, 
Cast down beneath an ancient eln> 
Upon a little strip of grass, 
From hand to hand the pitcher pass, 
While on the turf beside them lay 
The ashen-handled sickles gray, 
The matters of their cheer between : 
Slices of white cheese, specked with green, 
And green-striped onions and rye-bread, 
And summer apples faintly red, 
Kven beneath the crimson skin ; 
And yellow grapes, well ripe and thin, 
Plucked from the cottage gable-end." 

Nor is Mr. Morris less truthful when, turning from the glow and stir of life with 
out, he enters some desolate interior, this cabin, for example, of a peasant, who 
has just been bereaved of his wife : 

" On straw the poor dead woman lay; 
The door alone let in the day, 
Showing the trodden earthen floor, 
, A boardon trestles weak and poor, 



O TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

Three stumps of tree for stool or chair, 
A half-glazed pipkin, nothing fair, 
A bowl of porridge by the wife, 
Untouched by lips that lacked for life, 
A platter and a bowl of wood ; 
And in the further corner stood 
A bow cut from the wych-elm tree, 
A holly club, and arrows three 
111 pointed, heavy, spliced with thread." 

And how life-like is this touch of character when the King's squire casts gold to the 
still mourning woodman, whom he bribes to part with his child I 

" The carle's rough face, at clink of gold, 
Lit up, though still did he behold 
The wasted body lying there ; 
But stooping, a rough box, four-square, 
Made of old wood and lined with hay, 
Wherein the helpless infant lay, 
Me raised, and gave it to the squire, 
Who on the floor cast down his hire, 
Nor sooth dared murmur aught the while, 
But turning smiled a grim hard smile 
To see the carle his pieces count, 
Still weeping." 

Our later extracts are taken from the poem called " The Man Born to be King," 
a bright, fresh romance, full of adventure and vicissitude, and, irrespective of the 
glow of poetry which Mr. Morris has shed over it, riveting as a mere story. 

Let the reader now contrast with the landscapes already given this sketch of sea- 
coast that drinks in the soft splendor of a more southern sun: 

" Far out to sea a certain isle doth lie 
Men call Seriphos, craggy, steep, and high : 
It rises up on every side out one. 
And mariners its ill-famed headlands shun ; 
But toward the south the meads slope soft adown, 
Until they meet the yellow sands and brown, 
That slope themselves so gently to the sea, 
The nymphs are hidden only to the knee, 
When half a mile of rippling water is 
Between the waves that their white limbs do kiss, 
And the last wave that washes shells ashore." 

The poem from which we have just quoted, " The Doom of King Acrisius," might 
well detain us by its wealth of lovely description and by its marvellous events, told 
throughout with unflagging energy and with a genius as unstrained and capable in 
daring the " wonderland " of mythology as when it moves amidst the simplicities of 
pastoral life. We must, however, pass over this charming poem, and over that of 
" Cupid and Psyche." At " The Love of Alcestis " we pause. What Mr. Morris 
can do in point of bringing home to us the features of Nature, and touches of human 
character, we have already seen. Our readers will ask for illustrations of that yet 
higher power exhibited in " Jason," which deals with the supernatural and with the 
nobler phases of human emotion. " The Love of Alcestis " will supply the exam 
ples which they require. Without attempting a minute examination of a poem of 
which it is scant praise, because only general praise, to say that it is as rich and com 
plete in form as It is fine in idea, we proceed at once to the parting of Apollo with 
the King, who has so long known him as a shepherd, and who has nevertheless 






THE ENGLISH PRESS. 7 

caught at times indications of his glory through his humble disguise. The Divine 
Herdsman apprises the King that the farewell hour is arrived : 

" Then rose the King, and with a troubled look 
His well-steeled spear within his hand he took, 
And by his herdsmen silently he went 
As to a peaked hill his steps he bent, 
Nor did the parting servant speak one word, 
As up they climbed, unto his silent lord, 
Till from the top he turned about his head 
From all the glory of the gold light, shed 
Upon the hill-top by the setting sun, 
For now indeed the day was well-nigh done, 
And all the eastern vale was gray and cold; 
But when Admetus he did now behold, 
Panting beside him from the steep ascent, 
One godlike, changed look on him he bent, 
And said, ' O mortal, listen, for I see 
Thou deemest somewhat of what is in me; 
Fear not I I love thee, even as I can 
Who cannot feel the woes and ways of man 
In spite of this my seeming, for indeed 
Now thou beholdest Jove's immortal seed : 
And what my name is I would tell thee now, 
If men who dwell upon the earth as thou 
Could hear the name and live ; but on the earth, 
"With strange melodious stories of my birth, 
Phoebus men call me, and Latona's son.' 
* * * * * 

He ceased, but ere the golden tongue was still 
An odorous mist had stolen up the hill, 
And to Admetus first the god grew dim, 
And then was but a lovely voice to him, 
And then at last the sun had sunk to rest, 
And a fresh wind blew lightly from the west 
Over the hill-top, and no soul was there; 
But the sad dying autumn field-flowers fair, 
Rustled dry leaves about the windy place, 
Where even now had been the godlike face, 
And in their midst the brass-bound quiver lay. 
Then, going further westward, far away, 
He saw the gleaning of Peneus wan 
'Neath the white sky. but never any man 
Except a gray-haired shepherd driving down 
From off the long slopes to his fold-yard brown 
His woolly sheep, with whom a maiden went 
Singing for labor done and sweet content 
Of coming rest; with that he turned again, 
And took the shafts up, never sped in vain, 
And came unto his house most deep in thought 
Of all the things the varied year had brought." 

The simple majesty of the god's discourse, the mysterious beauty of description 
when he fades from a divine presence into a divine voice, and leaves his companion 
to the sweet but humble sights of earth, so pathetic in their evanescence when com 
pared with the heavenly splendor that has just disappeared, these are things that 
the poetic appreciator cannot miss, and of which no other can judge. 

Our last and perhaps finest extracts show the sacrifice of Alcestis for the hus 
band who fears to die, and the fame which she earned. We will not say that Mr. 
Morris has treated the subject to the full height either of the argument or of his own 
power; for throughout the poem Alcestis is kept somewhat in the background, and 



8 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

our knowledge of her feelings is gained almost as much from her silence as from her 
utterance. Prominent amongst these feelings is a vague fear in the wife's mind lest 
she should in time lose the ideal she had formed of Admetus, who, she now finds, 
can prefer life even to love. Of this flaw in the husband's devotion, Mr. Morris 
takes a much sterner view than that adopted by Euripides, who treats the infirmity 
leniently, if not lightly. Accordingly, in the poem before us, Alcestis, when pre 
paring to die, if not already conscious of a sad scorn for Admetus, has at least the 
apprehension that such a sentiment may arise. Though Mr. Morris, by the reticence 
of his heroine, has precluded himself from doing all that he might have done, he has 
accomplished with admirable beauty and pathos all that he chose to do. With the 
diep memories of past idolatry, and with some grief, as the dissolving enchantment 
shows the frailty of her hero, Alcestis lies down by his side, and buys the life of the 
sick man with her own : 

" With that she laid her down upon the bed, 
And nestling to him, kissed his weary head, 
And laid his wasted hand upon her breast, 
Yet woke him not ; and silence and deep rest 
Fell on that chamber. The night wore away 
Mid gusts of wailing wind, the twilight gray 
Stole o'er the sea, and wrought his wonderous change 
On things unseen by night, by day not strange, 
But now half-seen and strange ; then came the sun, 
And therewithal the silent world and dun 
Waking, waxed many-colored, full of sound, 
As men again their heap of troubles found, 
And woke up to their joy or misery. 

But there, unmoved by aught, those twain did lie 
Until Admetus' ancient nurse drew near 
Unto the open door, and full of fear 
Beheld them moving not, and as folk dead ; 
Then, trembling with her eagerness and dread, 
She cried, ' Admetus I art thou dead indeed? 
Alcestis I livest thou my words to heed? 
Alas, alas, for this Thcssalian folk 1 ' 

But with her piercing cry the King awoke, 
And round about him wildly 'gan to stare, 
As a bewildered man who knows not where 
He has awakened : but not thin or wan 
His face was now, as of a dying man, 
But fresh and ruddy; and his eyes shone clear, 
As of a man who much of life may bear. 
And at the first, but joy and great surprise 
Shone out from those awakened, new-healed eyes ; 
But as for something more at last he yearned, 
Until his love with troubled brow he turned, 
For still she seemed to sleep : alas, alas ! 
Her lonely shadow even now did pass 
Along the changeless fields, oft looking back, 
As though it yet had thought of some^great lack. 
And here, the hand just fallen from off his breast 
Was cold ; and cold the bosom his hand pressed. 
And even as the color lit the day 
The color from her lips had waned away: 
Yet still, as though that longed-for happiness 
Had come again ner faithful heart to bless, 
Those white lips smiled, unwrinkled was her brow, 
But of her eyes no secrets might he know, 
For hidden by the lids of ivory, 
Had they beheld that death a-drawing nigh." 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. 9 

How fine again is the sad, elevated sweetness of the conclusion. Admetus gradu 
ally forgets her who has died for him; he is still the idol of his people : 

" And though indeed they did lament in turn, 
When of Alcestis' end they came to learn, 
Scarce was it more than seeming, or, at least, 
The silence in the middle of a feast, 
\Vhen men have memory of their heroes slain. 
So passed the order of the world again, 
Victorious Summer crowning lusty Spring, 
Autumn with cleared fields from the harvesting, 
And Winter the earth's sleep ; and then again 
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and the Winter's pain; 
And still and still the same the years went by. 

But Time, who slays so many a memory, 
Brought hers to light", the short-lived loving Queen; 
And her fair soul, as scent of flowers unseen, 
Sweetened the turmoil of long centuries. 
For soon, indeed, Death laid hand on these, 
The shouters round the throne upon that day. 
And for Admetus, he, too, went his way, 
Though if he died at all I cannot tel\~, 
But either on the earth he ceased to dwell, 
Or else, oft born again, had many a name. 
But through all lands of Greece Alcestis' fame 
Grew greater, and about her husband's twined 
Lived, in the hearts of far-off men enshrined. 
See I have told her tale, though I know not 
What men are dwelling now on that green spot 
Anigh Boebeis, or if Pherae still, 
With name oft changed perchance, adown the hill 
Still shows its white walls to the rising sun. 
The gods at least remember what is done." 

A word or two should be said upon the brief descriptions of the Months and upon 
the musings of the Wanderers, both of which intervene between the respective stories. 
Of these the former afford relief by fresh and graphic glimpses of the passing sea 
sons, and the latter are written in a sweet and pensive vein, which, after the stir and 
interest of the narrative portion, floats to the ear like music caught from sea in the 
momentary lull of the billows. That a diffuse page may now and then be pointed 
out, has already been said; it may be added, that on occasions the rhymes employed 
are too obviously suggested by each other, and indicate difficulties avoided rather 
than difficulties overcome. But the wonder is, after all, that these faults occur so 
rarely in a work of such extent. The labor which Mr. Morris has accomplished 
would, if executed with only moderate ability, have been striking, from its mere 
magnitude. But, displaying, as it does, some of the high qualities of genius 
great riches of invention, an imagination that enters into the being not only of human 
but supernatural agents, unstrained pathos, vivid powers of description and a keen 
sense of beauty it is an achievement of which its author may be proud, and for 
which the lovers of English poetry can hardly be ungrateful. 



The Spectator. 

MR. MORRIS has revived the delightful art of dreaming the old dreamy stories in 
verse, so that they soothe and charm the ear and fancy without making any of the 
severe intellectual demands of most of our modern poets on the constructive thought 



to TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

and imagination of the reader. His Earthly Paradise is a book which it is wrong 
to read with any reviewer's cares upon the brain, or indeed to connect at all with any 
sense of responsibility, or any mood but one of dreamy enjoyment. His storied 
verse throws us back almost into the state of credulous wonder in which we used to 
read the fairy stories of childhood, and seriously try the expedient of throwing a 
crooked pin into a wishing well, and then wishing for one of the old marvels ; and 
yet, besides thus half restoring that vague and wide-eyed childlike credulity by its 
simple and earnest narrative of wonders, his verse is so full of the beauty of the 
world and of the pity of unsatisfied and disappointed yearnings, that it combines 
with this innocent simplicity much of the deeper rapture of the eye, and of the fuller 
pathos of the heart, which belong only to experience. Indeed, we scarcely know 
whether it has most of that happy freedom from the sense of chains and restraints 
which belongs to childlike ignorance of the inexorable intellectual and moral con 
ditions of life, or of that piteous tenderness in recounting human woes which belongs 
to the age of experience and consequently of regrets. The Earthly Paradise is a 
big book, to be read slowly, in the intervals of a lazy and leisurely holiday, not to be 
read through as one would read a book on the laws of Magnetic currents, or the 
Irish Church. There is no toil, no effort, no purpose in the verse. Mr. Morris sees 
the world again as the old childlike poets saw it before the idea of " law " had been 
brought forth with much travail into the world, or even the principles of art consci 
ously developed; and the beauty which his poem has, is, therefore, the old fresh 
beauty, sketched without laborious analysis, due to a visionary eye and a lovely uni 
verse, not the beauty of metaphysic subtlety or artistic skill. There is nothing more 
delightful than to escape from the problem-haunted poetry of the day into the rippling 
narrative of Mr. Morris's fresh and vivid fancy. In some of the loveliest verses we 
have yet read of his, perhaps the most beautiful he has ever given to the world, Mr. 
Morris truly describes his poetic function in the big, diversified, brightly colored 
tissue of poetic fable which he has wrought together in this volume : 

" Of Heaven or Hell I have no power to sing, 
I cannot ease the burden of your fears, 
Or make quick-coming death a little thing, 
Or bring again the pleasure of past years, 
Nor for my words shall ye forget your tears, 
Or hope again for aught that I can say, 
The idle singer of an empty day. 

But rather, when aweary of your mirth, 
From full hearts still unsatisfied ye sigh, 
And feeling kindly unto all the earth, 
Grudge every minute as it passes by, 
Made the more mindful that the sweet days die 
Remember me a little then. I pray, 
The idle singer of an empty day. 

The heavy trouble, the bewildering care 
That weighs us down who live and earn our bread, 
These idle verses have no power to bearj 
So let me sing of names remembered, 
Because they, living not, can ne'er be dead, 
Or long time take their memory quite away 
From us poor singers of an empty day. 

Dreamer of dreams, born out of my due time, 
Why should I strive to set the crooked straight? 
Let it suffice me that my murmuring rhyme 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. II 

Beats with light wing against the ivory gate, 
Telling a tale not too importunate 
To those who in the sleepy region stay, 
Lulled by the singer of an empty day. 

Folk say, a wizard to a northern king 
At Christmas-tide such wondrous things did show, 
That through one window men beheld the spring, 
And through another saw the summer glow, 
And through a third the fruited vines a-row, 
While still, unheard, but in its wonted way, 
Piped the drear wind of that December day. 

So with this Earthly Paradise it is, 
If ye will read aright, and pardon me, 
Who strive to build a shadowy isle of bliss 
Midmost the beating of the steely sea, 
Where tossed about all hearts of men must be; 
Whose ravening monsters mighty men shall slay, 
Not the poor singer of an empty day." 

?hat is a most perfect account of the scope and of the charm of the Earthly Para- 
'ise. In form the book has something of the naivete of the Thousand-And-One 
ights. Mr. Morris begins with a mediaeval poem on the dreams which led men to 
eek out Utopias in the west, during the century or two which preceded the actual 
liscovery of the New World. As in the Life and Death of jfason, but in this case, 
f course, without any of the magic which is of the essence of that delightful poem, 
S.T. Morris paints the half reasonable, half superstitious hopes which led men just 
efore the dawn of modern science to seek new lands free from the thought of death 
nd pain. He paints with exquisite lightness of touch the deferred hope, the tri- 
imphant anticipation, the weary disappointment, the soothing rest, which the long 
oyage and actual discovery of the lovely barbarism and semi-civilization of tropical 
America gave rise to in the hearts of the Utopia-seekers. Then he brings back a 
reary and dispirited remnant to the old country in that stage of life, and that com- 
lex mood of gratitude for their return, of self-reproach for their wasted stores of 
njoyment and energy, and of pride in their useless achievements, which most min 
sters to the dreamy mood in which they will recall gladly the old marvels their 
outh had read or heard of. This is the machinery by which the occasion is obtained 
x rehearsing the old Greek or Italian or Norse legends which these worn-out 
lariners have treasured up in their memories. The same old yearning for a condition 
f life in part removed from the painful incidents of loss and death, or raised above 
ese conditions by supernatural gifts, which had taken the mariners in seach of a 
'topia in their youth, is perceived to determine in great measure the subjects of the 
lies thus rehearsed. Either they are filled with the Greek idea of a fate overruling 
11 human desires or they narrate how men specially favored by the supernatural 
owers were just enabled to taste the delights which ordinary mortals miss. The 
iread which connects all these poetic fables and gives them a sort of unity, is the 
nportunate craving for some special isle of happiness amidst the cares of lite, which 
11 the tales more or less express, and the pathetic disappointments attaching to 
rhich all the tales more or less delineate. There is a profound sense of the glory 
roperly belonging to life in all of them, and of the lamentable liability to see that 
lory drowned in tears, in all likewise. In one or two of the tales perhaps, " The 
i^dy of the Land" and "The Writing on the Image" especially, the human 
earning, the Chaucerian pity, is too much lost sight of in mere fairy tale ; and by 



: 2 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

these two stories at least, this delightful volume might perhaps have fairly been 
shortened. But generally, in almost all, the human joy, love, and pity predom 
inate over mere wonders, and lend to the wonders half their light and beauty. Take, 
for instance, the story of Apollo's service as a herdsman to King Admetus, and how 
the god gave Alcestis power to redeem her husband from death by the sacrifice ol 
her own life; nothing can be more simply human in its tenderness than the whole 
story in the form in which Mr. Morris has given it to us. How fine is the description 
of Apollo in his herdsman's disguise at the opening of the poem : 

" So henceforth did this man at Pherse dwell, 
And what he set his hand to wrought right well, 
And won much praise and love in everything, 
And came to rule all herdsmen of the King; 
But for two things in chief his fame did grow; 
And first that he was better with the bow 
Than any 'twixt Olympus and the sea, 
And then that sweet, heart-piercing melody 
He drew out from the rigid-seeming lyre, 
And made the circle roxind the winter fire 
More like to heaven than gardens of the May. 
So many a heavy thought he chased away 
From the King's heart, and softened many a hate, 
And choked the spring of many a harsh debate ; 
And, taught by wounds, the snatchers of the wolds 
Lurked round the gates of less well guarded folds. 
Therefore Admetus loved him, yet withal, 
Strange doubts and fears upon his heart did fall ; 
For morns there were when he the man would meet, 
His hair wreathed round with bay and blossoms sweet, 
Gazing distraught into the brightening east, 
Nor taking heed of either man or beast, 
Or anything that was upon the earth. 
Or sometimes midst the hottest of the mirth, 
Within the King's hall, would he seem to wake 
As from a dream, and his stringed tortoise take 
And strike the chords unbidden, till the hall 
Filled with the glorious sound from wall to wall, 
Trembled and seemed as it would melt away, 
And sunken down the faces weeping lay 
That erewhile laughed the loudest ; only he 
Stood upright, looking forward steadily 
With sparkling eyes as one who cannot weep, 
Until the storm of music sank to sleep." 

Very sweet and harmonious is the description of the love of peace and the wide love 
of man shed by Apollo into the heart of Admetus, and of his delight in the peaceful 
conquests of rich harvests and laborious lives. But the main beauty of the poem is 
in Its close, when, on the death-bed of Admetus, Apollo returns to tell him that he 
Wjr yet recor^r if any one will give a life in exchange for his, and his aged wife 
~<i<is, yhQ js lying by his side, silently resolves to give up hers for her husband : 



e, the Bitterness of God and fate ( 
*ift} time ago y/e fwo were one ; 
A- ' nst Jost him though his life was done 1 , 
TT U t'll -C^ 03 ^ e * n m e 14 now alone 
r ^;~Y. the "Hick darkness fBSt my soul make moan, 
^1 must die- !"W can I live to bear 
An ern^y heart about, the nurse of fear? 
How^an 3 ! live to die some other Ude, . 
And, dying, hear my loveless name outcried 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. 13 

About the portals of that weary land 

Whereby my shadowy feet should come to stand? 

1 Alcestis 1 O Alcestis I hadst thou known 
That thou one day shouldst thus be left alone, 
How hadst thou borne a living- soul to love 1 
Hadst thou not rather lifted hands to Jove, 
To turn thine heart to stone, thy front to brass, 
That through this wondrous world thy soul might pass, 
Well pleased and careless, as Diana goes 
Through the thick woods, all pitiless of those 
Her shafts smite down? Alas 1 how could it be? 
Can a god give a god's delights to thee? 
Nay rather, Jove, out give me once again, 
If for one moment only, that sweet pain 
Of love I had while still I thought to live 1 
Ah I wilt thou not, since unto thee I give 
My life, my hope? But thou I come to thee, 
Thou sleepest : O wake not, nor speak to me I 
In silence let my last hour pass away, 
And men forget my bitter feeble day.' 

With that she laid her down. upon the bed, 
(See faffed.) 

The description here of the morning breaking over the aged pair, in one of whom 
life had been renewed, and in the other at her own prayer extinguished, is, in its 
gentle way, as sweet and touching- as anything in modern poetry, though it has not 
all the lustre of one or two of the descriptive passages in other poems where the beauty 
of the external world flashes through the veil of overflowing emotion. For mere lyrical 
beauty of this sweet and shining kind the passage describing Perseus and Andro 
meda, after the sea-monster has been destroyed, and the fears of the maiden have 
given place to happy love, is perhaps the most brilliant in the book: 

" Then on a rock smoothed by the washing sea 
They sat and eyed each other lovingly. 
And few words at the first the maiden said, 
So wrapped she was in all the goodlihead 
Of her new life made doubly happy now : 
For her alone the sea breeze seemed to blow, 
For her in music did the white surf faJl, 
For her alone the wheeling birds did cal 
Over the shallows, and the sky for her 
Was set with white clouds, far away and clear; 
B'en as her love, this strong and lovely one 
Who held her hand, was but for her alone." 

There is, too, quite a Herodotean simplicity and good faith in the manner in which 
Mr. Morris describes the various marvels of his old tales. Instead of the covert 
satire of the modern style, or even the irresponsible historical manner which tells 
only what it has heard for as much as it may be worth, and no more, Mr. Morris 
narrates with a circumstantial precision of eye which never even raises the question 
of evidence at all. For instance, when Psyche is alone in the palace of Love, you 
hear the very splash of the water in her golden bath, and see her startled eyes as she 
beholds her own image and hears "the loud splashing in that lonely place." No 
child would doubt any detail of the story, if not prematurely trained in scientific 
scepticism: 

" She came again, and through a little door 
Entered a chamber with a marble floor, 



H TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

Open a-top unto the outer air, 

Beneath which lay a bath of water fair, 

Paved with strange stones and figures of bright gold, 

And from the steps thereof could she behold 

The slim-leaved trees against the evening sky 

Golden and calm, still moving languidly. 

So for a time upon the brink she sat, 
Debating in her mind of this and that, 
And then arose and slowly from her cast 
Her raiment, and adown the steps she passed 
Into the water, and therein she played, 
Till of herself at last she grew afraid, 
And of the broken image of her face, 
And the loud splashing in that lonely place." 

It is this combination between the simple credulity of a seeing and trustful imagi 
nation, and a tender human love and pity that enter into all the hopes and fears of 
Mr. Morris's various wonderful heroes and heroines, which makes these narrative 
poems so charming. The story uniformly slides along with the simplest grace ; 
every now and then a passage of rare sweetness and pathos occurs which leaves a 
light in the memory long after we have passed it by; and so the book gives us, on 
the whole, a volume of the most delightful and varied poetic legend which ever en 
tranced the school-boy, or amused the weary brain of toiling man. 



The Saturday Review. 

IN these days, when the poetry most in vogue is such as is one man's business to 
write and another's to interpret, it is refreshing to the spirit to meet with a modern 
poem of the Chaucerian type. If there is ground for a suspicion that not half of 
those who praise the subtleties of our contemporary poets are at pains to penetrate 
them, still less is it likely that such will put themselves about to study the explana 
tions and elucidations which, although the tribute is surely a questionable compli 
ment, admiring critics vie with each other in offering at their shrine. At any rate 
there is a fairer chance for poetry to be read and appreciated and taken back into 
favor by a busy material age, if its scope is distinct and direct, its style clear and 
pellucid, and its manner something like that of the old rhapsodists, minnesingers, 
and tale-tellers who in divers climes and ages have won such deserved popularity. 
So seems Mr. Morris to have thought, who now follows up the success of his Life 
and Death of Jason with a second poem, even more distinctly wrought after Chau 
cer's model. In that poem the reader followed the hero, so to speak, from the cradle 
to the grave, and there was no attempt at any framework to hold his adventures 
together. The Earthly Paradise, on the other hand, is a collection of tales, classical 
and mediaeval, in much the same sort of setting as the tales of Boccaccio or Chaucer. 
A knot of story-tellers are introduced to us in a Prologue, which is in itself a story, 
as having agreed to tell tales at set times upon Sannazaro's principle, 

Falle diem : mediis mors venit atra jocis : 

And here it is not a group of Canterbury pilgrims supping at a hostel, nor young 
ladies with their lovers seeking refuge in a country villa, and fending the grim mem 
ories of the plague at Florence by the arts of the minstrel and the gestour, but a 
strangely interesting revival of that olden quest of shores unvisited by death, those 
dreams of alchymist, adept, and hermetic philosopher, which were so common in the 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. 15 

middle ages, and which, of course, resulted in the same sort of " labor lost" as the 
searches for the local habitation of Prester John. 

****** 

There is, indeed, one feature which imparts to Mr. Morris's lays a grace not always 
conspicuous in his model; a grace sadly wanting to the poetry of one of his contem 
poraries, who professes the warmest appreciation of his Muse. A thorough purity 
of thought and language characterizes Mr. Morris. We tremble to think of the 
treatment which Jove's wooing of Danae in the brazen tower would have met 'with, 
had the " Doom of King Acrisius" been handled by the author of Chastelard; had 
Andromeda on the rock, or Psyche in her interview with her unseen lover, been 
subjected to the fervid and sensuous imagination of Mr. Swinburne. From one end 
to the other of the Earthly Paradise there is no error in taste of this sort, and it is 
thereby adapted for conveying to our wives and daughters a refined, though not 
diluted, version of those wonderful creations of Greek fancy which the rougher sex 
alone is permitted to imbibe at first hand, from the ancient fountain, taking bitter 
with sweet, and pure with impure. Yet, in achieving this purification, Mr. Morris 
has not imported tameness into his versions. Every situation is made the most of, 
within the limits of a chaste and refined fancy a fancy, too, that does not escape 
into the favorite by-path of modern days, by regarding the mythic heroes and heroines 
as the impersonations of natural phenomena, or explaining them away upon the 
" bow-wow " principle. With him mortals and immortals live and breathe, eat and 
drink, love and hate, and he asks no questions, neither perplexes his readers with 
any doubts, keeping well before his mind that his office is that of the rhapsodist of 
old. The impress of familiarity with classic fable is stamped on his pages, and 
echoes of the Greek are wafted to us from afar both delicately and imperceptibly. 
* * * * * * 

But really the task of singling out the best stories for commendation, where all are 
good, is, in the case of the Earthly Paradise, a work of supererogation. Suffice it 
to say that we have enjoyed such a thorough treat in this in every sense rare volume, 
that we heartily commend it to readers of all ages. 



The London Review. 

THE reputation which Mr. Morris has won for himself is creditable not only to 
him, but also to the reading public. One begins to have a higher respect for modern 
taste and criticism, and greater hopes of modern English literature, in observing the 
effect produced by the one or two very unpretending volumes which Mr. Morris has 
published. We are glad to know that there is a public with sufficient discrimination 
and time to give honest literary labor the full and patient attention it demands ; and 
what reputation Mr. Morris has acquired, he has undoubtedly earned by dint of good 
and sound work. * * * Mr. Morris has got over the most trying portion of his career. 
He has separated himself from the herd of verse-writers ; he has secured for himself 
an audience ; whatever he writes is in no danger of being overlooked. And he has 
achieved this success under obviously difficult conditions. He is not professedly a 
lyric poet; nor does he ever care to appeal to the reader simply through a sensuous 
sweetness of sound. Then his subjects have been either mediaeval or classical; and, 
instead of breathing the new spirit of this century, into the old types, he has studi 
ously confined himself to a reproduction of the form and sentiment of the times of 



1 6 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

which he treats. We do not know in Knglish literature of any effort at reproduc 
tion so artistically perfect as the "Defence of Guenevere ; " and his recently-j. tb- 
lished "Jason" is admirable in the same way. But this is a merit which generally 
lies in the way of a poet's popularity; and that Mr. Morris, in the face of such obsta 
cles, should have earned for himself the fame that now belongs to him, is a proof that 
genuine poetic utterances, in whatever guise they may appear, never fail to secure 
their own proper audience. 

****** 

It would be difficult to convey, by means of extracts, any part of the impression 
produced by this book ; nor could the reader judge by sucli excerpts of the singular 
purity, terseness, and vigor of Mr. Morris's style. Mr. Morris aims at a severe 
simplicity, occasionally relieved by a few Chaucerian quaintnesses, which give his 
poems a certain air of individuality, besides adding greatly to the strength of his 
language. * * * Of the tales which go to make up the volume, " Atalanta's Race," and 
the story of Pygmalion, will probably become chief favorites. Mr. Morris points 
no artistic moral in his rendering of the Pygmalion legend. He does uot make the 
artist desecrate his art by imbuing it with sensual passion; nor does he describe the 
vivified statue as eating and drinking, " like to a glorious beast." Pygmalion's 
passion receives its reward in the entire humanizing- of the statue; and the maiden 
whom he had created becomes his wife. In the story of " Ogier the Dane," there 
occurs a charming song, which shows us that Mr. Morris ought to cultivate that 
lyric faculty which gave us the splendid choruses in the " Life and Death of Jason." 
The song is begun " 'twixt two young voices," " in the garden green," and the 
girl sings: 

" In the white-flowered hawthorn brake,' 
Love, be merry for my sake ; 
Twine the blossoms in my hair, 
Kiss me where I am most fair 
Kiss me, love 1 for who knoweth 
"What thing cometh after death? " 

It is finished by his singing 

" Weep, O Love, the days that flit 

Now, while I can feel thy breath ; 
Then may I remember it 

Sad and old, and near my death. 
Kiss me, love t for who knoweth 
What thing cometh after death?" 

As the latest contribution of a poet of unusual and quite original power, and of very 
great promise, " The Earthly Paradise " will be read with much interest and much 
pleasure. 



The Fortnightly Review. 

AT a time when lovers of poetry are over-wearied with excess of purely subjective 
verse, some of it deep and admirable and sincere, much of it mere hollow echo and 
imitation, and most of it essentially sterile in its solutions, it is no small thing to 
possess such a poet as Mr. Morris. His mind seems to have travelled in paths 
remote from the turgid perplexities of a day of spiritual transition. Either the extra 
ordinary directness and brightness of his temperament have made him unconscious 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. I'J 

of them, or else they have presented themselves to him for a space just long enough 
to reveal their own futility and flat unprofitableness, and then have vanished away, 
leaving him free to follow the lead of his genius. We nowhere see in his work the 
enfeebling influences of the little doublings, and little believings, and little wonder- 
ings, whose thin wail sounds in a conventional manner through so much of our 
current writing, whether in prose or verse, weakening life and distorting art. Mr. 
Morris's central quality is a vigorous and healthy objectivity ; a vision and a fancy 
ever penetrated by the color and light and movement of external things, just as they 
stir and penetrate the painter. It is because he is possessed by this most excellent 
spirit in all sincerity that he is able to produce such perfect effects by the plainest 
strokes. People who talk the conventional cant about word-painting, this phrase 
usually denoting a sickening process of accumulated epithet and names of piled-up 
objects, should turn to a page of the "Jason" or "The Earthly Paradise," and 
watch how the most delicious pictures are produced by the simplest and directest 
means. To take the first instance that offers as one turns over the pages hap-hazard, 
mark the life, color and distinctness in such lines as these : 

" Now, 'midst her wanderings, on a hot noontide, 
Psyche passed down a road, where, on each side, 
The yellow corn-fields lay, although as yet 
Unto the stalks no sickle had been set; 
The lark sung over them, the butterfly 
Flickered from ear to ear distractedly, 
The kestrel hung above, the weasel peered 
From out the wheat-stalks unafear'd, 
Along the road the trembling poppies shed 
On the burnt grass their crumpled leaves and red." 

Or this picture of remotest Thule : 

" Then o'er its desert icy hills he passed, 
And on beneath a feeble sun he flew, 
Till, rising like a wall, the cliffs he knew 
That Pallas told him of: the sun was high, 
But on the pale ice shone but wretchedly: 
Pale blue the great mass was, and the cold snow; 
Gray tattered moss hung from its jagged brow. 
No wind was there at all, though ever beat 
The leaden tideless sea, against its feet." 

Mr. Morris's descriptions, condensed, simple, absolutely free from all that is 
strained and all that is artificial, enter the reader's mind with the direct and vivid force 
of impressions coming straight from the painter's canvas. There is no English 
poet of this time, nor perhaps of any other, who has so possessed this excellent gift 
of looking freshly and simply on external nature in all her many colors, and of re 
producing what he sees with such effective precision and truthfulness. One trait 
and consequence of the same quality, by the way, is his sparing use, almost no use, 
of simile, which is supposed to be the peculiar figure of the story-teller from 
Homer downwards. More than one fine poem of our day has gone near having 1 
its effects destroyed by the writer's excessive resort to a figure which is so soon 
apt to wear the look of an artifice. 

Another of Mr. Morris's most characteristic and most delightful qualities, nearly 
always found in men of the healthy objective temperament, is the low-toned, crooning 
kindliness to all the earth which one hears through all his pleasant singing; and 



1 8 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

akin to this a certain sweet sadness as of the old time. There are not more than two 
or three passages in " The Earthly Paradise " where this is deliberately and articu 
lately expressed; here is one : 

" Sirs, you are old, and ye have seen, perchance, 
Some little child for very gladness dance 
Over a scarcely-noticed, worthless thing, 
Worth more to him than ransom of a king, 
Did not a pang of more than pity take 
Your heart thereat, not for the youngling's sake, 
But for your own, for man that passes by, 
So like to God, so like to beasts that die? 
Lo, sirs, my pity for myself is such, 
When like an image that my hand can touch, 
My old self grows unto myself grown old." 

As a rule, this sense of " more than pity " Mr. Morris leaves inarticulate, as the 
musician is constrained to leave it, and we only feel its presence vaguely, as one 
may in strains of quaint music. The old men and gray whose adventures form the 
staple of the prologue, and who sit with modest patience in the background of all 
the stories, perhaps do something to impart to the whole this effect at once of sad 
ness and of calm. The note of the poem is exquisitely struck in the half-dozen 
stanzas which open the volume : 

" Folk say, a wizard to a northern king 
At Christmas-tide such wondrous things did show, 
That through one window men beheld the spring, 
And through another saw the summer glow, 
And through a third the fruited vines a-row, 
While still unheard, but in its wonted way, 
Piped the drear wind of that December day. 

So with this Earthly Paradise it is, 
If he will read aright, and pardon me. 
Who strive to build a shadowy isle of bliss 
Midmost the beating of the steely sea, 

Where tossed about all hearts of men must be; 
Whose ravening monsters mighty men shall slay, 
Not the poor singer of an empty day." 

There were some weak and inappreciative souls, one has heard, who found the 
"Jason" somewhat touched with monotony of story. They can scarcely find the 
same fault with " The Earthly Paradise," which is full of change and variety of per 
sonage and incident. When it is complete, it is not too bold to anticipate for it a 
longer duration in the minds and hearts of men than perhaps any contemporary 
verse. It is less marked than any other with the accidental and transient moods of 
this time, and most strongly marked with those broad and unsophisticated moods 
that enchant men for all time. Meanwhile, for us it is full of that reposeful serenity, 
purity, freshness, and vivid objectivity which the mind loves always, but which it 
yearns for thirstily in turbid and broken times like these. 



The Imperial Revie-w. 

MR. MORRIS, by the publication of The Earthly Paradise, has confirmed and 
strengthened the favorable impressions that were produced by The Life and Death 
of Jason. In his present volume, the same power and beauty of expression, the 



THE ENGLISH PRESS. 19 

same delicate grace of style, the same ineffable charm, are displayed that rendered 
the earlier work so grateful to the reader. Perhaps one of the chief causes of the 
keen pleasure with which Mr. Morris's works are read, consists in the fact that they 
enter into so strong a contrast with the poetry that the other great poets of the day 
give us. No traces of the influence of Tennyson are to be traced. The rugged 
grandeur of Browning, with all its fascinations, has not prevailed over the native 
bent of Mr. Morris's genius. Mr. Swinburne is, perhaps, indebted to Mr. Morris ; 
the older poet has certainly in no way inclined to the sway that the author of Ata- 
lanta has exercised over so many even over the Laureate, if we are to judge by the 
evidence afforded in Lucretius. Mr. Morris writes with complete originality; he 
has won favor by disregarding the apparent tendencies of literary taste. He has 
gone back to the earlier poets for his inspiration^ His pages reveal his sympathy 
with Chaucer, and the influence that a delicate appreciation of the father of English 
poetry has had upon the latest of English poets is everywhere to be detected. Read 
ers turn from the subtle thoughtfulness, the vague mysticism, and the fierce volup 
tuousness that mark the writings of other great poets of the period, and find refresh 
ing calm and dreamy repose in these verses that brim with freshness and brightness 
as of early spring, and are softly melodious as the song of wild birds, and soothing 
and lulling in their tender harmonies and exquisite suggestiveness, as sea-waves 
swaying over sands, or low winds fluttering through trees. 

Mr. Morris does not adopt the conventional view of the lofty mission of the poet. 
His theory, if less transcendental, is one that gives results far more pleasant to the 
reader than those that are usually achieved. Only professing to be " an idle singer 
of an empty day," " a dreamer of dreamers, born out out of my due time," he does 
not strive to set the crooked straight : 

" Of heaven or hell I have no power to sing; 
I cannot ease the burden of your fears, 
Or make quick-coming death a little thing 
Or bring again the pleasures of past years, 
Nor for my words shall ye forget your tears, 
Or hope again for aught that I can say. 

* * * * 

The heavy trouble, the bewildering care 
That weighs us down who live and earn our bread, 
These idle verses have no power to bear." 

He is content not to weight his verse with deep speculation, or burden it with intri 
cate musings, but to reply on the simple fascinations of graceful legends daintily 
told: 

" Let it suffice me that my murmuring rhyme 

Beats with light wing against the ivory gate; 

Telling a tale, not too importunate, 

To those who in the sleepy region stay." 

Mr. Morris has, in The Earthly Paradise, exquisitely carried out the poetic in 
tention to which he has thus given expression. The language Keats applied to his 
Endymion may be used with equal, if not greater, appropriateness of Mr. Morris's 
new poem. He has offered his readers " a little region to wander in, where they 
may pick and choose, and in which the images are so numerous that many are for 
gotten, and found new on a second reading, which may be food for a week's stroll 
in summer." 



20 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 



The Pall Mall Gazette. 

MR. MORRIS, by his previously published book, " The Life and Death of Jason," 
placed his name definitively on the roll of poets, in an age by no means poor in good 
poetry. The volume now before us, containing the earlier half of a work of far 
larger scheme than the former, attests still more strongly the fertility of its author's 
genius, his independence and individuality of manner, and will be sure to extend, as 
it certainly will confirm, his reputation. The bulk of the book a thick octavo of 
nearly seven hundred pages, to be followed by another of like proportions may, it 
is possible, deter some who like their poems small, and are impatient of whatever 
cannot be read through and be done with in half an hour. And it cannot be denied 
that the poetic compendiousness, the concentration and castigation of style, of which 
the Laureate has given us so many admirable examples, have much to recommend 
them ; but the " Earthly Paradise " appeals to a class of readers willing to give time 
to the enjoyment of poetry, who, when they have a new book on hand, are in no 
hurry to get through with it, but like to loiter over its pages, putting it down and 
taking it up again. Those that, with Leigh Hunt, are disposed to shrug their 
shoulders at a long poem in these latter days, should call to mind the plea of Keats : 
" Do not the lovers of poetry like to have a little region to wander in, where they 
may pick and choose, and where the images are so numerous that they may be for 
gotten, and found new in a second reading, which may be food for a week's stroll in 
the summer? Besides, a long poem is the test of invention, which I tike to be the 
polar star of poetry, as fancy is the sails and imagination the rudder. Did our great 
poets ever write short pieces? I mean, in the shape of tales. This same invention 
seems indeed to have been forgotten as a poetical excellence." Mr. Morris's work 
is remarkable for "this same invention," the especial gift of the story-teller, in virtue 
of which he lives with the persons of his fable, and leads them through a labyrinth 
of circumstances conceived with unforced ingenuity and realized with pictorial dis 
tinctness. For vividness and luxuriance in this kind Mr. Morris may be compared 1 
with Spenser, rather than any other English poet; although we do not find in his < 
work other qualities of Spenser, his moral fervor, his subtlety and superabundance, j 
Mr. Morris's language is direct, flowing, and unlabored, uniting in a rare degree j 
simplicity with what we may call distinction. It is not easy to describe the charm of j 
a style which is picturesque without artifice, striking without emphasis, various with- , 
out inequality; which, though copious, is never redundant, and resembles the pleased j 
loquacity of one wholly taken up -with what he is talking about, and talking always j 
about beautiful things. Accepting as he does the part of teller of tales, whose one ! 
task is to deal with delightful subjects in a delightful manner, Mr. Morris shuts 
himself out from some of the most fertile fields of poetry. He forswears specula- J 
tion and reflection, refrains from touching, whether to solve or to restate, the ques- 1 
tions nearest the hearts of his contemporaries, the moral and social problems with '\ 
which so much modern poetry has occupied itself. In some prefatory stanzas of j 
singular melody he leaves to others the " slaying of monsters," the active or moral * 
function of the poet, 

" Dreamer of dreams, born out of my due time, 
Why should I strive to set the crooked straight? " 

and claims for himself, as " the idle singer of an empty day," the work of renewing . 
for us some of the old-world enchantments by -which pleasure m ay be bestowed if 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 21 

pain cannot be abated. He thus recalls poetry to the sphere of true fine art proper, 
in which it has simply, along with music, painting, and the rest, to add to the sum 
of human happiness in the contemplation of enjoyable things. The " Earthly Para 
dise " is written from the stand-point of a paganism that is frankly afraid of death, 
and eager to make the most of life and its blessings, foremost among which it 
reckons the artistic gratification of the higher senses. This fear of death is allowed 
to play a somewhat oppressive part in the poem ; not, of course, the coward's pas 
sion, but the ever-present dread of oblivion and extinction comes continually for 
ward as a motive to action, or darkener of delight. It may, for some, impair the 
charm of the book, that, over all the pleasant places into which the author leads us, 
there should hang this cloud. 

***** * * * 

Coming, however, to the stories themselves, there need be little reserve in prais 
ing; they are all beautiful. * * * The book must be read by any*bne who wishes to 
know what it is like ; and few will read it without recognizing its author for a poet 
who has struck a new vein, and who, preferring his art above popularity, has 
achieved a work which will yet be popular wherever true poetry is understood. 



The London Star, 

Mr. Morris's fame is a striking example of success achieved by worthy workman 
ship alone. The author of "Jason" has never appealed to fashion, or tried to put 
his work into a shape attractive to the mass of readers. On the contrary, he has 
deliberately chosen high ground and " audience fit though few." Our best critics, 
and some of our finest poets, have registered their favorable judgment on Mr. 
Morris's work, so that his name has come to be ranked with those of Arnold and 
Swinburne as one of the rising lights on the poetic horizon. A peculiar character 
istic of his poetry is that blitheness of helpful and hopeful humanity which makes 
' The Canterbury Tales " live for us today as fresh and vivid as when Chaucer 
wrote. Mr. Morris is almost alone in this spiritual vigor. His rivals, from the 
Laureate downwards, all feel, or feign, the presence of a morbid sense of wrong. 
Fate, the world, man and God are to them dark unrealities^ weary burdens or lurk 
ing foes. In Mr. Morris only do we find a thorough and healthy exultation in life 
as it is, united with a keen apprehension of the beauties of Nature and the pleasures 
of this earth. 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 

North American Review. 

MR. MORRIS'S last poem, " The Life and Death of Jason," proved him to possess 
so much intellectual energy, and so large a poetical capacity, that we are not sur 
prised to find him, after only a year's interval, publishing a work equally consider 
able in size and merit. The author's treatment of the legend of Jason, whatever may 
be thought of the success of his manner and of the wisdom of an attempt to revive 
an antiquated and artificial diction, certainly indicated a truly vigorous and elastic 



22 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

genius. It exhibited an imagination copious and varied, an inventive faculty of the 
most robust character, and the power to sustain a heavy burden without staggering 
or faltering. It had, at least, the easy and abundant flow which marks the effusions 
of genius, and it was plainly the work of a mind which takes a serious pleasure in 
large and formidable tasks. Very much such another task has Mr. Morris set him 
self in the volume before us. He has not, indeed, to observe that constant unity of 
tone to which he had pledged himself in telling the adventures of Jason, but he is 
obliged, as in his former work, to move all armed and equipped for brilliant feats, 
and to measure his strength as frequently and as lustily. 

"The Earthly Paradise" is a series of tales in verse, founded, for the most part, 
on familiar legends and traditions in the Greek mythology. Each story is told with 
considerable fulness, so that by the time the last is finished the volume numbers 
nearly seven hundred pages, or about twenty thousand lines. Seven hundred pages 
of fantastic verse, in these days of clamorous intellectual duties, run a very fair 
chance of being, at best, somewhat neglectfully read, and to secure a deferential in 
spection they must carry their excuse in very obvious characters. The excuse of 
Mr. Morris's volume is simply its charm. We know not what force this charm may 
exert upon others, but under its influence we have read the book with unbroken de 
light and closed it with real regret, a regret tempered only by the fact that the 
publishers announce a second series of kindred tales. Mr. Morris's book is frankly 
a work of entertainment. It deals in no degree with actualities, with worldly 
troubles and burdens and problems. You must forget these things to take it up. 
Forget them for a few moments, and it will remind you of fairer, sweeter, and 
lighter things, things forgotten or grudgingly remembered, things that came to 
you in dreams and waking reveries, and odd idle moments stolen from the present. 
Every man, we fancy, has a latent tenderness for the past, a vague unwillingness to 
let it become extinct, an unavowed desire to preserve it as a pleasure-ground for the 
fancy. This desire, and his own peculiar delight in it, are very prettily suggested by 
the author in a short metrical Preface: 

" The heavy trouble, the bewildering care 
That weighs us down who live and earn our bread, 
These idle verses have no power to bear; 
So let me sing of names remembered, 
Because they, living not, can ne'er be dead, 
Or long time take their memory quite away 
From us poor singers of an empty day." 



Mr. Morris's diction is doubtless far from perfect in its kind. It is as little purely 
primitive as it is purely modern. The most that we can say of it is that, on the 
whole, it recalls Chaucer. But Mr. Morris wears it with such perfect grace, and 
moves in it with so much ease and freedom, with so little appearance of being in 
bands or in borrowed raiment, that one may say he has fairly appropriated it and 
given it the stamp of his individuality. How he came finally to form his style, 
the remote causes of his sympathy with the language which he has made his own, 
the history of his literary growth, these are questions lying below the reach of 
criticism. But they are questions possessing the deeper interest, in that the author's 
present achievement is a very considerable fact. Xone but a mind of remarkable 
power could have infused into the torpid and senseless forms of a half-forgotten 
tongue the exuberant vitality which pervades these pages. To our perception, they 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 23 

are neither cold nor mechanical, they glow and palpitate with life. This is saying 
the very best thing we can think of, and assigning Mr. Morris's volume a place 
among the excellent works of English literature, a place directly beside his "Jason." 



The Atlantic Monthly. 

The trouvere, as distinct from the troubadour, seemed almost disappearing from 
literature, when Mr. Morris revived the ancient line, or, to speak more exactly, the 
ancient thousand lines. He brings back to us the almost forgotten charm of mere 
narrative. We have lyric poets, and, while Browning lives, a dramatic poet; it is a 
comfort if we can have also a minstrel who can tell a story. 

It is true, as Keats said, that there is a peculiar pleasure in a long poem, as in a 
meadow where one can wander about and pick flowers. One should cultivate a hope 
ful faith, like that of George Dyer, who bought a bulky volume of verse by an 
unknown writer, in the belief (so records Charles Lamb) that " there must be some 
good things in a poem of three thousand lines." That kindly critic would have 
found a true Elysium in the " Earthly Paradise." 

If not so crowded as "Jason" with 'sweet, fresh, Chaucerian passages, it has 
more breadth, and more maturity, and briefer intervals of dulness. Yet the word 
" Chaucerian " must be used with reluctance, and only to express a certain freshness 
of quality that no other phrase can indicate. Imitative these poems certainly are not; 
their simplicity is simple, whereas the simplicity of some poets is the last climax of 
their affectation. The atmosphere of Morris's poems is really healthy, though lim 
ited ; and their mental action is direct and placid, not constrained. 

The old legends of Cupid and Psyche, Atalanta, Alcestis and Pygmalion, are here 
rendered with new sweetness, interspersed with tales more modern. It is pleasant 
to see these immortal Greek stories reproduced in English verse ; for, at the present 
rate of disappearance, who knows that there will be an American a hundred years 
hence who can read a sentence of that beautiful old language, or to whom the names 
of "the Greeks and of Troy town" will be anything but an abomination? It is a 
comfort to think that the tales of the world's youth may take a new lease of life in 
these and other English rhymes, and so something of the ideal world be preserved 
for our grand-children, as well as Herbert Spencer, and Greeley's "American 
Conflict." 

Such themes are far more congenial to Morris than to Swinburne; for Greek 
poetry is at once simple and sensuous, and we come nearer to it when put on short 
allowance of the sensuous than when it runs riot and becomes unpleasantly conscious 
of its own nudity. Morris is also wiser in not attempting any imitation of the antique 
forms. Indeed his poems belong in a world of their own, neither ancient nor mod 
ern, and touching remotely on all human interests. The lyrical poems interspersed 
between the legends are the only modern things, and even those are tender little bits 
of English landscape-painting that might have been executed centuries ago. His 
story-tellers and his listeners dwell forever in a summer land, where youths and 
maidens may sit beneath their own vines and fig-trees, and even a poem of seven 
bundred pages cannot molest them nor make them afraid. 



24 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 



The Galaxy. 

THE world is richer by a new poet, a genuine born maker and singer. William 
Morris, were he to write nothing more than "Jason " and " The Earthly Paradise," 
is sure of a hold upon the world's ear and heart that will not be loosened for many 
a year, perhaps for generations. * * * * " * 

The manner of these poems is new to this generation; but it is no new manner. 
The delight that they give is fresh ; but it is the old delight for which men have 
longed in their hearts ever since they began to feel and to think, and which has been 
ministered to them by men born to that office through centuries and cycles. 'What 
we crave, unless we are gross, material, and sordid, is the beauty of human life, and 
to show us this is what we ask of our poets. The beauty of the whole of it, of its 
sorrows as well as of its joys, of its graver as well as of its lighter employments; of 
its grand purposes, its absorbing passions, its passing moods, its reveries, its gaiety 
and its gloom. For it all has beauty beauty which a great painter shall detect and 
set before you in the mingled craft and misery of a beggar, as a great poet has, in 
the agony of a forlorn, insulted father and crazy king. There are two ways by 
which this end can be attained; one is by the representation of real life, which is the 
aim of the novelist, whether in prose, or in verse like that of Mrs. Browning's 
" Aurora Leigh ; " the other the creation of an ideal world, of life freed from material 
cares, from what must be to most of us its chief concern daily toil and the multi 
plication table. To present the latter is the chief function of the poet when he works 
simply as a poet a maker and does not assume the functions of priest, sage, 
seer, or prophet. And rarely has a man of this order sung his songs of life with 
such power of enchantment as is shown in William Morris's " Earthly Paradise." 
*** *** * * 

The very charm of his poetry is in that while it does not strive " to set the crooked 
straight," it is yet penetrated, as we see in many sad, sweet lines the writer's soul is 
penetrated, with the keen knowledge of the woe of life and the weariness. * * * The 
poet whom Morris most resembles is Chaucer, whom he is like in the clean, sharp 
outline of his figures and their vivid coloring, and the firm straightforwardness of 
his simple thought, revealed although it is through a rich poetic style. This like 
ness comes of inborn impulse, but no less of purpose. The poet himself tells us at 
whose feet he has sitten a learner in some beautiful lines of his "Jason," which set 
Chaucer's style before us with fine appreciation. He disclaims comparison with his" 
master, and even the credit of being his worthy pupil, with a modesty which is 
touching because it is manifestly genuine, but it is too great. For, William Morris 
is eminently a poet of imagination, and he does bring before our eyes the image of 
the thing his heart is filled with. His " Earthly Paradise " is a succession of scenes, 
either of repose or of action, which he has seen, and which he enables us to see as 
clearly as -we saw the friends we sat with yesterday. He is not sententious, not 
philosophical ; he does not trouble himself or us with the twelve moral virtues ; he 
comes not to offend us by preaching to us, or to please us by scourging the rest of 
the world ; he is no writer of epigrams or sayer of sayings ; he does not even give us 
poetry, as Bunsby uttered wisdom " in solid chunks," but he diffuses it throughout 
the stories that he tells us in sweet rhymes that run so easily and with such mere 
charm of sound and motion, that it seems as if he must have had as much pleasure 
in the writing of them as we do in the reading. * * * 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 25 

And the stories that he tells, what of them? Wonderful new stories, you suppose. 
No; they are the wonderful old stories; stories that wre told a thousand years, and 
most of them two thousand years ago ; which grammar-school boys have had flog 
ged into them as tasks for centuries the stories of Medea, of Atalanta, of Cupid 
and Psyche, of Alcestis, of Croesus, of Pygmalion, or to mix the new and the 
modern with the old, the story of Ogier the Dane, who was one of Charlemagne's 
paladins stories which, if told by the right man, are just as fresh, and just as 
charming now as they were to the people who first heard them. For all the beauty 
of a story that does not lie in the heart of the hearer lies in the tongue of the teller. 
******** 

"Jason " is inferior to " The Earthly Paradise," chiefly because there is in it less 
of the poet. He has confined himself more to the old classic authorities ; he has fol 
lowed more the old classic models. * * * But in this poem are many passages which 
are filled with a spirit of poetry that has been born since the days of the blind bard of 
Scio, and which give new life to the old tale of Medea and the Argonaut. One of 
the most beautiful of these is in the opening of the ninth book, where Jason and the 
princely sorceress, who has given up all that she might give herself to him, stand 
together outside her father's palace. Then, with a touching premonition of her fate, 

" Medea turned to Jason, and she said : 
1 love, turn round, and note the goodlihead 
My father's palace shows beneath the stars. 
Bethink thee of the men grown old in wars 
Who do my bidding; what delights I have, 
How many ladies he in wait to save 
My life from toil and carefulness, and think 
How sweet a cup I have been used to drink, 
And how I cast it to the ground for thee. 
Upon the day thou weariest of me 
I wish that thou may'st somewhat think of this, 
And, 'twixt thy new-found kisses and the bliss 
Of something sweeter than thine old delight, 
Remember thee a little of this night 
Of marvels, and this starlit, silent place. 
And these two lovers, standing face to face.' " 

Then he breaks out with vows of constancy, and swears the old oath, forever. 
What young man ever did, ever could do less, and do it, too, in simple honesty? 
Had she been mere woman, she would have believed him ; but she was a sorceress, 
and she looked, though but a little way, into the cloud before her, and trembled ; but, 
being more woman than sorceress, she did not hesitate : 

" Nay sweet," she said, " let be : 
Wert thou more fickle than the restless sea 
Still should I love thee, knowing thee for such; 
Whom I know not, indeed, but fear the touch 
Of fortune's hand when she beholds our bliss, 
And knows that nought is good to me but this." 

O, the old, sad story that will be ever fresh while man is man and woman woman 1 
with what tender nobleness of beauty is it told here ; with what exquisite art is it 
revealed to us in the very first flush of mutual passion between these two lovers, 
before he has begun to waver and she to eat her own heart with jealousy. Who can 
be untouched by her reply, which has a certain grandeur I She loves him, not because 
She trusts him, but because he is her heart's desire, and, to use the poet's words on 



26 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

another occasion, she has cast her heart into the hand of fate. In all modern poetrj 
known to us, there is no more clearly-imagined picture, none more filled with mean 
ing than this one of Medea standing with Jason in the starlight upon the threshold oi 
their strange, woful love. For this, and for what is like it in the poem, "William 
Morris owes nothing to the ancients. And although he is a teller of tales, he is 
dramatic in the higher sense, in that he writes without a conscience. For when Jason 
comes to love Creusa, he glides into his new passion so easily, so naturally, it seems 
so inevitable that the beauty and the allurements of this fair girl and the circum 
stances under which they are brought together should end in his enthralment, thai 
we we men, at least cannot look upon him as guilty; while Medea, with hei 
love-born hatred of the fresh-hearted, innocent beauty who has won what she has lost, 
with her incantations and her poisoned garments, becomes, in spite of her grief and 
her grandeur, a hideous witch. 

****** 

Perhaps of all the poems in " The Earthly Paradise " that which tells the story ol 
Cupid and Psyche is the most admirable, the most daintily sensuous, the richest in those 
clearly and strongly-imagined scenes of various beauty which are the chief charm of 
this delightful volume. One of these scenes, not very interesting for the incident 
which it relates, is yet very impressive for the sharp sense of reality which is con 
veyed by the poet's clear imagination, and his ability to impress upon others what 
his mind's eye so clearly sees. Psyche finds herself in the wonderful golden house 
of her unknown, unseen lover. She has wandered through it, wrapt in admiration, 
and has begun to lose her fear of its strangeness as her sensitive nature is absorbed 
in her enjoyment of its marvellous beauty. After hearing a song of welcome, sung 
by an invisible choir, she enters a tessellated chamber, in which there is a bath : 

" So for a time upon the brink she sat, 
Debating in her mind of this and that, 
And then arose, and slowly from her cast 
Her garment, and adown the steps she passed 
Into the water, and therein she played, 
Till of herself at last she grew afraid, 
And of the broken image of her face, 
And the loud splashing in that lonely place." 

That would seem rather like the relation of an actual occurrence by the actor in it, 
than the dream of a poet, did we not know how sharply real the dreams of real poets 
are. It brought up at once to us the memory of a woman, who, under like circum 
stances, would surely become thus the prey of her own fancy one who with Psyche's 
nature seems like her in the poet's word's, " the soul of innocent desire." In this 
poem we have evidence that, given up to his delight, as the author is, in physical 
beauty, he is able to read the nature to which it is as often a mask as an outward 
manifestation, and that he is not to be bribed by its allurements into any unfaithful 
ness to the truth of nature. 

Poor Psyche, according to the old story, wanders into the precincts of her arch 
enemy Venus herself, who straightway begins to torment her rival in beauty, who 
has thus stumbled into her power. There, in an enchanting plesaunce, she has the 
poor girl whipped by stalwart Amazons, until " like red flame she saw the trees and 
ground." And then comes this fine touch : 

" But while beneath the many moving feet 
The small crushed flowers sent up their odor sweet, 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 27 

Above sat Venus, calm and very fair; 

Her white limbs bared of all her golden hair; 

Into her heart all wrath cast back again, 

As on the terror and the helpless pain 

She gazed with gentle eyes and unmoved smile." 

Admirable, and not exaggerated picture of a cold, cruel beauty, the cruellest and 
most coldly selfish of all created things. In portraying moods of mind our new poet 
is no less skilful than in his descriptions of passing scenes and his revelations of 
character. Psyche, weary and worn, sinks down in a swoon upon the banks of the 
Styx, 

" And there she would have lain forevermore, 
A marble image on the shadowy shore," 

had not the Phoenix seen her, and for pity of her sweet face borne the news of her 
whereabout to Cupid, who flies to her, and rouses her by words of love, and assu 
rances that now she shall be his, and share his divinity forever: 

" Then when she heard him, straightway she arose, 
And from her fell the burden of her woes ; 
And yet her heart within her well nigh broke, 



\Vhen she from grief to happiness awoke; 
And loud her sobbing was in that gray place, 
And with sweet shame she covered up her face." 



But we must bring to a speedy end our studies of these delightful poems. We 
have not troubled ourselves with the plan or the machinery of " The Earthly Para 
dise," which are of the most artless sort mere unconcealed contrivances by which 
a dozen tales are strung together, and which yet give the work a unity of purpose 
and of tone. The story of The Wanderers, who set sail in quest of that Utopia for 
which their hearts yearn, even like ours, who know that there is no Utopia, but 
which men five hundred years ago, seem to have thought might exist in some far 
country this side of the bourne from which no traveller returns, and who finally rest 
worn and weather-beaten among some kindly folk beyond the great gray waters, and 
who tell, and are told, these old-world tales, is at times a little prolix, but is sur 
charged with that poetic charm which Morris diffuses through all his writing. 
****** 

RICHARD GRANT WHITE. 



Harper's Magazine. 



IT is very remarkable that two poems should have been published within the last 
eighteen months, each filling a large volume, and revealing not only a new poet, but 
a nascent change in the character of the poetry of the time, without awakening more 
general interest and attention. When Mr. Bailey published his " Festus," twenty- 
five years ago, it was received by many as the most remarkable of modern poems 
since Goethe's "Faust." When Alexander Smith's " Life Drama " appeared, the 
English reviews and magazines and newspapers overflowed with superlatives of 
praise, and a new poet was hailed with acclamation. The cry was caught up on this 
side of the sea, and it might have been supposed that Keats had an equal successor. 
More recently Mr. Swinburne's poetry, a kind of renaissance, or, perhaps, culmina- 



28 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

tion, of the truly sensational, highly-colored modern verse, has had a great reputa 
tion. Meanwhile Tennyson -was twenty years in coming to his fame, and Browning 
is still the poet of a few. And now comes William Morris, with " The Life and 
Death of Jason" and "The Earthly Paradise." Of the first there was a notice a few 
months since among the literary criticisms of this Magazine, and the secortti, like 
the first, has been welcomed by the best critics with an almost unreserved praise. 
But common conversation is by no means full of the poems and the poet, and there 
are doubtless a great many careful readers who have looked doubtfully at so ample 
a body of verse, and have passed it by. 

Yet if they will stop long enough to taste fully, they will detect an unaccustomed 
flavor. It is neither Byron nor Wordsworth, nor Tennyson, nor Browning; neither 
of the technically " natural," nor of the spasmodic kind. It should, perhaps, chal 
lenge the most interested attention of every cultivated reader that the only poet men 
tioned in the notices of Mr. Morris's poems is Chaucer. That is a key to their 
character. We have come out of shadows and murky, lurid lights, into the sweet 
morning sunshine, and the whistling of robins, and the joyous voice of the lark and 
the bobolink. The breath of spring blossoms perfumes the air; the open landscape 
is peopled with heroic forms. The pervading pathos is natural and simple. There 
is no artifice of sentiment, no elaboration of emotion. This poetry is in no sense a 
repetition, or an imitation, or an echo of Chaucer; it is like him only because he is 
the most breezy, and blithe, and sincere of story-tellers in rhyme. 

" The Life and Death of Jason " is the old tale of the search for the Golden Fleece, 
and the old tale is made as new and absorbingly interesting as if we were Greeks 
hearing it for the first time. We follow the fortunes of those ancient mariners as if 
they were friends who sailed last May, not as if they were the vague figures of a 
forgotten fiction. It is a Greek poem, but not as Swinburne's " Atalanta," or Mat 
thew Arnold's " Merope," or Keats's " Hyperion " are. It is not a study in the 
Greek style, with a careful reproduction of the Greek form. It is Greek in the 
simple, broad, obvious treatment of a romantic narrative, without sentimentality, 
yet as cunningly adjusted to the necessity of modern interest as the " Iliad " to that 
of old Greece. The story is told as Homer would tell it were Homer an English 
man and writing today. 

This is to say that Mr. Morris is a true poet; not an extremely clever, and culti 
vated, and imaginative, and poetic writer, who can turn off excellent work in many 
styles, like Owen Meredith, for example, and very many writers like Mr. Swin 
burne. He tells a story whose interest lies in the play of the cardinal human feel 
ings, and with a delicacy and depth of insight, a broad and self-possessed mastery 
of manner, a freedom, and simplicity, and sustained power, which are wholly unri 
valled among the recent singers. These two poems may be read with the same pro 
found satisfaction that we read the best novels. They are refreshing and purifying, 
and yet the themes are all remote. They are wholly romantic in themselves as 
well as in their treatment. It is not Goody Blake and Harry Gill, not the Five 
Points or Wapping, not London or Saratoga, of which the poet tells. He 

" Builds a bridge from Dreamland for his lay," 

for, with the instinct of a poet, he knows that imagination is as real as experience. 

" Certain gentlemen and mariners of Norway," says the simple argument, 
" having considered all that they had heard of the Earthly Paradise, set sail to find 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 29 

it, and after many troubles and the lapse of many years, came old men to some 
western land, of which they had never before heard; there they died, when they had 
dwelt there certain years, much honored of the strange people." At once, with this 
quaint yet pathetic prelude for who knows not what the search for the Earthly 
Paradise must be? we are wafted away into pure romance : 

" Forget six counties overhung with smoke, 
Forget the snorting steam and piston stroke, 
Forget the spreading of the hideous town; 
Think rather of the pack-horse on the down, 
And dream of London, small, and white, and clean, 
The clear Thames bordered by its garden green ; 
Think, that below bridge the green, lapping waves 
Smite some few keels that bear Levantine staves, 
Cut from the yew-wood on the burned-up hill, 
And pointed jars that Greek hands toiled to fill, 
And treasured scanty spice from some far sea, 
Florence gold cloth and Ypres napery, 
And cloth of Bruges, and hogsheads of Guienne; 
"While nigh the thronged wharf Geoffrey Chaucer's pen 
Moves over bills of lading mid such times 
Shall dwell the hollow puppets of my rhymes." 

The tale begins at once in " a nameless city in a distant sea," upon whose quays 
have landed a little band of gray-beard wanderers, who are the remnant of the cer 
tain gentlemen and mariners of Norway who sailed to find the Earthly Paradise. 
The elders of the city salute them kindly, and, telling them that they too are the 
descendants of wanderers from some Grecian land, invite them to remain. Then 
one of the strange old men replies that he knows the Greek tongue, because he was 
born in Byzantium, but of northern parents, and long before his beard grew was 
taken back to Norway. There, when a pestilence raged, he and others were per 
suaded to leave the land of death and seek the happy shores of which a Breton 
Squire told them. The old man goes on to tell the sad story of their wandering. It 
is a delightful poem, full of romantic adventure and perpetually suggestive of 
Browning's lines : 

"The sad rhyme of the men who proudly clung 
To their first fault and withered in their pride." 

After long and weary years they come to the nameless city where they met this 
sympathetic welcome ; and in every month the wanderers and the elders meet, and 
after an ample feast two tales are told, one by the hosts and the other by the guests. 
That of the elders is a Greek story, that of the northmen a northern legend. In the 
present volume there are the twelve narratives of half the year, March to August; 
and another volume will finish the yearwith twelve more. The Greek tales thus far 
are Atalanta's Race ; the Doom of King Acrisius ; the story of Cupid and Psyche ; 
the Love of Alcestis ; the Son of Croesus ; Pygmalion and the Image. The others 
are less known, but are very striking and fascinating. 

This is the argument of much the most notable poem recently published: and if 
the wanderers among ourselves, seeking somewhere an autumn Paradise, are 
wondering with what new book to charm their retreat, let them open these poems of 
Morris's; and if they do not agree with John Morley that they will be remembered 
beyond Tennyson and Browning, they will agree with him that they are most 
delightful reading. GEORGE W. CURTIS. 



30 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

Putnam's Magazine. 

It is about a year since Mr. Morris's first poem was published, and was heartily wel 
comed, especially by the English critics. At the head of his eulogists was Algernon 
Charles Swinburne, who, like himself, had first appeared as a Greek story-teller, and 
who hailed the new poet as a second Chaucer. Without being convinced of the justice 
of all Mr. Swinburne's enthusiasm about his friend, an enthusiasm as highly-colored 
as his own poetry, it is nevertheless impossible to read Jason without very great 
pleasure. The exquisite simplicity of the style, the grace and easy flow of the lines, 
and tone of truthfulness and serious intent which pervade its beautiful descriptions, 
made us forget the want of grander thought, or more intense dramatic power. It 
was all that it seemed meant to be, a beautifully told story in verse, and therewith we 
were content. * * * In the " Earthly Paradise " we have more and better than we 
had hoped. It is rare, indeed, that a poet gives us a volume of seven hundred pages 
within a year of its predecessor, and still more rare that in that time should be so 
much improvement. 

****** 

Of the twelve tales contained in this volume, six are from Grecian history and the 
others legends of various times and countries. The finest poem of all, for interest 
of subject, dignity of treatment, and flashes of real poetic fire, is the Love of Alcestis. 
In this lovely tale we are told how Admetus, assisted by Apollo, who serves him as 
a herdsman, wins to wife the daughter of King Pelias, and how Alcestis, when her 
husband's time comes to die, saves his life by giving her own in his stead. In the 
course of this poem occurs perhaps the finest passage in the whole book, the farewell 
and departure of Apollo. The god, in a speech of exquisite beauty and dignity, bids 
adieu to the earth, 

" This handful that within its little girth 
Holds that which moves you so, O men that die; " 

and after promising Admetus assistance in his last extremity, 

" He ceased, but ere the golden tongue was still 
An odorous mist had stolen up the hill, 
And to Admetus first the god grew dim, 
And then was but a lovely voice to him, 
And then at last the sun had sunk to rest, 
And a fresh wind blew lightly from the west 
Over the hill-top, and no soul was there ; 
But the sad dying autumn field-flowers fair, 
Rustled dry leaves about the windy place, 
Where even now had been the god-like face, 
And in their midst the brass-bound quiver lay." 

Could there be anything in the way of simple narrative lovelier than this picture? 
We seem to stand among the " sad dying autumn field-flowers fair," and gaze with 
Admetus at the vanishing divinity, till the last ray of the celestial brightness has de 
parted, and we turn to see only a " gray-haired shepherd driving down " the woolly 
sheep that must learn now to obey the voice of mortal herdsman. Throughout this 
poem we find more frequent traces of the finer gold of poetry; the diction rises con 
tinually to a higher level than in some of the tales, in which there seems little 
absolute necessity for the poetic form. We might go through all the Son of Croesus, 
for instance, or the Watching of the Falcon, without finding any such lines as these : 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 31 

" the night 

Grew dreamy with a shadowy sweet delight." 

" Her lovely shadow even now did pass 
Along the changeless fields, oft looking back, 
As though it yet had thought of some great lack." 

" But Time, who slays so many a memory, 
Brought hers to light, the short-lived loving Queen; 
And her fair soul, as scent of flowers unseen, 
Sweetened the turmoil of long centuries." 

After Alcestis, in order of excellence, comes perhaps the Cupid and Psyche. A 
greater genius would probably have given us more of the spiritual aspects of the 
fable, but we will not quarrel with our poet, who has told us the old, old story in his 
sweetest words. * * * The picture of Psyche wandering through the world after she 
has lost her love, is most beautifully drawn. 

" Like a thin dream she passed the clattering town," 

is one of Mr. Morris's felicities of expression. 

And above all, and through all the grace and simplicity of the narrative, the music 
of the flowing verse, the vividness of the lightly sketched pictures, is the exquisite 
purity of thought, which pervades the book like an atmosphere. It is lovely with the 
perfume of a beautiful soul and a sweet imagination. Its tender moonlight effects, 
its dreamy music, soothe us to sleepy peace. It is a book preeminently for lovers 
and lazy people; a book to carry into the country and read under a tree, with a little 
brook keeping time to the flowing lines ; a book to loiter and dream over, not to 
analyze and criticise. 



The Nation. 

THIS new volume of Mr. Morris's is, we think, a book for all time ; but it is 
especially a book for these ripening summer days. To sit in the open shade, inhaling 
the heated air, and, while you read these perfect fairy tales, these rich and pathetic 
human traditions, to glance up from your page at the clouds and the trees, is to do 
as pleasant a thing as the heart of man can desire. Mr. Morris's book abounds in all 
the sounds and sights and sensations of nature, in the warmth of the sunshine, the 
murmur of forests, and the breath of ocean-scented breezes. The fulness of physical 
existence which belongs to climates where life is spent in the open air, is largely dif 
fused through its pages : 

. . . " Hot July was drawing to an end, 
And August came the fainting year to mend 
With fruit and grain ; so 'neath the trellises, 
Nigh blossomless, did they lie well at ease, 
And watched the poppies burn across the grass, 
And o'er the bindweed's bells the brown bee pass, 
Still murmuring of his gains : windless and bright 
The morn had been, to help their dear delight. 

Then a light wind arose 

That shook the light stems of that flowery close, 
And made men sigh for pleasure." 



32 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

This is a random specimen. As you read, the fictitious universe of the poem 
seems to expand and advance out of its remoteness, to surge musically about your 
senses, and merge itself utterly in the universe which surrounds you. The summer 
brightness of the real world goes half-way to meet it; and the beautiful figures which 
throb with life in Mr. Morris's stories pass lightly to and fro between the realm of 
poetry and the mild atmosphere of fact. This quality was half the charm of the 
author's former poem, " The Life and Death of Jason," published last summer. We 
seemed really to follow, beneath the changing sky, the fantastic boat-load of wander 
ers in their circuit of the ancient world. For people compelled to stay at home, the 
perusal of the book in a couple of mornings was very nearly as good as a fortnight's 
holiday. The poem appeared to reflect so clearly and forcibly the poet's natural 
sympathies with the external world, and his joy in personal contact with it, that the 
reader obtained something very like a sense of physicial transposition, without either 
physicial or intellectual weariness. This ample and direct presentment of the joys 
of action and locomotion seems to us to impart to these two works a truly national 
and English tone. They taste not perhaps of the English soil, but of those strong 
English sensibilities which the great insular race carry with them through their 
wanderings, which they preserve and apply with such energy in every terrestrial 
clime, and which make them such incomparable travellers. We heartily recommend 
such persons as have a desire to accommodate their reading to the season as are 
vexed with a delicate longing to place themselves intellectually in relation with the 
genius of the summer to_take this " Earthly Paradise " with them to the country. 
* * * * * * * * 

The author, in his "Jason," identified himself with the successful treatment of 
Greek subjects to such a degree as to make it easy to suppose that these matters were 
the specialty of his genius. But in these romantic modern stories the same easy 
power is revealed, the same admirable union of natural gifts and cultivated percep 
tions. Mr. Morris is evidently a poet in the broad sense of the word a singer of hu 
man joys and sorrows, whenever and wherever found. His somewhat artificial diction, 
which would seem to militate against our claim that his genius is of the general and 
comprehensive order, is, we imagine, simply an achievement of his own. It is not 
imposed from without, but developed from within. Whatever may be said of it, it 
certainly will not be accused of being unpoetical ; and except this charge, what serious 
one can be made? The author's style according to our impression is neither 
Chaucerian, Spenserian, nor imitative ; it is literary, indeed, but it has a freedom and 
irregularity, an adaptability to the movements of the author's mind, which make it 
an ample vehicle of poetical uttearnce. He says in this language of his own the 
most various and the most truthful things; he moves, melts, and delights. Such, at 
least, is our own experience. Other persons, we know, find it difficult to take him 
entirely ail seritux. But we, taking him and our critical duties too in the most 
serious manner our mind permits of, feel strongly impelled, both by gratitude and by 
reflection, to pronounce him a noble and delightful poet. To call a man healthy now- 
a-days is almost an insult invalids learn so many secrets. But the health of the 
intellect is often promoted by physical disability. We say therefore, finally, that 
however the faculty may have been promoted with the minimum of suffering, w&- 
certainly hope Mr. Morris is a supremely healthy writer. This poem is marked by 
all that is broad and deep in nature, and all that is elevating, profitable, and curious 
in art. 



THE AMERICAN PRESS, 23 

The Round Table. 

THE very breath of June, its tenderness, its gracious calm, its infinite repose, seems 
to breathe through the music of these verses ; one almost catches on the page the 
shifting play of sun and shade from the rose trellises under which they were surely 
written : 

. . . "the murmur of the stream, 
The rustling boughs, the twitter of the birds," 

seem to mingle with their soft, sad cadence. And reading thus, one is apt to fling 
criticism, as he flings care, to the winds, and, fully resigned to the spell of the poet, 
to drink his fill of enjoyment. So we are not disposed to find fault, and indeed it is 
difficult to choose words which shall suffice without extravagance to express our 
praise. 

****** 

There are not many poets of the present generation who can write better poetry 
than this ; there is none who can attire so much graceful simplicity of thought in such 
simple grace of language, who can wed such straightforwardness of sense to such 
exquisite melody of rhythm, who can so completely satisfy one's perceptions of 
poetic beauty with so little appeal to poetic ornament. 

****** 

Mr. Morris's faults are easily numbered; it is more difficult, within the limits of 
such a notice as this, to enumerate his beauties. Many there are which the ordinary 
reader can scarcely miss : his directness, his clearness, his simplicity, the firmness 
and fineness of his style, the beauty of his rhythm, in whose music there is a certain 
subtle pathos we find it difficult to define, unlike the cadence of any other poet, and 
which we can only trace to the singular preponderance of Saxon words and of mono 
syllables. But what few readers will discern on casual inspection are the delicate 
touches with which Mr. Morris finishes his pictures into unusual perfection, as in the 
charming description of Psyche's meeting with her sisters : 

" Then did she run to take them by the hand, 
And laid her cheek to theirs, and murmured words 
Of little meaning, like the moan of birds'' (p. 377); 

or of Andromeda rescued by Perseus : 

" For her alone the sea breeze seemed to blow, 
For her in music did the white surf fall, 
For her alone the wheeling- birds did call 
Over the shallows, and the sky for her 
Was set with white clouds far away and clear 
Even as her love; this strong and lovely one 
Who held her hand was but for her alone " (p. 275) ; 

or the beautiful expression of the dying- Admetus, 

11 Stoop down and kiss me, for I yearn for you 
E'en as the autumn yearneth for the sun" (p. 493); 

the pathetic farewell of Alcestis, which is too long- to quote; or the picture of Tht 
Lady of the Land, p. 513, 

" Naked she was ; the kisses of her feet 
Upon the floor a dying path had made\ n 



34 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

But it needs not to multiply examples which indeed would be endless; we have 
said enough to show the high value we set on a poem which it is not easy to value 
too highly, and which, if it cannot, as its author fears, 

" Make quick coming death a little thing, 
Or bring again the pleasures of past years," 

must certainly win for him a longer memory than the one he modestly hopes for, a 
nobler name than 

" The idle singer of an empty day." 



New Tork Independent. 

WHEN " The Life and Death of Jason " appeared, scarce a year ago, it was quietly 
welcomed, and found not many but appreciative readers. It was hardly to be ex 
pected that classic tales could be made popular when sung by minstrels this side 
of the dark ages. The Myriad-Minded had dramatized the death of Cassar; but what 
other immortal work of modern times is founded on ancient tale or history? And yet 
there has been a constant fascination about these scenes of distant romance, and few 
of our English poets, from Chaucer to Tennyson, have failed to court the muses of 
the Aonian Mount. 

But a few months have passed by, and Mr. Morris issues yet another volume of 
nearly seven hundred pages, and promises a second of equal bulk, which shall con 
clude the work. Such a race-horse speed in composition well nigh takes away our 
breath, and we involuntarily mutter the rule which Horace oracularly lays down to 
young authors, 

" Nonumque prematur in annum, 
Meinbranis intus fositis," 

and open the volume with no little suspicion. 

But a nine years' gestation is a law for that style of literary artists whose forte Is 
elaboration, and is no law for genius; and genius Mr. Morris possesses. The 
"Earthly Paradise" is worthy of the author of "Jason." 

****** 

But in his own sphere Mr. Morris is unequalled. His stories have all the simplicity 
of one of Andersen's fairytales. He does not hesitate to modify the details of classic 
mythology; and his taste is in such exquisite harmony with the antique that there 
are no seams between shreds of Grecian and English fancy, sewed into a modern 
patchwork. Nor yet do the classic tales seem purely Grecian. They are, rather, un 
defined in time and place pure tales of fancy. 

We admire, then, three things in Mr. Morris : his sustained power of invention, 
which can add the interest of novelty to well-worn tales; his extreme simplicity, so 
charming and so rare, and so beautifully adapted to his themes a simplicity which , 
allows no poetical flourishes, scarce a metaphor or a simile, nothing more pretentious 
than the simple " pale as privet," which, twice repeated, is almost the only compari 
son in the whole volume, even as 'os nephos like a cloud is the only simile which 
Demosthenes allows himself in his oration "De Corona"; and, finally, a sympathy 
'.vith the unreal, the distant, the vague" which, if not very healthy, is yet delightful, 
and which reminds one rather of a seer telling in unconscious soliloquy the vision 
which with closed eyes he sees, or dreams he sees, in some distant haze. * * 



THE AMERICAN PRESS. 35 

We might like now and then a little more condensation ; we might at times prefer 
a more perfect rhythm ; but we cannot avoid welcoming the poem as worthy to rank 
among the best productions of the century. Nothing can be more charming for a 
summer's vacation, or, better, for a hazy autumn afternoon, when sky and earth and 
leaf all seem least real ; and it needs scarce an overwrought fancy to see " the yel 
low-skirted fays," not yet banished from earth with the " flocking shadows pale." 



Ne-w York Times. 

THERE can be no question in the mind of any critic with regard to the extraordi 
nary industry of Mr. Morris. It was only last year that he came before the world 
for the first time with a poem, under the title of Jason, which contained about eleven 
thousand lines. We now have a series of poems, amounting in the whole to twice 
the length of Jason, and at the end of the volume a continuation of the series is 
announced, apparently to extend over the same compass. This is a wonderful 
instance of quick writing, to say nothing of the fertility of the poetic genius, and if 
Mr. Morris is not publishing works which have long been in hand, the mere manual 
labor which he is equal to must surprise even a practised journalist, who is accus 
tomed to use his pen as freely as most men. Yet the further marvel remains that 
there is no sign of crudeness or haste in Mr. Morris's compositions. The tales and 
legends of which his new poem is constructed are as perfect in workmanship as 
Jason a new version of an old story that compelled the reluctant admiration of men 
who took up the book with a certain prejudice against both it and the author. * * * 

Chaucer is Mr. Morris's model, and the old master reappears in the disciple. To 
some readers the ease and unambitious grace of these poems will seem to savor of 
monotony. There are few of those lines in the poem which certain critics like to 
quote in italics. The work is one of uniform excellence, not of exceptional bril 
liancy. * * * The mastership which Mr. Morris possesses over our mother tongue 
would alone repay every reader for the hours devoted to this work, even if those 
hours were snatched from the most engrossing pursuits. 

We have already stated that the Earthly Paradise is formed of a number of dif 
ferent stories, so that a detailed analysis of the poem would be both unreadable and 
unprofitable, even if the critic had the patience to make it. The prologue is sufficient 
by itself to satisfy the sternest judges of the right of Mr. Morris to be ranked among 
the true poets of this century. * * * We are disposed to think that this prologue, 
called " The Wanderers," will haunt the recollection of the reader longer than any 
of the classical or Northern legends which make up the substance of the volume. 
We follow the adventures of the " gentlemen and mariners of Norway " with the 
interest which very few records of travel succeed in inspiring. Sometimes they are 
beating about at random on unknown seas, at other times they have landed on the 
coast which, to their self-deluded eyes, seems to be the entrance to the Earthly Par 
adise. Then come their toilsome marches, their hardships, their bitter disappoint 
ments and sorrows. One such expedition into a land of idolaters, where human 
sacrifices are part of the religion of the country, reads like a metrical version 
of Prescott's account of the advance of Cortes into Mexico. The story of the 
" Spanish Conquest " was undoubtedly fanyliar to Mr. Morris before he sat down 
to relate the wayward fortunes of the" Wanderers." The Norsemen tarry, in one 
or the other of these strange lands, and as they grow older and more hopeless in 



50 TRIBUTES TO WILLIAM MORRIS. 

their quest, their reflections, being based rather upon retrospection than anticipa 
tion, take a sombre cast. It is while they are in these moods that the pathetic 
quality of Mr. Morris's muse finds its exercise. * * * 



Neiv York Evening Post. 

" THE Earthly Paradise " is in many ways a better work than "Jason." It is not, 
perhaps, so carefully finished, either in design or expression. The reader in this, 
oftener than in the former work, feels the lack of that undying patience with one's 
own work which alone accomplishes perfection. Yet there is an apparent advance 
in power in the collection of stories. The author speaks, on the whole, more simply, 
more intelligibly; he sustains the human interest of his tale more uniformly; and in 
several passages rises to a nobler style than he had attained in " Jason." 

****** 

Mr. Morris's book is in itself charming. The stories of Atalanta, Alcestis and 
Pygmalion have never been told so well. Apart from the dusky world the reader is 
taken into a life of the imagination, another human race ; like this, so as to awaken 
our sympathies, but yet more unlike it, so as to rest our hearts. Anything less in 
unison with the strifes and aims of the age can scarcely be dreamed. There is nothing 
in the events, the persons, the words, to connect the work with this century or with 
England. It is the permanent element of our language in which it is written; and 
it is the permanent element of human nature in which it seeks its interest. 



Boston Transcript. 

THE previous poem by Mr. Morris was so good, and so original in its excellence, 
that his present venture will naturally be subjected to tests of more than ordinary 
severity. These, we think, " The Earthly Paradise" will bear. As a narrative poet 
the author takes Chaucer for his model, and though his seeming artlessness is rea! 
artfulness, it is still full of fascination. Let any reader once commit himself to any 
one of these delicious narratives, " Atalanta's Race," "The Man Born to be a 
King," " The Doom of King Acrisius," " Cupid and Psyche," "The Love of Al 
cestis," or " Pygmalion and the Image," and he cannot fail to feel the spell of its 
melody, and to have his imagination filled with its events and images. Nobody 
who wishes to gain an idea of the original poetic literature of the present time can 
afford to overlook " The Life and Death of Jason," and " The Earthly Paradise." 



Boston Daily Advertiser. 

The Earthly Paradise is the sweetest volume of poetry we have seen for a long 
time. Its absolute merit cannot be judged of at once. At present, with its melodies 
ringing in our ears, and all the pictures of the four seasons and all the tropics 
orderly and clear before our eyes, it seems as if the genuine instrument of Chaucer 
were touched again by a worthy hand; as if England were essentially the same 
healthy England, our language the same great language, our hearts the same hearts 
to which the world six hundred years ago owed the immortal Canterbury Tales. 



Stereotyped by INNBS & REGAN, 65 Water St 



Leigh Hunt's Writings. 



THE SEER ; OR, COMMONPLACES REFRESHED. 
"Love adds a precious seeing to the eye." Shake 
speare. In two volumes. i6mo. Cloth, gilt top. 
Price, $3.00. 

Contents of " The Seer" 

Cat by the Fire ; Put up a Picture in 
your Room ; A Gentleman-Saint 
The Eve of St. Agnes; A "Now," 
descriptive of a cold day ; Ice, will 
Poets upon it ; The Piano-forte 
Why Sweet Music produces Sadness 
Dancing and Dancers ; Twelftl 
Night ; Rules in Making Presents 
Romance of Commonplace ; Amiable 
ness Superior to Common Intellect 
Life After Death, Belief in Spirits 
On Death and Burial ; On Washer 
women ; The Nightmare ; The Flor 
entine Lovers ; Rhyme and Reason 
Vicissitudes of a Lecture ; The For 
tunes of Genius; Poets' Houses 
A Journey by Coach; Inexhaustibility 
of the Subject of Christmas. 



Pleasure ; On a Pebble ; Spring ; 
Color ; Windows ; Windows, con 
sidered from inside ; A Flower for 
your Window ; A Word on Early 
Rising ; Breakfast in Summer ; Anac- 
reon ; The Wrong Sides of Scholar 
ship and No Scholarship ; Cricket ; 
A Dusty Day; Bricklayers, and An 
Old Book ; A Rainy Day ; The East 
Wind; Strawberries; The Waiter: 
The Butcher; A Pinch of Snuff; 
Wordsworth and Milton ; Specimens 
of Chaucer ; Peter Wilkins and the 
Flying Woman ; English and French 
Females ; English Male Costume ; 
English Women Vindicated ; Sunday 
in London; Sunday in the Suburbs; 
A Human Being and a Crowd; The 



" ' The Seer ' is a capital companion in the traveller's pocket, and by the 
bachelor's coffee-cup, and whenever one wishes a nibble at the good things of 
the library at home. No one can behold the face of Nature without finding a 
smile upon it, if he looks there through the eyes of 'The Seer.'" Boston 
Daily A dvertiser. 

" A collection of delicious essays, thoroughly imbued with the characteristics 
of the writer's genius and manner, and on topics especially calculated to bring 
out all the charms of his genial spirit and develop all the niceties of his fluent 
diction, and worthy of being domesticated among those choice family books 
which while away leisure hours with agreeable thoughts and fancies." 
E. P. 



" ' The Seer ' is one of the best specimens of the modern essayist's dealing 
with the minor pleasures and domestic philosophy of life, and is a capital anti 
dote for the too exciting books of the hour ; it lures us to musing, and what 
Hazlitt calls 'reposing on our sensations.'" H. T. Tuckerman. 



Sold everywhere. ' Mailed, post-paid, by the Publisher!,. 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, 

Boston. 



Leigh Hunt's Writings. 



THE BOOK OF THE SONNET. Compris 
ing an Essav on the Cultivation, History, and Varieties 
of the species of poem called the Sonnet, with a Selec 
tion of English Sonnets, now first published from the 
original MSS. of Leigh Hunt. An Essay on American 
Sonnets and Sonneteers, with a Selection of Sonnets, 
by S. Adams Lee. In two volumes. i6mo. Cloth, 
gilt top. Price, $3.00. 

"The genuine aroma of literature abounds in every page of Leigh Hunt's 
delicious Essay on the Sonnet. His mind shows itself imbued with a rich 
knowledge of his subject, and this, illumined by the evidence of a thorough and 
unaffected liking for it, makes him irresistible." London Saturday Review. 

" As a collection of Sonnets, it is not only the fullest ever made, but by far 
the best, even excelling the dainty little collection by Dyce, . . . and Hunt's 
exhaustive and every way admirable introductory essay is, after all, much the 
best part of the work. Its pages are steeped in thoughtful scholarship on this 
special theme, and sparkle with genial and veracious criticism." R. H. Stod- 
dard. 

" A greater verbal epicurean than Leigh Hunt never lived. He luxuriated 
over niceties of expression and revelled in a delicious image or apt phrases ; he 
was always seeking the beautiful in neglected fields of literature ; and to renew 
his acquaintance with the memorable sonnets of Italian and English poets was 
simply a labor of love. He therefore wrote an essay giving the history of the 
sonnet, and defining its conditions and possibilities, expatiated on the special 
merits of each renowned writer in this sphere, and indicated the most striking 
examples of success in artistic and effective construction or eloquent feeling as 
thus embodied and expressed." H. T. Tuckerinan. 

" Whether Leigh Hunt was a man of genius, or only of surpassing talent, 
is a question which we willingly leave to the critics who find tweedledee differ 
ent from tweedledum in kind as well as degree. We are content with the fact 
that he has some virtue which makes us read every book of his we open, and 
which leaves us more his friend at the end than we were before. Indeed, it 
would be hard not to love so cheerful and kindly a soul, even if his art were 
ever less than charming. But literature seems to have always been a gay sci 
ence with him. We never see his Muse as the harsh step-mother she really 
was : we are made to think her a gentle liege-lady, served in the airiest spirit of 
chivalric devotion ; and in the Essay in this ' Book of the Sonnet ' her aspect 
is as sunny as any the poet has ever shown us. 

" The Essay is printed for the first time, and it was written in Hunt's old 
age ; but it is full of light-heartedness, and belongs in feeling to a period at 
least as early as that which produced the ' Stories from the Italian Poets.' It 
is one of those studies in which he was always happy, for it keeps him chiefly 
in Italy ; and when it takes him from Italy, it only brings him into the Italian 
air of English sonnetry, a sort of soft Devonshire coast, bordering the rug- 
geder native poetry on the south." W. D. Howells, in Atlantic Monthly. 



Sold everywhere. Mailed, postpaid, by the Publishers. 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, 

Boston. 



THE HANDY VOLUME SERIES. 



MESSRS. ROBERTS BROTHERS propose to issue, under the 
above heading, a Series of Handy Volumes, which shall be at 
once various, valuable, and popular, their size a most conven 
ient one, their typography of the very best, and their price ex 
tremely low. They will entertain the reader with poetry as well 
as with prose ; now with fiction, then with fact ; here with narra 
tion, there with inquiry ; in some cases with the works of living 
authors, in others with the works of those long since dead. It is 
hoped that they will prove to be either amusing or instructive, 
sometimes curious, often valuable, always handy. Each Volume 
will, as a rule, form a work complete in itself. 

OPINIONS OF THE PRESS. 

PALL MALL GAZETTE. "The size and shape of this volume justifies the 
name given to the series, and it is as well and as clearly printed as many a 
book of double the price." 

ATHEN^UM. " The size is handy, the type neat, the paper good, and the 
price moderate." 

ILLUSTRATED TIMES. " We hail this new series of ' Handy Volumes ' with 
pleasure, and shall be careful to add each work as it appears to our own rivate 
library ; and would advise all who value good, substantial, interesting reading 
to go and do likewise." 

LONDON NEWS. " The handy volume, the pretty volume, the volume 
of good reading, is a clteap volumt." 

The Handy Volume Series will be neatly bound in cloth, 
flexible covers, and also in illuminated paper covers. 



HANDT VOLUME SERIES, 
i. 

HAPPY THOUGHTS. By F. C. BURNAND. Price in 

cloth, $1.00 ; paper covers, 75 cents. 

2. 

DOCTOR JACOB. A Novel. By Miss M. BETHAM ED 
WARDS, Price in cloth, i.oo; paper covers, 75 cents. 

3- 

PLANCHETTE ; or, The Despair of Science. Being a full 
account of Modern Spiritualism. Price in cloth, $1.25; 
paper covers, $1.00. 

Other volumes will follow the above at convenient interval* 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON. 
14 



HANDY VOLUME SERIES, 



I. 



HAPPY THOUGHTS. Br F. C. BUTRXAXD. Price, in Cloth, 
$ Ijoo; in fllmminatffd Paper Coras, 75 cents. 



to lie. Baa- 
or Us hei% the thaa^ </hmB inch thoughts is Ac happiest. As we 



read, we hash and we admire. Mi iTmiiiiiiiil rr Tim frrtflr m i mi 11 nj ml < 
edy, l&Btwe^re BO other nxnrce; bo, at least, oar fa-ehter k SD 
We do aet faj adorned of hiriafcheeaamanrri There k BO 
^ ' 



f mmmmnmi amawovds. 1J** the Bext monmBT * whtch i 
may say of Mir. BuBBBBdfc Am, ihal thuK. as Bot a headache 
at. Cuaeriy hamjum. as his rhararanrt are, they are Beaher i 

I too umiHimh, bat oat mtemed. Bat the* he overlays them with 








rf{Hk.] 

J 'pvzzile the critics.* The. 
"vzded, Tmae ksBcha mmtof mmur m every page of the book 

fafmml ^mVmflvSIR K *m* f wmw* (HwBlrnfVJB Imflv ImmwmDnmnl mC kmYmt jualBH rVmmlV' IhmmT mm* 

- 3_. ^ J V, .._.. ,.."- 

BKMFS K amKl mG mmCaaBS BU MC COmlDTRCS ttftmC mWJSt mfMBCXOwB VJailBmtS 3mmml 

see wmot he wn! say. It is mat enaag^ 




dot IBS mi.budL nay record affl the stages nt 

a*^ . - - -,,B , y -- 

ABB* Bwenncv WBJB tme SOBOBOT B\ 



'. nostt t.lmimii mCmiiiL Jflgt. cftfhc boofc. If B mairfitiod by BBOBC lluum 
iTiirmnl ifaf-mc Tkc idea <tf a .Baa wric^ de.i n 2 Ki^e^book, 
\HmpTl*iL Go to bed IB MF boots' is - oa-m-c if ya-t ttyttoa-n-Tzc 
u BdEt Iftn TDK doB^t aaaBrzc k. Yon accept k vodknc acjm.a.y- YOBI 




Xf 

:u. _ ^ j - * - ^ - 

B a. SKBBBO mweaimr ot ciLtu BOBSCBSC, aous iBcre B 

^ 



A 

reader maid smmcr bByvhea he or skewed ID feel iffle. 
It aecdk BO mane effort to take m what 3fr. lt ' wishes to say tmas k 
does tto 9Bobe a op*. . . ., . He oaty anas tra aaBse, aad he succeeds 

Mailed to any address, post-paid, on receipt of die advertised 
price. 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, Bosrox. 






HANDY VOLUME SEEIES. 

IV. 

EDELWEISS : A Story. By BERTHOLD ACERBACH, author of 
" On the Heights," " Villa Eden : The Conntry-House on the 
Rhine," "Village Tales." Price, in Cloth, $1.00; in Illu 
minated Paper Covers, 75 cents. 

** There is a flower kuowu to botanists, one of the ff unr genus with OUT dm* 
ner plant, called ' lafe-Everiasting,' a Gnapkalinm like that which grows on 
the most inaccessible cliffs of the Tyrolese mountains, where the ^^"~"'< dart 
hardly venture, and which the banter, tempted by its beauty and by his love (fat 
it is immensely valued by the Swiss maidens), climbs the cliffs to gather, and is 
sometimes found dead at the foot, with the flower in his hand. It is called by 
botanists the Gnaphalimm leomlopodimm, but by the Swiss EDELWKISSB, which 
signifies NOBLE PCRITY.*" RALPH WALDO EMERSON. 
From the Salem Gazette. 

" The German novelist is hemming a great favorite with American readcis, 
chiefly through the enterprise of Messrs. ROBERTS BROTHERS in ammg *D 
English version, of h"g productions in such desirable fditioi 1 * * 
From the Worcester Palladium. 

" Berthold Anerbach is a genius. He treads in no beaten path; he echoes 
no man's thoughts. He can be compared with no other writer, for there is nona 
like him. He has the rare power of grasping the salient points of his time, and 
writing a story of to-day which has all the poetic haze which hangs over the 
past. In this he is an artist, nl one, too, whose work is ^ ltTWVC t faultless in 
construction. He knows the value of form and harmonious proportion, and 
piettr ^^aiis of color ***! Miijmi^it do not lead him f *** &*^ inJiing' idea 
and plan of his work. Then he is a reformer, in the best and highest rr. 
A tyrannical ruler might dread the influence of his Mi*a*. which tf >rti flic ^Iriitih* 
cratic idea of the sovereignty of the people. Not that he writes political novels. 
They are tales of real life, unfolding the good and the evil there is in man, 
but showing always how virtue is its own reward, and that mng^tt but 01 can 
come of eviL" 

" I know of no writer of fiction of the present day equal to Anerbach." 
JOKX G. WmninR. 

From the New Bedford Mertmry. 

"The story, a German one, is a gem. It is told quietly, smoothly, gracefully, 
and naturally. There is nothing to excite, but everything about it interests the 
reader. It is one of the books, and such novels are very rare, that one lays by 
for a second perusal; and that made, is reserved for another and another. It is a 
book we can commend heartily to all classes of readers.* 

Mailed to any address, post-paid, on receipt of the advertised 
price. 

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON. 

a 



VI. 

POEMS OF RURAL LIFE IN COMMON ENGLISH. 
By WILLIAM BARNES. Price, in green cloth, $1.25. 



from fyt (KngUsj) |)nss. 

From the Saturday Review. 

" One of the most original, and, within his own range, one of the most faultless of 
English poets/' 

From the London Review. 

" They breathe the spirit of true poetry, and are invested with a simple beauty, 
*liich is their greatest charm.'' 

From the Pall-Matt Gazette. 

" The vale and the village are his world, and he makes us familiar with every lane 
*nd copse and hill ; he laughs with the beauty in every farm-house, and knows the 
story of every cottager's family. His language, direct and simple, aided by the in 
genious structure of the verse, lends itself admirably to the scenes which he delineates. 
It is the homely, healthy language of his native country-side, only purified and clarified 
by good taste and feeling ; like brook-water coming to one over beds of golden gravel." 
From the Spectator. 

" There can be no readers, we should imagine, whose good opinion will not be won 
Dy poems so fresh, tender, and pure . . . not unworthy to be ranked with the best 
national poets . . . the exquisite melody of his verse . . . his country men and 
women have all the look of reality ... he paints to the life ; and, in this respect, he 
teems to us to excel all the poets of rural life." 



Ijlotitts from tfet ^irurirnn |jrtss. 

From the Galaxy. 

" A precious contribution to the poetic literature of the year. They are full of 
tenderness, of homely grace, of simple pathos, the poetry of the home, the hearth, 
the field, the daily round of rustic life. They come to American readers in an ex 
quisitely tasteful garb of print and illustration." 

From the Boston Transcript. 

" These ' Rural Poems ' do, indeed, smack of the soil, and smell of honeysuckle* 
and primroses. The volume is full of happy descriptions of nature, of sweet, simple 
pictures of rustic life, of charming little idyls, which are almost worthy of Theocritus 
himself. Mr. Barnes can not only paint a tree or a flower or 

" ' A trottin" birnie wimplin' through the .ground, 

Its channel peebles shining smooth and round,' 

but he succeeds admirably as a poetic delineator of rural life and manners. His pic 
tures of ' the doings and wooings ' of rustic beaux and belles are touched off with the 
skill of a master." 

Front the New-York Evening Post. 

" The poems in this little volume are another illustration of the great truth that 
poetry is to be found in the obscurest scenes ; that it exists in the lives of the most 
humble and simple-hearted. As soon as a poet appears sensitive enough to catch the 
inward music by which the life of a single human being is modulated, the world 
hearkens to his songs with wonder and delight. The sorrows and joys of village 
youths and maidens; the tenderness of husband and w : fe walking hand-in-hand 
through the shadow and sunshine of their existence ; the talk of friendly neighbors ; 
the varying aspects of nature, these are the themes that the author writes about, 
with so much sweetness and simplicity that every scene that he describes becomes a 
true poem. They have the vigor, purity, and reality that belongs to every work of art 
born of the ideal, and strengthened and vivified by a faithful study of nature." 

Mailed to any address, post-paid, on receipt of the advertised 
price. ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston. 





The Life and Death of Jason. 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 



3&S0N 



A POEM 



BY WILLIAM MORRIS 



BOSTON 

ROBERTS BROTHERS 

1867 



C3 7$2__ 



;Uiri7IRSIT7] 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JASON. 

ARGUMENT. 

Jason, the son of iEson, king of Iolchos, having come to man's 
estate, demanded of Pelias his father's kingdom, which he held 
wrongfully. But Pelias answered, that if he would bring from 
Colchis the golden fleece of the ram that had carried Phryxus 
thither, he would yield him his right. Whereon Jason sailed to 
Colchis in the ship Argo, with other heroes, and by means of 
Medea, the king's daughter, won the fleece ; and carried off also 
Medea ; and so, after many troubles, came back to Iolchos again. 
There, by Medea's wiles, was Pelias slain ; but Jason went to 
Corinth, and lived with Medea happily, till he was taken with the 
love of Glauce, the king's daughter of Corinth, and must needs 
wed her; whom also Medea destroyed, and fled to iEgeus at 
Athens ; and not long after Jason died strangely. 

BOOK I. 

IN Thessaly, beside the tumbling sea, 
Once dwelt a folk men called the Minyae ; 
For, coming from Orchomenus the old, 
Bearing their wives and children, beasts and gold, 
Through many a league of land they took their way, 
And stopped at last, where in a sunny bay 
The green Anaurus cleaves the white sea-sand, 
And eastward inland doth Mount Pelion stand, 
Where bears and wolves the centaur's arrows find ; 
And southward is a gentle sea and kind, 
Nigh landlocked, peopled with all kinds of fish, 
And the good land yields all that man can wish. 



0^762 



6 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

So there they built Iolchos, that each day- 
Grew great, until all these were passed away, 
With many another, and Cretheus the king 
Had died, and left his crown and everything 
To iEson, his own son by fair Tyro ; 
Whom, in unhappy days and long ago, 
A God had loved, whose son was Pelias. 

And so, within a while, it came to pass 
This Pelias being covetous and strong 
And full of wiles, and deeming nought was wrong 
That wrought him good, thrust iEson from his throne, 
And over all the Minyae reigned alone ; 
While iEson, like a poor and feeble lord, 
Dwelt in Iolchos still, nor was his word 
Regarded much by any man therein, 
Nor did men labour much his praise to win. 

Now 'mid all this a fair young son he had ; 
And when his state thus fell from good to bad 
He thought, Though Pelias leave me now alone, 
Yet he may wish to make quite sure his throne 
By slaying me and mine, some evil day ; 
Therefore the child will I straight send away, 
Ere Pelias feels his high seat tottering, 
And gets to know the terrors of a king, 
That blood alone can deaden. Therewithal 
A faithful slave unto him did he call, 
And bade him from his nurses take the child 
And bear him forth unto the forest wild 
About the foot of Pelion : There should he 
Blow loudly on a horn of ivory 
That ^son gave him ; then would come to him 
A Centaur, grave of face and large of limb, 
Before whom he should fall upon his knees, 
And, holding forth the child, say words like these : 

"Omy lord Cheiron, iEson sends me here 



OF JASON. \ 

To say, if ever you have held him dear, 

Take now this child, his son, and rear him up 

Till we have fully drained the bitter cup 

The fates have filled for us ; and if times change 

While through the peaceful oak wood here you range, 

And the crown comes upon the youngling's head, 

Then, though a king right fair apparelled, 

Yet unto you shall he be but a slave, 

Since now from fear his tender years you save ; " 

" And then," quoth iEson, " all these words being said, 

Hold out this ring, set with a ruby red, 

Adorned with dainty little images, 

And this same horn, whereon, 'twixt carven trees, 

Diana follows up the flying hart ; 

They shall be signs of truth upon your part. 

Then leave the child with him, and come to me, 

Minding what words the Centaur saith to thee ; 

Of whom thou needest have no whit of fear ; 

And, ere thou goest, bring me the child here." 

Then went the man and came again to him 
With Jason, who was strong and large of limb 
As for his years, and now upon his feet 
Went firmly, and began to feel life sweet, 
And longed for this and that, and on his tongue, 
Bewildered, half articulate, speech hung. 

But iEson, when he saw the sturdy boy, 
His fair round limbs and face lit up with joy 
Of very life, sighed deeply, and he said : 
" child, I pray the Gods to spare thine head 
The burden of a crown ; were it not good 
That thou shouldst live and die within this wood 
That clothes the feet of Pelion, knowing nought 
Of all the things by foolish men so sought ; 
For there, no doubt, is everything man needs, 
The quiver, with the iron-pointed reeds, 
The cornel bow, the wood-knife at the side, 



8 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The garments of the spotted leopard's hide, 

The bed of bear-skin in the hollow hill, 

The bath within the pool of some green rill ; 

There shall the quick-eyed centaurs be thy friends, 

Unto whose hearts such wisdom great Jove sends 

They know the past and future, and fear nought 

That by the fates upon them may be brought. 

And when the spring brings love, then mayst thou find. 

In some fair grassy place, the wood-nymphs kind, 

And choose thy mate, and with her, hand in hand, 

Go wandering through the blossoming sweet land ; 

And nought of evil there shall come to thee, 

But like the golden age shall all things be ; 

And when upon thee falls the fated day, 

Fearless and painless shalt thou pass away." 

So spoke he foolishly, nor knew indeed 
How many hearts his son should make to bleed, 
How many griefs his head, whitened with care 
Long ere its time, before his death should bear. 

Now, since the moonless night and dark was come, 
Time was it that the child should leave his home ; 
And saddled in the court the stout horse stood 
That was to bear them to the Centaur's wood ; 
And the tried slave stood ready by his lord, 
With wallet on his back, and sharpened sword 
Girt to his side ; to whom the horn and ring, 
Fit for the belt and finger of a king, 
Did iEson give, and therewith kissed the boy, 
Who with his black beard played, and laughed for joy 
To see the war-horse in the red torch-light. 
Then, being mounted, forth into the night 
They rode, and thus has Ja^on left his home. 

All night they rode, and at the dawn, being come 
Unto the outskirts of the forest wild, 
They left the horse, and the still sleeping child 



OF JASON. 

The slave bore in his arms, until they came 
Unto the place where, living free from blame, 
Cheiron the old roamed through the oaken wood ; 
There by a flowering thorn-bush the slave stood, 
And set the little Jason on the ground ; 
Who, waking from sweet sleep, looked all around 
And 'gan to prattle ; but his guardian drew 
The horn from off his neck, and thereon blew 
A point of hunting known to two or three, 
That sounded through the forest merrily, 
Then waited listening. 

And meantime the sun, 
Come from Eubcean cliffs, had just begun 
To light the high tips of the forest grass, 
And in the thorns the blackbird singing was ; 
But 'mid his noise the listening man could hear 
The sound of hoofs, whereat a little fear 
He felt within his heart, and heeded nought 
The struggling of the child, who ever sought 
To gain the horn all glittering of gold, 
Wrought by the cunning Daedalus of old. 

But louder still the noise he hearkened grew, 
Until at last in sight the Centaur drew, 
A mighty grey horse, trotting down the glade, 
Over whose back the long grey locks were laid, 
That from his reverend head abroad did flow ; 
For to the waist was man, but all below 
A might v horse, once roan, now well-nigh white 
With lapse of years ; with oak- wreaths was he dight 
Where man joined unto horse, and on his head 
He wore a gold crown, set with rubies red, 
And in his hand he bare a mighty bow, 
No man could bend of those that battle now. 

So, when he saw him coming through the trees, 
The trembling slave sunk down upon his knees 
And put the child before him ; but Cheiron, 



io THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Who knew all things, cried : " Man with iEson's son, 

Thou needest not to tell me who thou art, 

Nor will I fail to do to him my part : 

A vain thing were it, truly, if I strove, 

Such as I am, against the will of Jove. 

Lo now, this youngling, set 'twixt thee and me, 

In days to come a mighty man shall be, 

Well-nigh the mightiest of all those that dwell 

Between Olympus and Malea ; and well 

Shall Juno love him till he come to die. 

"Now get thee to thy master presently, 
But leave with me the red ring and the horn, 
That folk may know of whom this boy was born 
In days to come, when he shall leave this wild : 
And lay between my arms the noble child." 

So the slave joyful, but still half afraid, 
Within the mighty arms young Jason laid, 
And gave up both the horn and the red ring 
Unto the Centaur, who the horn did sling 
About him ; on his finger, with a smile, 
Setting the ring ; and in a little while 
The slave departing, reached the open plain, 
And straight he mounted on his horse again, 
And rode on toward Iolchos all the day, 
And as the sunset darkened every way, 
He reached the gates, and coming to his lord, 
Bid him rejoice, and told him every word 
That Cheiron said. Bight glad was iEson then 
That from his loins a great man among men 
S ould thus have sprung; and so he passed his days 
Full quietly, remote from fear or praise. 

And now was Pelias mindful of the day 
When from the altar's horns he drew away 
Sidero's cruel hands, while Neleus smote 
The golden-hilted sword into her throat, 



OF JASO. 



iV. 1 1 

And without fire, or barley-cake, or cup, 
No pleasing victim, she was offered up 
In Juno's temple ; so he feared that he, 
Though sprung from him who rules the restless sea, 
Should meet an evil fate at Juno's hands : 
Therefore he sent for men from many lands ; 
Marble and wood, and gold and brass enow ; 
And day by day, with many a sounding blow, 
The masons wrought, until at last was reared 
A temple to the Goddess that he feared ; 
A wonder among temples, for the stone 
That made it, and the gold that therein shone. 
And in the midst her image Pelias set, 
Wrought cunningly of purest gold, which yet 
Had served him better in his treasury, 
So little store the Goddess set thereby. 

Moreover to Dodona, where the doves 
Amid the oak-trees murmur of their loves, 
He sent a messenger to know his fate ; 
Who, up the temple steps, beneath the weight 
Of precious things went bending ; and being come 
Back from the north to his Thessalian home, 
Gave forth this answer to the doubtful king : 

" Pelias, fearful of so many a thing, 
Sit merry o'er thy wine, sleep safe and soft 
Within thy golden bed ; for surely oft 
The snows shall fall before the half-shod man 
Can come upon thee through the water wan." 

So at this word the king along the shore 
Built many a tower, and still more and more 
Drew men unto him skilled in spear and bow ; 
And through the streets full often would he go 
Beset with guards, and for the rest began 
To be a terror unto every man. 

And yet indeed were all these things but vain, 



12 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

For at the foot of Pelion grew his bane 

In strength and comeliness from day to day, 

And swiftly passed his childish years away : 

Unto whom Cheiron taught the worthy lore 

Of elders who the wide world filled before ; 

And how to forge his iron arrow-heads, 

And how to find within the marshy steads 

The stoutest reeds, and from some slain bird's wing 

To feather them, and make a deadly thing ; 

And through the woods he took him, nor would spare 

To show him how the just-awakened lair 

Came hungry from his tree, or show him how 

The spotted leopard's lurking-place to know ; 

And many a time they brought the hart to bay, 

Or smote the boar at hottest of the day. 

Now was his dwelling-place a fair-hewn cave, 
Facing the south : thereto the herdsmen drave 
Full oft to Cheiron woolly sheep, and neat, 
And brought him wine and garden-honey sweet, 
And fruits that flourish well in the fat plain, 
And cloth and linen, and would take again 
Skins of slain beasts, and little lumps of gold 
Washed from the high crags : then would Cheiron hold, 
Upon the sunny lawns, high feast with them, 
And garland all about the ancient stem 
Of some great tree, and there do sacrifice 
Unto the Gods, and with grave words and wise 
Tell them sweet tales of elders passed away : 
But for some wished thing every man would pray 
Or ever in their hands the steel did shine, 
And or the sun lit up the bubbling wine ; 
Then would they fall to meat, nor would they leave 
Their joyances, until the dewy eve 
Had given good heart unto the nightingale 
To tell the sleepy wood-nymphs all his tale. 

Moreover, Chieron taught him how to cast 



OF JASON. 13 

His hand across the lyre, until there passed 

Such sweetness through the woods, that all about 

The wood-folk gathered, and the merry rout 

That called on Bacchus, hearkening, stayed a while, 

And in the chase the hunter, with a smile, 

From his raised hand let fall the noisy horn, 

When to his ears the sweet strange sound was borne. 

But in the night-time once did Jason wake, 
And seem to see the moonlit branches shake 
With huge, unwonted clamour of the chase ; 
Then up he sprung, but ere he went one pace 
Unto the cave's mouth, Cheiron raised his arm 
And drew him back, and said: " Surely, no charm 
Thou hast, my son, against Diana's sight, 
Who over Pelion goes abroad this night ; 
Now let those go to her that she doth call, 
Because no fenced town, brazen gate or wall, 
No coat of mail, or seven-folded shield, 
Can guard thee from the wound that ne'er is healed, 
When she is angry. Sleep again, my son, 
Nor wish to spoil great deeds not yet begun." 

Then Jason lay and trembled, while the sound 
Grew louder through the moonlit woods around, 
And died off slowly, going toward the sea, 
Leaving the fern-owl wailing mournfully. 

Thereafter wandering lonely did he meet 
A maid, with girt-up gown and sandalled feet, 
Who joyously through flowering grass did go, 
Holding within her hand an unstrung bow ; 
And, setting eyes on her, he thought, indeed, 
This must be she that made Acteeon bleed ; 
For, certes, ere that day he had not seen, 
Within that wild, one made so like a queen. 

So, doubtful, he held back, nor dared to love 
Her rosy feet, or ivory knees above, 
And, with half-lifted eyes, could scarcely dare 



14 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

To gaze upon her eyes or golden hair, 

Or hidden bosom : but she called aloud, 

" Tell me, fair youth, if thou hast seen a crowd 

Of such as I go through these woods to-day? " 

And when his stammering tongue no word could say, 

She smiled upon him, and said, " Who art thou, 

Who seemest fitter from some galley's prow 

To lead the heroes on the merchant-town, 

Than through the wilds to hunt the poor beasts down, 

Or underneath the canopy to sit, 

Than by the beech to watch the cushat flit ? 

Speak out and fear not." 

"0, my queen ! " said he, 
" Fair Goddess, as thou seemest well to be, 
Give me good days and peace, and fair girl's love, 
And let great kings send out their sons to rove ; 
But as for me, my name is little known, 
I am but Jason, who dwell here alone 
With Cheirou in the hollow mountain-side, 
Wishful for happy days, whate'er betide." 

" Jason," she said, " all folk shall know thy name, 
For verily the Gods shall give thee fame, 
Whatever they keep back from thee : behold ! 
Restless thou shalt be, as thou now art bold, 
And cunning, as thou now art skilled to watch 
The crafty bear, and in the toils to catch 
The grey-maned yellow lion ; and now see 
Thou doest my commands, for certainly 
I am no mortal ; so to Cheiron tell ; 
No longer is it fitting thou shouldst dwell 
Here in the wilds, but in a day or two, 
Clad in Magnesian garments, shalt thou go 
Unto Iolchos, and there claim thine own. 
And unto thee shall Cheiron first make known 
The story of thy father and thy kin, 
That thou mayst know what right thou hast herein. 



OF JASON. 15 

And say to him, I bid him do this thing, 
By this same token, that the silver ring 
Upon my altar, with Sidero's blood 
Is spotted still, and that the half-charred wood 
My priests had lighted early on that day, 
Yet lies thereon, by no flame burnt away." 
Then Jason fell a-trembling, and to him 
The tall green stems grew wavering and dim ; 
And when a fresh gust of the morning breeze 
Came murmuring along the forest trees, 
And woke him as from dreaming, all alone 
He stood, and with no farewell she was gone, 
Leaving no traces of her dainty feet. 

But through the leaves ambrosial odours sweet 
Yet floated as he turned to leave the place, 
And with slow steps, and thinking on his case, 
Went back to Cheiron, whom he found laid there, 
Half sleeping on the thymv herbage fair, 
To whom he told the things that he had-heard, 
"With flushed and eager face, for they had stirred 
New thoughts within him of the days to come, 
So that he longed to leave his woodland home. 

Then Cheiron said : "0, fair son, thou shalt go, 
Since now, at last, the Gods will have it so : 
And know that, till thou comest to the end 
Of thy loved life, shall Juno be thy friend, 
Because the lovely huntress thou didst see 
Late in the greenwood certainly was she 
Who sits in heaven beside almighty Jove, 
And noble things they do that have her love. 

" Now, son, to-day I rede thee not to go, 
Nor yet to-morrow, for clouds great and slow 
Are gathering round the hill-tops, and I think 
The thirsty fields full many a draught will drink : 
Therefore to-day our cups shall not be dry, 
But we will sit together, thou and I, 






1 6 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And tales of thy forefathers shalt thou hear, 
And many another, till the heavens clear." 

So was it as the Centaur said j for soon 
The woods grew dark, as though they knew no noon ; 
The thunder growled about the high brown hills, 
And the thin, wasted, shining summer rills 
Grew joyful with the coming of the rain, 
And doubtfully was shifting every vane 
On the town spires, with changing gusts of wind ; 
Till came the storm-blast, furious and blind, 
; Twixt gorges of the mountains, and drove back 
The light sea breeze ; then waxed the heavens black, 
Until the lightning leapt from cloud to cloud, 
With clattering thunder, and the piled-up crowd 
Began to turn from steely blue to grey, 
And toward the sea the thunder drew away, 
Leaving the north-wind blowing steadily 
The rain-clouds from Olympus j while the sea 
Seemed mingled with the low clouds and the rain : 
And one might think that never now again 
The sunny grass would make a pleasant bed 
For tired limbs, and dreamy, languid head 
Of sandalled nymph, forewearied with the chase. 

Meantime, within a pleasant lighted place, 
Stretched upon warm skins, did the Centaur lie, 
And nigh him Jason, listening eagerly 
The tales he told him, asking, now and then, 
Strange questions of the race of vanished men : 
Nor were the wine-cups idle ; till at last 
Desire of sleep over their bodies passed, 
And in their dreamless rest the wind in vain 
Howled round about, with washing of the rain. 



OF JASON. 17 



BOOK II. 



SO there they lay until the second dawn 
Broke fair and fresh o'er glittering glade and lawn ; 
Then Jason rose, and did on him a fair 
Blue woollen tunic, such as folk do wear 
On the Magnesian cliffs, and at his thigh 
An iron-hilted sword hung carefully ; 
And on his head he had a russet hood ; 
And in his hand two spears of cornel-wood, 
Well steeled and bound with brazen bands he shook. 

Then from the Centaur's hands at last he took 
The tokens of his birth, the ring and horn, 
And so stept forth into the sunny morn, 
And bade farewell to Cheiron, and set out 
With eager heart, that held small care or doubt. 

So lightly through the well-known woods he passed, 
And came out to the open plain at last, 
And went till night came on him, and then slept 
Within a homestead that a poor man kept ; 
And rose again at dawn, and slept that night 
Nigh the Anaurus, and at morrow's light 
Rose up and went unto the river's brim ; 
fBut fearful seemed the passage unto him, 
For swift and yellow drave the stream adown 
'Twixt crumbling banks ; and tree-trunks rough and brown 
Whirled in the bubbling eddies here and there ; 
So swollen was the stream a maid might dare 
To cross, in fair days, with unwetted knee,J 

Then Jason with his spear-shaft carefully 
Sounded the depth, nor any bottom found ; 
And wistfully he cast his eyes around 
To see if help was nigh, and heard a voice 
Behind him, calling out, " Fair youth, rejoice 



15 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

That I am here to help, or certainly 

Long time a dweller hereby shouldst thou be." 

Then Jason turned round quickly, and beheld 
A woman, bent with burdens and with eld, 
Grey and broad shouldered ; so he laughed, and said : 
' ' O mother, wilt thou help me ? by my head, 
More help than thine I need upon this day." 

" son," she said, " needs must thou on thy way ; 
And is there any of the giants here 
To bear thee through this water without fear ? 
Take, then, the help a God has sent to thee, 
For in mine arms a small thing shalt thou be." 

So Jason laughed no more, because a frown 
Gathered upon her brow, as she cast down 
Her burden to the earth and came a-nigh, 
And raised him in her long arms easily, 
And stept adown into the water cold. 

There with one arm the hero did she hold, 
And with the other thrust the whirling trees 
Away from them ; and laughing, and with ease 
Went through the yellow foaming stream, and came 
Unto the other bank ; and little shame 
Had Jason that a woman carried him, 
For no man, howsoever strong of limb, 
Had dared across the swollen stream to go, 
But if he wished the Stygian stream to know ; 
Therefore he doubted not, that with some God 
Or reverend Goddess that rough way he trod. 

So when she had clomb up the slippery bank 
And let him go, well-nigh adown he sank, 
For he was dizzy with the washing stream, 
And with that passage mazed as with a dream. 

But, turning round about unto the crone, 
He saw not her, but a most glorious one, 
A lady clad in blue, all glistering 
With something more than gold, crowned like the king 



OF JASON. 19 

Of all the world, and holding in her hand 
A jewelled rod. So when he saw her stand 
With unsoiled feet scarce touching the wet way, 
He trembled sore, but therewith heard her say : 

" Jason, such as I have been to thee 
Upon this day, such ever will I be ; 
And I am Juno; therefore doubt thou not 
A mighty helper henceforth thou hast got 
Against the swords and bitter tongues of men, 
For surely mayst thou lean upon me, when 
The turbulent and little-reasoning throng 
Press hard upon thee, or a king with wrong 
Would fain undo thee, as thou leandst just now 
Within the yellow stream : so from no blow 
Hold back thine hand, nor fear to set thine heart 
On what thou deemest fits thy kingly part. 

Now to the king's throne this day draw anear, 
Because of old time I have set a fear 
Within his heart, ere yet thou hadst gained speech, 
And whilst thou wanderedst beneath oak and beech 
Unthinking. And, behold ! so have I wrought, 
That with thy coming shall a sign be brought 
Unto him ; for the latchet of thy shoe 
Rushing Anaurus late I bade undo, 
Which now is carried swiftly to the sea. 

So Pelias, this day setting eyes on thee, 
Shall not forget the shameful trickling blood 
Adown my altar-steps, or in my wood 
The screaming peacocks scared by other screams, 
Nor yet to-night shall he dream happy dreams. 

Farewell, then, and be joyful, for I go 
Unto the people, many a thing to show, 
And set them longing for forgotten things, 
Whose rash hands toss about the crowns of kings." 

Therewith before his eyes a cloud there came, 
Sweet-smelling, colored like a rosy flame, 



20 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

That wrapt the Goddess from him j who, indeed, 
Went to Iolchos, and there sowed the seed 
Of bitter change, that ruins kings of men ; 
For, like an elder of threescore and ten, 
Throughout the town she went, and, as such do, 
Ever she blessed the old, and banned the new ; 
Lamenting for the passed and happy reign 
Of Cretheus, wishing there were come again 
One like to him ; till in the market-place 
About the king was many a doubtful face. 

Now Jason, by Anaurus left alone, 
Found that, indeed, his righj>foot shoe was gone, 
But, as the Goddess bade hiin, went his way 
Half shod, and by an hour before mid-day 
He reached the city gates, and entered there, 
Whom the folk mocked, beholding his foot bare, 
And iron-hilted sword, and uncouth weed : 
But of no man did he take any heed, 
But came into the market-place, where thronged 
Much folk about him who his sire had wronged. 
But when he stood within that busy stead, 
Taller he showed than any by a head, 
Great limbed, broad shouldered, mightier than all, 
But soft of speech, though unto him did fall 
Full many a scorn upon that day to get. 

So in a while he came where there was set 
Pelias, the king, judging the people there ; 
In scarlet was he clad, and on his hair, 
Sprinkled with grey, he wore a royal crown, 
And from an ivory throne he looked adown 
Upon the suitors and the restless folk. 

Now, when the yellow head of Jason broke 
From out the throng, with fearless eyes and grey, 
A terror took the king, that ere that day 
For many a peaceful year he had not felt, 



OF JASON. 21 



And his hand fell upon his swordless belt ; 

But when the hero strode up to the throne, 

And set his unshod foot upon the stone 

Of the last step thereof, and as he stood, 

Drew oif the last fold of his russet hood, 

And with a clang let fall his brass-bound spear, 

The king shrunk back, grown pale with deadly fear ; 

Nor then the oak-trees' speech did he forget, 

Noting the one bare foot, and garments wet, 

And something half remembered in his face. 

And now nigh silent was the crowded place, 
For through the folk remembrance Juno sent, 
And soon from man to man a murmur went, 
And frowning folk were whispering deeds of shame 
And wrong the kino; had wrought, and iEson's name, 
Forgotten long, was bandied all about, 
And silent mouths seemed ready for a shout. 

So, when the king raised up a hand, that shook 
With fear, and turned a wrathful, timorous look 
On his iEtolian guards, upon his ears 
There fell the clashing of the people's spears ; 
And on the house-tops round about the square 
Could he behold folk gathered here and there, 
And see the sunbeams strike on brass and steel. 
But therewithal, though new fear did he feel, 
He thought, " Small use of arms in this distress, 
Needs is it that I use my wiliness ; " 
Then spoke aloud : " 0, man, what wouldst thou here 
That beardest thus a king with little fear ? " 

" Pelias," he said, " I will not call thee king, 
Because thy crown is but a stolen thing, 
And with a stolen sceptre dost thou reign, 
Which now I bid thee render up again, 
And on his father's throne my father set, 
Whom for long years the Gods did well forget, 
But now, in lapse of time, remembering, 

3* 



22 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Have raised me, Jason, up to do this thing, 

His son, and son of fair Alcimide ; 

Yet now, since Tyro's blood 'twixt thee and me 

Still runs, and thou my father's brother art, 

In no wise would I hurt thee, for my part, 

If thou wilt render to us but our own, 

And still shalt thou stand nigh my father's throne." 

Then all the people, when aright they knew 
That this was iEson's son, about them drew, 
And when he ended gave a mighty shout ; 
But Pelias cleared his face of fear and doubt, 
And answered Jason, smiling cunningly : 

" Yea, in good time thou com est unto me, 
My nephew Jason ; fain would I lay down 
This heavy weight and burden of a crown, 
And have instead my brother's love again 
I lost, to win a troublous thing and vain ; 
And yet, since now thou showest me such good-will, 
Fain would I be a king a short while still, 
That everything in order I may set, 
Nor any man thereby may trouble get. 
And now I bid thee stand by me to-day, 
And cast all fear and troublous thoughts away ; 
And for thy father iEson will I send, 
That I may see him as a much-loved friend, 
Now that these years of bitterness are past, 
And peaceful days are come to me at last." 

With that, from out the press grave iEson came, 
E'en as he spoke ; for to his ears the fame 
Of Jason's coming thither had been brought ; 
Wherefore, with eager eyes his son he sought ; 
But, seeing the mighty hero great of limb, 
Stopped short, with eyes set wistfully on him, 
While a false honied speech the king began : 

" Hail, brother ^Eson, hail, O happy man ! 
To-day thou winnest back a noble son, 



OF JASON. 23 

Whose glorious deeds this hour sees begun, 
And from my hands thou winnest back the crown 
Of this revered and many-peopled town ; 
So let me win from thee again thy love, 
Nor with long anger slight the Gods above." 

Then Jason, holding forth the horn and ring, 
Said to his father : ' ' Doubtest thou this thing ? 
Behold the tokens Cheiron gave to me 
When first he said that I was sprung from thee." 

Then little of those signs did iEson reck, 
But cast his arm about the hero's neck, 
And kissed him oft, remembering well the time 
When as he sat beneath the flowering lime 
Beside his house, the glad folk to him came 
And said : " King, all honour to thy name 
That will not perish surely, for thy son 
His royal life this day has just begun." 

Wherefore unto him, like an empty dream, 
The busy place, the king and folk did seem, 
As on that sight at las. he set his eyes, 
Prayed for so oft with many a sacrifice ; 
And speechless for a while fain must he stand, 
Holding within his hand the mighty hand ; 
And as the wished-for son he thus beheld, 
Half mournful thoughts of swiftly-gathering eld 
Came thick upon him, till the salt tears ran 
On to the raiment of the goodly man ; 
Until at last he said : " All honour now 
To Jove and all the Gods ! Surely, I know, 
Henceforth my name shall never perish ; yet 
But little joy of this man shall I get, 
For through the wide world where will be the king 
Who will not fear him ; nor shall anything 
Be strong against him ; therefore certainly 
Full seldom will he ride afield with me, 
Nor will he long bear at his father's board 



"V s " OF TH^^ 



24 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

To sit, well-known of all, but with his sword 

Will rather burst asunder banded throngs 

Of evil men, and heal some great king's wrongs. 

And as for thee, Pelias, as I may, 
Will I be friend to thee from this same day ; 
And since we both of us are growing old, 
And both our lives will soon be as tales told, 
I think perchance that thou wilt let me be, 
To pass these few years in felicity 
That this one brings me." 

Thereon Pelias said : 
" Yea, if I hurt thee aught, then on my head 
Be every curse that thou canst ever think ; 
And dying, of an ill draught may I drink, 
For in my mind is nought but wish for rest. 

" But on this day, I pray thee be my guest, 
While yet upon my head I wear the crown, 
Which, ere this morning's flowers have fallen down, 
Your head shall bear again ; for in the hall, 
Upon the floor the fresh-plucked rushes fall, 
Even as we speak, and maids and men bear up 
The kingly service ; many a jewelled cup 
And silver platter ; and the fires roar 
About the stalled ox and the woodland boar ; 
And wine we have, that ere this youngling's eyes 
First saw the light, made tears and laughter rise 
Up from men's hearts, making the past seem dull, 
The future hollow, but the present full 
Of all delights, if quick they pass away ; 
And we, who have been foes for many a day, 
Surely, ere evening sees the pitcher dry, 
May yet be friends, and talking lovingly, 
And with our laughter make the pillars ring, 
While this one sits revolving many a thing, 
Saddened by that, which makes us elders glad." 

Such good words said he, but the thoughts were bad 



OF JASON. 25 

Within his crafty breast j and still he thought 
How best he might be rid of him just brought, 
By sentence of the Gods, upon his head. 

Then moved the kinsmen from the market-stead 
Between a lane of men, who ever pressed 
About the princes, and with loud words blessed 
The hero and his race, and thought no shame 
To kiss his skirts ; and so at last they came 
Unto the house that rustling limes did shade, 
And thereabout was many a slender maid, 
Who welcomed them with music and sweet song, 
And cast red roses as they went along 
Before their feet ; and therewith brought the three 
Into the palace, where right royally 
Was Jason clad, and seemed a prince indeed. 

So while the harp-string and shrill-piping reed 
Still sounded, trooped the folk unto the feast, 
And all were set to meat, both most and least ; 
And when with dainties they were fully fed, 
Then the tall jars and well-sewn goat-skins bled, 
And men grew glad, forgetting every care. 
But first a golden chain and mantle fair 
Pelias did on hi in ; and then, standing up, 
Poured out red wine from a great golden cup 
Unto the Gods, and prayed to them : " ye 
Who rule the world, grant us felicity 
This hour, at least, nor let our sweet delight 
Be marred by aught, until the silent night 
Has come, and turned to day again, and we 
Wake up once more to joy or misery, 
Or death itself, if so it pleaseth you : 
Is this thing, then, so great a thing to do ? " 

Thereon folk shouted, and the pipes again 
Breathed through the hall a sweet heart-softening strain, 
And up the hall came lovely damsels, dressed 
In gowns of green, who unto every guest 



26 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Gave a rose garland, nor yet hasted they, 
When this was done, to pass too quick away, 
If here and there an eager hand still held 
By gown or wrist, whom the young prince beheld 
With longing eyes that roved about the hall. 

Now longer did the cool grey shadows fall, 
And faster drew the sun unto the west, 
And in the field the husbandman, opprest 
With twelve hours' labour, turned unto his home, 
And to the fold the woolly sheep were come ; 
And in the hall the folk began to tell 
Stories of men of old, who bore them well, 
And piteous tales. And Jason in mean while 
Sat listening as his uncle, with a smile, 
Kept pouring many a thing into his ears, 
Now worthy laughter, and now meet for tears. 
Until at last, when twilight was nigh gone, 
And dimly through the place the gold outshone, 
He bade them bring in torches, and while folk 
Blinked on the glare that through the pillars broke, 
He said to Jason : " Yet have I to tell 
One tale I would that these should hear as well 
As you, Prince." And therewith did he call 
The herald, bidding him throughout the hall 
Cry silence for the story of the king. 

And this being done, and all men listening, 
He rose and said, " noble Minyse, 
Right prosperous and honoured may ye be ; 
When Athamas ruled over Thebes the great, 
Upon his house there fell a heavy fate, 
Making his name a mere byeword ; for he, 
Being wedded to the noble Nephele, 
Oat on her a fair youth and tender maid, 
Phryxus and Helle ; but, being nought afraid 



OF JASON. 27 

Of what the righteous Gods might do to hiny 
And seeing Ino, fair of -face and limb ( 

Beyond all other, needs with her must wed, 
And to that end drove from his royal bed 
Unhappy Nephele, who now must be 
A slave, where once she governed royally ; 
While the white-footed Ino sat alone 
By Athamas upon the ivory throne. 

" And now, as time went on, did Ino bear 
To Athamas two children hale and fair ; 
Therefore, the more increased her enmity 
Against those two erst born of Nephele, 
Who yet, in spite of all things, day by day 
Grew fairer as their sad lives wore away j 
Till Ino thought, ' What help will it have been, 
That through these years I have been called a queen, 
And set gold raiment on my children dear, 
If Athamas should die and leave me here 
Betwixt the people and this Nephele, 
With those she bore ? What then could hap to me 
But death or shame ? for then, no doubt, would reign 
Over this mighty town the children twain ; 
With her who once was queen still standing near, 
And whispering fell words in her darlings' ear. 
And then what profit would it be that they 
Have won through me full many an evil day ; 
That Phryxus base and servile deeds doth know, 
Unmeet for lords ; that many a shame and woe 
Helle has borne, and yet is wont to stand, 
Shrinking with fear, before some dreaded hand ; 
If still the ending of it must be this, 
That I must die while they live on in bliss, 
And cherish her that first lay in my bed ? 
Nor is there any help till they be dead.' 

" Then did she fall on many an evil thought, 
And going thence, with threats and money brought 



28 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The women of the land to do this thing : 

In the mid-winter, yea, before the spring 

Was in men's minds, they took the good seed corn, 

And while their husbands toiled in the dark morn, 

And dreaded nought, they thoroughly seethed it all ; 

Whereby this seeming portent did befall, 

That neither the sweet showers of April tide, 

Nor the May sunshine, gleaming far and wide 

Over the meadows, made their furrows green, 

Nor yet in June was any young shoot seen. 

1 ' Then drew the country folk unto the king, 
Weeping and wailing, telling of the thing, 
And praying him to satisfy the God, 
Whoe'er he was, who with this cruel rod 
So smote his wretched people : whereon he 
Bade all his priests inquire solemnly 
What thing had moved the Gods to slay them thus ? 
Who, hearing all this story piteous, 
Because their hands had felt Queen Ino's gold, 
And itched for more, this thing in answer told : 

" That great Diana with Queen Nephele 
Was wroth beyond measure, for that she, 
Being vowed unto the Goddess, none the less 
Cast by the quiver and the girtrup dress, 
To wed with Athamas, the mighty king, 
Therefore must she pay forfeit for the thing, 
And though she still should keep her wretched life, 
Yet must she give her children to the knife, 
Or else this dearth should be but happiness 
To what should come, for she would so oppress 
The land of Thebes, that folk who saw its name 
In old records, would turn the page, and blame 
The chronicler for telling empty lies, 
And mingling fables with his histories. 

" Therefore is Athamas a wretched man 
To hear this tale, and doeth what he can 



OF JASON. 29 

To save his flesh and blood, but all in vain ; 

Because the people, cruel in their pain, 

With angry words were thronging the great hall, 

And crafty Ino at his feet did fall, 

Saying, ' King, I pray for these, and me, 

And for my children.' Therefore, mournfully 

He called the priests again, and bade them say, 

In few words, how his children they would slay, 

And when the dreadful bearer of the bow 

Would best be pleased to see their young blood flow. 

Who said, ' that if the thing were quickly done, 

Seeing the green things were not wholly gone, 

The ruined fields might give a little food, 

And that high noon-tide the next day was good, 

Above all other hours, to do the thing ; 

And thereupon they prayed unto the king, 

To take the younglings, lest, being fled away, 

They still might live and leave an evil day 

To Thebes and all its folk henceforth to bear.' 

" Then men were sent, who by the river fair 
Found Phryxus casting nets into the stream, 
Who, seeing them coming, little harm did deem 
They meant him, and with welcome bade them share 
The glittering heap of fishes that lay there. 
But they with laughter fell at once on him, 
Who, struggling wrathfully, broke here a limb 
And there a head, but lastly on the ground 
Being felled by many men, was straightly bound, 
And in an iron-bolted prison laid, 
While to the house they turned to seek the maid. 

" Whom soon they found, within the weaving-room, 
Bent earnestly above the rattling loom, 
Working not like a king's child, but a slave 
Who strives her body from the scourge to save. 
On her they seized, speechless for very fear, 
And dragged her trembling to the prison drear, 
4 



3 THE LIFE AND BE A TH 

Where lay her brother, and there cast her in, 
Giddy and fainting, wondering for what sin 
She suffered this ; but, finding Phryxus laid 
]n the same dismal place, the wretched maid 
Bewailed with him the sorrows of their life, 
Praying the Gods to show the king's new wife 
What sorrow was, nor let her hair grow grey 
Ere in some hopeless place her body lay. 

" Now in that court a certain beast there was, 
The gift of Neptune to King Athamas, 
A mighty ram, greater than such beasts be 
In any land about the Grecian sea ; 
And in all else a wonder to men's eyes, 
For from his shoulders did two wings arise, 
That seemed as they were wrought of beaten gold, 
And all his fleece was such as in no fold 
The shepherd sees, for all was gold indeed. 
And now this beast with dainty grass to feed, 
The task of Nephele had late been made, 
Who, nothing of the mighty ram afraid, 
Would bring him flowering trefoil day by day, 
And comb his fleece ; and her the ram would pay 
With gentle bleatings, and would lick her hand, 
As in his well-built palace he did stand. 
For all the place was made of polished wood, 
Studded with gold ; and, when he thought it good, 
Within a little meadow could he go, 
Throughout the midst whereof a stream did flow, 
And at the corners were there great lime-trees, 
Hummed over by innumerable bees. 

" So on the morning when these twain should die, 
Stole Nephele to this place quietly 
And loosed the ram, and led him straight away 
Unto Diana's temple, where that day 
Her heart should break unless the Gods were good. 
There with the ram, close in a little wood, 



OF JASON. 3 1 

She bid herself a-nigh the gates, till noon 

Should bring those to the Lady of the Moon 

She longed to see ; and as the time drew nigh, 

She knelt, and with her trembling hands did tie 

About the gold beast's neck a mystic thing, 

And in his ears, meanwhile, was murmuring 

Words taught her by the ever-changing God, 

Who on the sands at noon is wont to nod 

Beside the flock of Neptune ; till at last 

Upon the breeze the sound of flutes went past ; 

Then sore she trembled, as she held the beast 

By the two golden horns, but never ceased 

Her mystic rhyme ; and louder, and more loud 

The music sounded, till the solemn crowd 

Along the dusty road came full in sight. 

First went the minstrels, clad in raiment white, 

Both men and maids garlanded daintily ; 

And then ten damsels, naked from the knee, 

Who in their hands bare bows done round with leaves, 

And arrows at their backs in goodly sheaves, 

Gaudily feathered, ready for the strife ; 

Then came three priests, whereof one bore the knife, 

One a great golden bowl to hold the blood, 

And one a bundle of some sacred wood ; 

And then was left a little vacant space, 

And then came gold, and she could see the face 

Of beauteous Ino, flushed and triumphing, 

And by her, moody and downcast, the king. 

"And now her heart beat quick and fast indeed, 
Because the two came, doomed that day to bleed, 
Of whom went Phryxus in most manly mood, 
Looking around, with mournful, steady eyes, 
Upon the green fields and the braveries, 
And all he never thought to see again. 
But Helle, as she went, could not refrain 
From bitter wailing for the days gone by, 



32 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

When hope was mixed with certain misery; 
And, when the long day's task and fear was done, 
She might take pleasure sometimes in the sun, 
Whose rays she saw now glittering on the knife 
That in a little time would end her life. 

" Now she, who in coarse raiment had been clad 
For many a year, upon her body had, 
On this ill day, a golden pearl- wrought gown, 
And on her drooping head a glittering crown, 
And jewelled sandals on her fainting feet, 
And on her neck and bosom jewels meet 
For one who should be wedded to a king - } 
Thus to her death went moaning this sweet thing. 

" But when they drew a-nigh the temple gate 
The trembling, weeping mother, laid in wait, 
Let go the mighty beast upon the throng, 
Like as a hunter holds the gazehound long, 
Until the great buck stalks from out the herd, 
And then, with well-remembered hunting word, 
Slips the stout leash, so did she slip the beast, 
Who dashed aside both singing-man and priest, 
And girded maiden, and the startled king, 
And Ino, grown all pale to see the thing, 
With rising horror in her evil heart. 
And thereon Phryxus, seeing the crowd part, 
And this deliverer nigh him, with wings spread 
Ready for flight, and eager threatening head, 
Without more words, upon his broad back sprung, 
And drew his sister after him, who clung 
With trembling arms about him ; and straightway 
They turned unto the rising of the day, 
And over all rose up into the air 
With sounding wings ; nor yet did any dare, 
As fast they flew, to bend on them a bow, 
Thinking some God had surely willed it so. 



OF JASON. 33 

" Then went the king unto his house again, 
And Ino with him, downcast that the twain 
Had so escaped her, waiting for what fate 
Should bring upon her doomed head, soon or late. 

" Nor long she waited ; for, one evil day, 
Unto the king her glittering gold array 
And rosy flesh, half seen through raiment thin, 
Seemed like the many-spotted leopard's skin ; 
And her fair hands and feet like armed paws 
The treacherous beast across the strained throat draws 
Of some poor fawn ; and when he saw her go 
Across the hall, her footsteps soft and slow 
And the lithe motion of her body fair 
But made him think of some beast from his lair 
Stolen forth at the beginning of the night. 

" Therefore with fear and anger at the sight 
He shook, being maddened by some dreadful Grod ; 
And stealthily about the place he trod, 
Seeking his sword ; and, getting it to hand, 
With flaming eyes and foaming mouth did stand 
Awhile, then rushed at Ino as she stood 
Trembling, with cheeks all drained of rosy blood ; 
Who straightway caught her raiment up, and fled 
Adown the streets, where once she had been led 
In triumph by the man whose well-known cheer 
Close at her heels, now struck such deadly fear 
Into her heart, the forge of many a woe. 

" So, full of anguish, panting did she go 
O'er rough and smooth, till field and wood was passed, 
And on the border of the sea at last, 
With raiment torn and unshod feet, she stood, 
Reddening the flowering sea-pink with her blood. 

" But when she saw the tireless hunter nigh, 
All wild and shouting, with a dreadful cry 
She stretched her arms out seaward, and sprung down 
Over the cliff among the seaweed brown 

4* 



34 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And washing surf, neither did any one 
See aught of her again beneath the sun. 

" But Athamas, being come to where she stood, 
Stared vacantly awhile upon the blood, 
Then, looking seaward, drew across his eyes 
His fevered hand : and thronging memories 
Came thick upon him, until dreamily 
He turned his back upon the hungry sea, 
And cast his sword down ; and so, weaponless, 
Went back, half-waking to his sore distress. 

"As for the twain, perched on that dizzy height, 
The white-walled city faded from their sight, 
And many another place that well they knew ; 
And over woods and meadows still they flew ; 
And to the husbandmen seemed like a flame 
Blown 'twixt the earth and sky ; until they came 
Unto the borders of the murmuring sea. 
Nor stayed they yet, but flew unceasingly, 
Till, looking back, seemed Pelion like a cloud ; 
And they beheld the white-topped billows crowd 
Unto the eastward, 'neath the following wind. 

" And there a wretched end did Helle find 
Unto her life ; for when she did behold, 
So far beneath, the deep green sea and cold, 
She shut her eyes for horror of the sight, 
Turning the sunny day to mirk midnight, 
Through which there floated many an awful thing, 
Made vocal by the ceaseless murmuring 
Beneath her feet ; till a great gust of wind 
Caught the beast's wings and swayed him round ; then, 

blind, 
Dizzy, and fainting, grew her limbs too weak 
To hold their place, though still her hands did seek 
Some stay by catching at the locks of gold ; 
And as she fell her brother strove to hold 



OF JASON. 35 

Her jewelled girdle, but the treacherous zone 
Broke in his hand, and he was left alone 
Upon the ram, that, as a senseless thing, 
Still flew on toward the east, no whit heeding 
His shouts and cries ; but Helle, as she fell 
Down through the depths, the sea-folk guarded well, 
And kept her body dead, from scar or wound, 
And laid it, in her golden robes enwound, 
Upon the south side of the murmuring strait, 
That still, in memory of her piteous fate, 
Bears her sweet name ; her, in a little while, 
The country folk beheld, and raised a pile 
Of beech and oak, with scented things around, 
And, lifting up the poor corpse from the ground, 
Laid it thereon, and there did everything, 
As for the daughter of a mighty king. 

" But through the straits passed Phryxus, sad enow, 
And fearful of the wind, that by his brow 
Went shrieking, as, without all stop or stay, 
The golden wings still bore him on his way 
Above the unlucky waves of that ill sea 
That foamed beneath his feet unceasingly. 
Nor knew he to what land he was being borne, 
Whether he should be set, unarmed, forlorn, 
In darksome lands, among unheard-of things, 
Or, stepping off from 'twixt the golden wings, 
Should set foot in some happy summer isle, 
Whereon the kind, unburning sun doth smile 
For ever, and that knows no frost or drought j 
Or else, it seemed to him, he might be brought 
Unto green forests where the wood-nymphs play 
With their wild mates, and fear no coming day. 
And there might he forget both crown and sword, 
And e'en the names of slave, and king, and lord, 
And lead a merry life, till all was done, 
And 'mid the green boughs, marked by no carved stone, 



36 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

His unremembered bones should waste away, 
In dew, and rain, and sunshine, day by day. 

" So, 'mid these thoughts, still clinging fearfully 
Unto his dizzy seat, he passed the sea, 
And reached a river opening into it, 
Across the which the white-winged fowl did flit 
From cliff to cliff, and on the sandy bar 
The fresh waves and the salt waves were at war, 
At turning of the tide. Forth flew they then, 
Till they drew nigh a strange abode of men, 
Far up the river, white-walled, fair, and great, 
And at eac i end of it a brazen gate, 
Wide open through the daylight, guarded well, 
And nothing of its name could Phryxus tell, 
But hoped the beast would stop, for to his eyes 
The place seemed fair ; nor fell it otherwise. 
There stayed the ram his course, and lighted down 
Hard by the western gate of that fair town, 
And on the hard way Phryxus joyfully 
Set foot, full dizzy with the murmuring sea, 
Numbed by the cold wind ; and, with little fear, 
Unto the guarded gate he drew anear, 
While the gold beast went ever after him. 

" But they, beholding him so strong of limb, 
And fair of face, and seeing the beast that trod 
Behind his back, deemed him some wandering God, 
So let the two-edged sword hang by the side, 
And by the wall the well-steeled spears abide. 

" But he called out to them, ' What place is this ? 
And who rules over you for woe or bliss ? 
And will he grant me peace to-day or war ? 
And may I here abide, or still afar 
Must I to new abodes go wandering ? ' 

" Now as he spake those words, that city's king 
Adown the street was drawing towards the gate, 
Clad in gold raiment worthy his estate : 



OF JASON. 37 

Therefore one said : ' Behold our king is here, 

Who of all us is held both lief and dear j 

iEetes, leader of a mighty host, 

Feared by all folk along the windy coast. 

And since this city's name thou fain wouldst know, 

Men call it JEsl, built long years ago, 

Holpen of many Gods, who love it well. 

Now come thou to the king, and straightly tell 

Thy name and country* if thou art a man, 

And how thou earnest o'er the water wan, 

And what the marvel is thou hast with thee ; 

But if thou art a God, then here will we 

Build thee a house, and, reverencing thy name, 

Bring thee great gifts and much-desired fame.' 
" Thus spake he, fearful ; but by this the king 

Had reached the place, and stood there wondering 

At that strange beast and fair man richly clad, 

Who at his belt no sort of weapon had j 

Then spoke he : ' Who art thou, in what strange wain 

Hast thou crossed o'er the green and restless plain 

Unharvested of any ? And this thing, 

That like an image stands with folded wing, 

Is he a gift to thee from any God, 

Or hast thou in some unknown country trod, 

Where beasts are such-like ? Howsoe'er it be, 

Here shalt thou dwell, if so thou wilt, with me, 

Unless some God is chasing thee, and then, 

What wouldst thou have us do, who are but men, 

Against the might of Gods ? ' 

Then answered he : 
' king, I think no God is wroth with me, 
But rather some one loves me ; for, behold, 
A while ago, just as my foe did hold 
The knife against my throat, there came this ram, 
Who brought me to the place where now I am 
Safe from the sea and from the bitter knife. 



3 8 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And in this city would I spend my life, 
And do what service seemeth good to thee, 
Since all the Gods it pleases I should be 
Outcast from friends and country, though alive ; 
Nor with their will have I the heart to strive 
More than thou hast j and now as in such wise 
I have been saved, fain would I sacrifice 
This beast to Jove, the helper of all such, 
As false friends fail, or foes oppress* too much.' 

" ' Yea,' said iEetes, 'so the thing shall be 
In whatsoever fashion pleaseth thee ; 
And long time mayst thou dwell with us in bliss, 
Not doing any service worse than this, 
To bear in war my royal banner forth, 
When fall the wild folk on us from the north. 
Come now this eve, and hold high feast with us, 
And tell us all of strange and piteous 
Thy story hath.' 

So went he with the king, 
And gladly told unto him everything 
That had befallen him, and in a grove, 
Upon the altar of the Saving Jove, 
They offered up the ram the morrow morn 
That thitherward the Theban prince had borne. 

" And thenceforth Phryxus dwelt in Colchis long 
In wealth and honour, and, being brave and strong, 
Won great renown in many a bloody fray, 
And still grew greater j and both night and day, 
Within his pillared house, upon the wall 
Hung the gold fell ; until it did befall 
That in iEetes' heart a longing grew 
To have the thing, yea, even if he slew 
His guest to get it ; so, one evil night, 
While the prince lay and dreamed about the fight, 
With all armed men was every entry filled, 
And quickly were the few doorkeepers killed ; 



OF JASON. 39 

And Phryxus, roused with clamour from his bed, 
Half-armed and dizzy, with few strokes was dead. 
And thus the King iEetes had his will ; 
And thus the Golden Fleece he keepeth still 
Somewhere within his royal house of gold. 

" And thus, MinyaD, is the story told 
Of things that happened forty years agone ; 
Nor of the Greeks has there been any one 
To set the Theban's bones within a tomb, 
Or to iEetes mete out his due doom ; 
And yet, indeed, it seemeth unto me 
That many a man would go right willingly, 
And win great thanks of men and godlike fame, 
If there should spring up some great prince of name 
To lead them ; and I pray that such an one, 
Before my head is laid beneath a stone, 
Be sent unto us by the Gods above." 

Therewith he ceased j but all the hall did move 
As moves a grove of rustling poplar trees 
Bowed all together by the shifting breeze, 
And through the place the name of Jason ran, 
Nor, 'mid the feasters, was there any man 
But toward the hero's gold-seat turned his eyes. 

Meanwhile, in Jason's heart, did thoughts arise 
That brought the treacherous blood into his cheek, 
And he forgot his father, old and weak, 
Left 'twixt the fickle people of the land, 
And wily Pelias, while he clenched his hand, 
As though it held a sword, about his cup. 

Then, 'mid the murmuring, Pelias stood up 
And said : " 0, leaders of the Minyae, 
I hear ye name a name right dear to me 
My brother's son, who in the oaken wood 
Has grown up nurtured of the Centaur good, 



40 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And now this day has come again to us, 
Fair faced and mighty limbed, and amorous 
Of fame and glorious deeds ; nowise content 
Betwixt the forest and the northern bent 
To follow up the antlers of the deer, 
Nor in his eyes can I see any fear 
Of fire, or water, or the cleaving sword. 

" Now, therefore, if ye take him for your lord 
Across the sea, then surely ye will get 
Both fame and wealth, nor will men soon forget 
To praise the noble city whence ye came, 
Passing from age to age each hero's name." 

Then all stood up and shouted, and the kinyr, 
While yet the hall with Jason's name did ring, 
Set in his hands a gleaming cup of gold, 
And said : " Jason, wilt thou well behold 
These leaders of the people, who are fain 
To go with thee and suffer many a pain 
And deadly fear, if they may win at last 
Undying fame when fleeting life is past ? 
And now, if thou art willing to be first 
Of all these men, of whom, indeed, the worst 
Is like a God, pour out this gleaming wine 
To him with whose light all the heavens shine, 
Almighty Jove." 

Then Jason poured, and said : 
" Jove, by thy hand may all these be led 
To name and wealth ! and yet, indeed, for me, 
What happy ending shall I ask from thee ? 
What helpful friends ? what length of quiet years ? 
What freedom from ill care and deadly fears V 
Do what thou wilt, but none the less believe 
That all these things and more thou shouldst receive, 
If thou wert Jason, I were Jove to-day. 

" And ye who now are hot to play this play, 
Seeking the fleece across an unknown sea, 



OF JASON. 41 

Bethink ye yet of death, and misery, 
And dull despair, before ye arm to go 
Unto a savage king and folk none know, 
Whence it may well hap none of ye to come 
Again unto your little ones and home. 

" And do thou, Pelias, ere we get us forth, 
Send heralds out, east, west, and south, and north, 
And with them cunning men, of golden speech, 
Thy tale unto the Grecian folk to teach ; 
That we may lack for neither strength nor wit, 
For many a brave man like a fool will sit 
Beside the council board ; and men there are 
Wise-hearted who know little feats of war ; 
Nor would I be without the strength of spears, 
Or waste wise words on dull and foolish ears. 

" Also we need a cunning artisan, 
Taught by the Gods, and knowing more than man, 
To build us a good ship upon this shore. 
Then, if but ten lay hold upon the oar, 
And I, the eleventh, steer them toward the east, 
To seek the hidden fleece of that gold beast, 
I swear to Jove that only in my hand 
The fleece shall be, when I again take land 
To see my father's hall, or the green grass 
O'er which the grey Thessalian horses pass. 

" But now, friends, forget all till the morn 
With other thoughts and fears is duly born ! " 

He ceased, and all men shouted ; and again 
They filled their cups, and many a draught did drain. 
But Pelias gazed with heedful eyes at him, 
Nor drank the wine that well-nigh touched the brim 
Of his gold cup ; and, noting every word, 
Thought well that he should be a mighty lord, 
For now already like a king he spoke, 
Gazing upon the wild tumultuous folk 



42 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

As one who knows what troubles are to come, 
And in this world looks for no peaceful home, 
So much he dreaded what the Gods might do. 

But iEson, when he first heard Pelias, knew 
What wile was stirring, and he sat afeard, 
With sinking heart, as all the tale he heard ; 
But after, hearkening what his son did say, 
He deemed a God spoke through him on that day, 
And held his peace ; yet to himself he said : 
"And if he wins all, still shall I be dead 
Ere on the shore he stands beside the fleece, 
The greatest and most honoured man in Greece." 

But Jason, much rejoicing in his life, 
Drank and was merry, longing for the strife ; 
Though in his heart he did not fail to see 
His uncle's cunning wiles and treachery ; 
But thought, when sixty years are gone, at most, 
Then will all pleasure and all pain be lost ; 
Although my name, indeed, be cast about 
From hall to temple, amid song and shout : 
So let me now be merry with the best. 

Meanwhile all men spoke hotly of the quest, 
And healths they drank to many an honoured man, 
Until the moon sank, and the stars waxed wan, 
And from the east faint yellow light outshone 
O'er the Greek sea, so many years agone. 



BOOK III. 

"TVTOW, the next morn, when risen was the sun, 
J_ l Men 'gan to busk them for the quest begun ; 
Nor long delay made Pelias, being in fear 
Lest aught should stay them ; so his folk did bear 



OF JASON. 43 

News of these things throughout the towns of Greece, 
Moving great men to seek the golden fleece. 

Therefore, from many a lordship forth they rode, 
Leaving both wife and child and loved abode, 
And many a town must now be masterless, 
And women's voices rule both more and less, 
And women's hands be dreaded far and wide, 
This fair beginning of the summer-tide. 

Now, all the folk who went upon this quest 
I cannot name, but fain would hope the best 
In men's remembrance ancient tales did keep 
Unto our time, letting the others sleep 
In nameless graves though, mayhap, one by one 
These grew to be forgotten 'neath the sun, 
Being neither poor of heart or weak of wit, 
More than those others whose crowned memories 
Enthroned amid the echoing minstrelsy 
Sung of old time beside the Grecian sea. 

Howe'er it be, now clinging to the hem 
Of those old singers, will I tell of them, 
In weak and faltering voice, e'en as I can. 

Now was the well-skilled Argus the first man 
Who through the gates into lolchos passed, 
Whose lot in fertile Egypt first was cast, 
The nurse of Gods and wonder-working men ; 
His father's name was Danaus, who till then 
Had held the golden rod above the Nile, 
Feared by all men for force and deadly wile. 

So he, being brought to Jason, said : "0 King, 
Me have the Gods sent here to do the thing 
Ye need the most; for truly have I seen, 
'Twixt sleep and waking, one clad like a queen, 
About whose head strange lights shone gloriously, 
Stand at my bed's foot, and she said to me : 
'Argus, arise, when dawn is on the earth, 



44 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And go unto a city great of girth 
Men call Iolchos, and there ask for one 
Who now gets ready a great race to run 
Upon a steed whose maker thou shalt be, 
And whose course is the bitter, trackless sea, 
Jason, the king's son, now himself a king ; 
And bid him hearken, by this tokening, 
That I, who send thee to him, am the same 
Who in the greenwood bade him look for fame 
That he desired little ; and am she 
Who, when the eddies rushed tumultuously 
About us, bore him to the river side : 
And unto thee shall such-like things betide.' 

" Therewith she told me many a crafty thing 
About this keel that ye are now lacking, 
Bidding me take thee for my king and lord, 
And thee to heed my counsel as her word 
As for this thing. So if ye would set forth 
Before the winter takes us from the north, 
I pray you, let there be at my commands 
Such men as are most skilful of their hands ; 
Nor spare to take lintel, rooftree, or post, 
Of ash or pine, or oak that helpeth most, 
From whoso in this city lacketh gold ; 
And chiefly take the post that now doth hold 
The second rafter in the royal hall, 
That I may make the good ship's prow withal, 
For soothly from Dodona doth it come, 
Though men forget it, the grey pigeons' home. 

" So look to see a marvel, and forthright 
Set on the smiths the sounding brass to smite ; 
For surely shall all ye your armour need 
Before these flower-buds have turned to seed." 
Then Jason gave him thanks and gifts enow, 
And through the town sought all who chanced to know. 
The wood wright's craft, by whom was much begun, 



OF JASON. 45 

Whilst be took gifts of wood from many an one ; 
And getting timber with great gifts of gold, 
Spared not to take the great post used to hold 
The second rafter in the royal hall 
To make the new ship's goodly prow withal. 

So Argus laboured, and the work was sped, 
Moreover, by a man with hoary head, 
Whose dwelling and whose name no man could know, 
Who many a strange thing of the craft did show, 
And 'mid their work men gazed at him askance, 
Half fearful of his reverend piercing glance, 
But did his bidding ; yet knew not, indeed, 
It was the Queen of Heaven, Saturn's seed. 

Meanwhile came many heroes to the town : 
Asterion, dweller on the windy down 
Below Philseus, far up in the north ; 
Slow-footed Polyphemus, late borne forth 
In chariot from Larissa, that beholds 
Green-winding Peneus cleaving fertile wolds ; 
Erginus, son of Neptune, nigh the sea 
His father sent him, where the laden bee 
Flies low across Mseander, and falls down 
Against the white walls of a merchant town 
Men call Miletus. 

Behind him there came 
The winter of a great and dreaded name, 
Theseus, the slayer of the fearful beast, 
Who soon in winding halls should make his feast 
On youths and maidens ; and with him there rode 
The king, Pirithous, who his loved abode 
Amid the shady trees had left that tide 
Where fly the centaurs' arrows far and wide. 

Black-haired was Theseus, slim, and still his cheek 
Lacked all but down, for vet he had to seek 

5* J 



46 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The twisted ways of Daedalus the old ; 
But long and twining locks of ruddy gold 
Blew round the face of the huge forest king, 
As carelessly he rode and feared no thing. 

Great joy had Jason, gazing on the twain, 
Young though they were, and thought that not in vain 
His quest should be, if such as these had will 
The hollow of his great black ship to fill. 

Next, threading Argive ways and woody lanes, 
Came Nauplius, son of Neptune, to those plains, 
Crossing Anaurus dryshod, for his sire 
With threats and blows drove up the land-stream higher, 
And sucked the sea-waves back across the sands j 
With him came Idmon, mighty of his hands, 
But mightier that he was skilled to know 
The counsel of the God who bears the bow, 
His very father, who bore not to see 
Unloved, Cyrene, wandering carelessly 
Beside the Peneus ; Iolaus came 
From Argos, too, to win a deathless name ; 
And if thenceforth came any heroes more 
I know not, and their names have died of yore. 

But from Arcadian forests came forth one 
Who like a goddess 'mid the rowers shone, 
Swift-running "Atalanta, golden-haired, 
Grey-eyed, and simple ; with her white limbs bared, 
And sandalled feet set firm upon the sand. 
Amid the wondering heroes did she stand 
A very maid, yet fearing not for aught ; 
For she, with many a vow, had dearly nought 
Diana's love, and in no flowery stead 
Had borne to hear love-songs, or laid her head 
On any trembling lover's heaving breast ; 
Therefore of mortals was she loved the best 
By Her, who through the forest goes a-nights, 
And, in return for never-tried delights, 
Has won a name no woman else can have. 



OF JASON. 47 

Next through the gates his car Oileus drave, 
The Locrain king, red-haired, with fierce grey eyes 
Wandering from right to left, as though some prize 
He sought for in the rich Thessalian land ; 
Then Iphiclus beside the gates did stand, 
His kine at all adventure left at home, 
That on a doubtful voyage he might roam. 

Admetus from the well-walled Pherae came, 
Longing to add new glory to the fame 
Of him whose flocks Apollo once did keep. 
And then Echion, who would nowise sleep 
Amid Ephesian roses, or behold 
Betwixt gold cups and dainty things of gold 
The white limbs of the dancing-girl, her hair 
Swung round her dainty loins and bosom bare ; 
But needs must try the hollow-sounding sea, 
As herald of the heroes, nor was he 
Left by his brother Eurytus the strong. 

Neither did Casneus, the Magnesian, long 
Less than the others strange new lands to see, 
Though wondrous things were told of him, that 

he, 
Once woman, now was man by Neptune's aid, 
And thus had won a long-desired maid. 

From nigh Larissa came iEtalides, 
Leaving a plain well-watered, set with trees, 
That feeds much woolly sheep and lowing neat, 
And knoweth well the dancing maiden's feet. 
Mopsus, like Idmon, knew of things to come, 
And had in Lipara a rocky home. 
Eurydamas, tired of the peaceful lake 
Of Xynias, was come for Jason's sake 
To lay his well-skilled hands upon the oar, 
Dealing with greater waves than heretofore. 

Menoetius, son of Actor, from the land 
Where swift Asopus runs through stones and sand, 



48 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Bridged by the street of Opus, next was seen. 

Eribotes, who through the meadows green 

Would wander oft to seek what helpeth man ; 

Yet cannot cure his lust, through waters wan 

To seek for marvels, cometh after him. 

Then a rich man, grown old, but strong of limb, 

Eurytion, son of Iras, leaveth now 

His husbandmen still following of the plough 

In the fat Theban meadows, while he goes, 

Driven by fate, to suffer biting woes. 

From OEchalia, Clytius the king, 
And Iphitus his brother, felt the sting 
That drives great men through woes to seek renown, 
And left their guarded city, looking down 
From rocky heights on the well- watered plain. 
Right wise they were, and men say, not in vain 
Before Apollo's court they claimed to be 
The first who strung the fatal cornel tree, 
And loosed the twanging bowstring from the ear. 

Then to the gate a chariot drew a-near, 
Wherein two brothers sat, whereof the one 
Who held the reins was mighty Telamon ; 
And Peleus was the other's dreaded name. 
And from an island both the heroes came, 
Sunny iEgina, where their father's hand 
Ruled o'er the people of a fruitful land ; 
But they now young, rejoicing in their birth, 
Dreamed not that, ere they lay beneath the earth, 
Still greater heroes from their loins should come, 
The doomsmen of the Trojan's godlike home. 

Fair Athens, and the olive groves thereby, 
Phalerus left, riding through deserts dry 
And rocky passes where no sweet birds sing ; 
And with him Butes, with the owlet's wing 
Well-painted on his shield ; and he, at least, 
Came back no more to share the joyous feast 



OF JASON. 49 

And pour out wine for well accomplished days, 
Who, all besotted with the Syren's lays, 
Must leave his mates ; nor happier than he, 
Tiphys the pilot came, although the sea 
Dealt gently with the ship whose ashen helm 
His hand touched ; in the rich Boeotian realm, 
He left outlandish merceries stored up 
With many a brazen bowl and silver cup 
His heirs should feast from in the days to come, 
When men he knew not went about his home. 

Next Phlias came, forgetful of the hill 
That bears his name, where oft the maidens fill 
Their baskets with the coal-black clustering grapes, 
Far on in autumn, when the parched earth gapes 
For cool November rain and winter snow, 
For there his house stood," on the shaded brow 
Of that fair ridge that Bacchus loves so well. 

Then through the gates one with a lion's fell 
Hung o'er his shoulders, on a huge grey steed 
Came riding, with his fair Phoenician weed 
Glittering from underneath the tawny hair, 
Who loosely in his dreadful hand did bear 
A club of unknown wood bound round with brass, 
And underneath his curled black hair did pass 
A golden circlet o'erwrought cunningly 
With running beasts ; so folk knew this was he 
That in Amphytrion's palace first saw light, 
And whose first hour began with deadly fight, 
Alcmena's son, the dreadful Hercules ; 
The man whose shout the close Nemean trees 
Had stifled, and the lion met in vain ; 
Thr ravisher of hell, the serpent's bane, 
Whom neither Grods nor fate could overwhelm. 

Now was he come to this Thessalian realm 
To serve with Jason on the wandering seas, 
Half seeking fame, half wishing to appease 



5 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The wrath of her who grudged him ease and rest, 
Yet needs must see him, of all men the best. 
Laughing he went, and with him on each hand 
There rode a squire from the Theban land ; 
Hylas was first, whose sire, Theoclamas, 
Had given him worthy gifts of gold and brass, 
And gold-wrought arms, that he should see no more 
Glittering along the green Ismenian shore. 
With him Ephebus came, who many a year 
Had backed the steed and cast the quivering spear 
In Theban meadows, but whose fathers came 
From Argos, and thereby had left their name. 

So through the streets like Gods they rode, but he 
Who rode the midmost of the glorious three 
O'ertopped them by a head ; and looking down 
With smiling face, whereon it seemed no frown 
Could ever come, showed like the king of all. 

Now coming to the palace, by the wall 
Sat Jason, watching while an armourer wrought 
A golden crest according to his thought ; 
And round about the heroes were at play, 
Casting the quoit ; but on the well-paved way. 
With clanging arms, leapt down Alcmena's son 
Hefore the prince, and said : " I who have won 
Some small renown, Jason, in this land, 
Come now to put my hand within your hand 
And be your man, if wide report says true, 
That even now with cinnabar and blue 
Men paint your long ship's prow, and shave the oars 
With sharpened planes ; for soothly, other shores 
I fain would see than this fair Grecian one, 
Wherein great deeds already I have done : 
And if thou wiliest now to hear my name, 
A Theban queen my mother once became, 
And had great honour ; wherefore some men say 



OF JASON. 51 

That in Amphytrion's bed my mother lay 
When I was gotten j and yet other some 
Say that a God upon that night did come 
(Whose name I speak not), like unto the king, 
With whom Alcmena played, but nought witting. 

" Nor I, nor others know the certainty 
Of all these things ; but certes, royally 
My brother rules at Thebes, whom all men call 
Amphytrion's son, in whose well-peopled hall 
Ever am I the least loved guest of all, 
Though, since my name is Hercules, the man 
Who owes me hatred hides it if he can. 

" And now, prince, I bid thee take my hand, 
And hear me swear that till unto this land 
Thou hast borne back the fleece across the sea, 
Thy liege-man and thy servant I will be. 
Nor have I seen a man more like a king 
Than thou art, of whom minstrel folk shall sing 
In days to come when men sit by the wine." 

Then Jason said : " A happy lot is mine ! 
Surely the Gods must love me, since that thou 
Art come, with me the rough green plain to plough 
That no man reaps ; yet certes, thou alone 
In after days shalt be the glorious one 
Whom men shall sing of when they name the fleece 
That bore the son of Athamas from Greece, 
When I and all these men have come to nought." 

So spake he ; but the great-eyed Juno brought 
His words to nothing, stooping to behold 
Jason's fair head, whereon the locks of gold 
Curled thick and close, and his grey eager eyes, 
That seemed already to behold the prize 
In far-off Colchis, like a God he stood, 
No less than he that in the darksome wood 
Slew the lake-haunting, many-headed beast. 






52 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But on that day the Minyae held a feast, 
Praising the Gods, and those that they had sent 
Across the sea to work out their intent. 

Yea, ere the night, greater their joyance grew, 
For to the throng of heroes came there two, 
In nowise worse than any of the best, 
Castor and Pollux, who thought not to rest 
In woody Lacedaemon, where the doves 
Make summer music in the beechen groves, 
But rather chose to hear the sea-fowl sing. 

Their mother wedded Tyndarus the king. 
And yet a greater name their father had, 
As men deem ; for that Leda, all unclad, 
In cold Eurotas, on a summer morn, 
Bathed her fair body, unto whom was borne, 
Fleeing from seeming death, a milk-white swan, 
Whom straight the naked queen, not fearing man, 
Took in her arms, nor knew she fostered Jove, 
Who rules o'er mortal men and Gods above. 

So in the hall of Pelias, in their place 
The twain sat down ; and joy lit every face, 
When both their names the sweet- voiced herald cried. 
But the next morn into the town did ride 
Lynceus and Idas, leaving far away 
Well-walled Messene where the kestrels play 
About the temples and the treasure-house. 
But of these twain was Idas valorous 
Beyond most men, and hasty of his blow j 
And unto Lynceus would the darkness show 
That which he lacked ; and of all men was he 
The luckiest to find the priyity 
Of gold or gems. And on the self-same day 
Came Periclymenes, who folk did say 
Had Proteus' gift to change from shape to shape. 

Next from Tegea, where the long green grape 



OF JASON. 53 

Grows yellow in the dewy autumn night, 
There came Ancaeus, stubborn in the fight. 

Amphidamus and Apheus left the trees 
Where sing the wood-doves to their mistresses 
In the Arcadian forests ; and where oft, 
If through the springing brake he treadeth soft, 
The happy hunter may well chance to see 
Beside a hidden stream some two or three 
Of tired nymphs, stripping the silken weed 
From off their limbs ; nor shall Acteon's meed 
Betide him there among the oaken trees. 

Next came there Augeas, who at Elis sees 
On his fat plains the sheep, and kine, and beeves, 
Unnumbered as the rustling aspen leaves 
Beside the river : from the grassy plain 
Anigh Pellene, where the harvest wain 
Scatters the grazing sheep, Amphion came, 
In nowise skilled like him who bore his name, 
The deathless singer, but right wise in war. 
Then through the town there passed a brazen car 
Bearing Euphemus, who had power to go 
Dryshod acioss the plain no man dorh sow. 
By Tenarus he dwelt, beside the sea, 
Anigh the temple of the deity 
Whose son he was, the shaker of the earth. 

Then came a fresh Ancaeus, who had birth 
In woody Samos, of the self-same sire 
Whose heart white-footed Alta set on fire, 
As on the yellow sands at dawn she went. 

Then Calydon the great a hero sent, 
The fair-haired Meleager, who became, 
In after-days, the glory of his name, 
The greatest name of the iEtolian land ; 
While yet on him Fate laid her heavy hand, 
In midst of all his glory so raised up, 
Who nowise now dreaded the proffered cup 



54 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Of life and death she held for him to drain, 
Nor thought of death and wishes wished in vain. 
With him his uncle rode, Laocoon, 
No longer young, teaching his brother's son 
What 'longed .to ruling men and unto war. 

From Lacedaemon, Iphiclus afar 
Had travelled till the rich embroidered weed, 
His father Thestius gave him at his need, 
Was stained with sun and dust, but still he came 
To try the sea and win undying fame. 

Then came a man long-limbed, in savage weed, 
Areas the hunter, to whose unmatched speed 
All beasts that wander through the woods are slow. 
In his right hand he bare the fatal bow 
Of horn, and wood, and brass, but now unstrung, 
And at his back a well-closed quiver hung, 
Done round with silver bands and leopard's skin, 
And fifty deaths were hidden well therein 
Of men or beasts ; for whoso stood before 
His bended bow and angry eyes, no more 
Should see the green trees and the fertile earth. 

Then came two brothers of a wondrous birth, 
Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas ; 
For he beheld Erechtheus' daughter pass 
Along Ilissus, one bright windy day, 
Whom from amidst her maids he bore away 
Unto the hills of Thrace to be his bride. 
Now unto them this marvel did betide, 
That like fair men in all else, from the head 
Of each sprung wings, wherewith at will they sped 
From land to land, 'midst of the pathless air. 

Next from Magnesia did roan horses bear 
Phocus and Priasus, well skilled to cast 
The whistling dart ; then o'er the drawbridge passed 
iEtolian Palaemonius, who not yet 
Had seen men armed in anger, or steel wet 



OF JASON. 55 

With blood of aught but beasts, but none the less 
Was willing now to stand among the press 
Of god-like men, who, with the Minyse, 
Were armed to bring the fleece across the sea. 

Then came Asclepius, whom the far-darter 
Saved living from the lifeless corpse of her 
He once loved well, but slew, for treason done, 
Fair-haired Coronis, whose far-seeing son 
He honoured much, and taught so many a thing, 
That first he knew how man may ease the sting 
Of sickening pain, because all herbs he knew, 
And what the best and worst of them could do. 
So many a bitter fight with death he had, 
And made the heart of many a sick man glad, 
And gave new life to many a man who seemed 
But dead already, wherefore people deemed 
When he was dead that he was God indeed, 
And on his altars many a beast did bleed. 

Acastus, Pelias' son, from wandering 
Was come that self-same day unto the king, 
And needs must go with Jason on this quest, 
Careless of princely ease and golden rest. 

Next Neleus, growing grey, forgetting not 
The double crime, had left the pleasant spot 
Where the wan Alpheus meets the green sea waves, 
And twice a-day the walls of Pylos laves ; 
For he was fain to expiate the sin 
Pelias shared with him, long years past within 
Queen Juno's temple, where the brothers slew 
The old Sidero, crying out, who knew 
Then first the bitterness of such a cry 
As broke from Tyro in her agony 
When helpless, bound, within the brazen hall, 
She felt unthought-of torment on her fall, 
With none to pity her, nor knew what end 
The Gods unto such misery would send. 



56 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

So might Sidero feel, when fell on her 
Unlooked-for death and deadly, hopeless fear ; 
And in their turn must Neleus o'er the sea 
Go wandering now, and Pelias must be 
A trembling liar till death seizes him. 

But now with Neleus, young but strong of limb, 
His wise, far-seeing offspring, Nestor, went, 
With eyes a little downward ever bent, 
Thinking of this and that which he had seen ; 
Who, when his youth was flourishing and green, 
Saw many feats of arms and ways of men, 
Yet lived so long to be well honoured, when 
In Troy the old the princes shared the spoil. 

Next came Laertes to share grief and toil 
With these upon the sea j yet had he not 
An easy land in Ithaca the hot, 
Though Bacchus loves the ledges of the land, 
And weighs the peasant in his sunburnt hand 
The heavy oozing bunches, in the time 
When frosts draw nigh in the rough northern clime. 

Next whom came Almenus, of nought afraid, 
Well armed and hardy, whom a mortal maid 
Bore unto Mars, for he, new-come from Thrace, 
Beside Enipeus met her, and in chase 
He held her long, who vainly fled from him, 
Though light of foot she was, and strong of limb. 

And last of all, Orpheus the singer came, > 
The son of King (Eager, great of fame, 
Yet happier by much in this, that he 
Was loved by heavenly Calliope, 
Who bore him Orpheus on a happy day. 
And now, through many a rough and toilsome way, 
Hither he came the Minyae to please, 
And make them masters of the threatening seas, 
Cheering their hearts, and making their hands strong 
With the unlooked-for sweetness of his song. 



OF JASON. 57 

Nor was it eve by then that Orpheus came 
Into the hall, and when they heard his name, 
And toward the high-seat of the prince he drew, 
All men beholding him the singer knew, 
And glad they were, indeed, that he should be 
Their mate upon the bitter, tuneless sea. 
And loud they shouted, but Prince Jason said : 
" Now, may the Gods bring good things on thy head, 
Son of (Eager, but from me, indeed, 
This gold Dasdalian bowl shall be thy meed, 
If thou wilt let us hear thy voice take wing 
From out thy heart, and see the golden string 
Quiver beneath thy fingers. But by me 
First sit and feast, and happy mayst thou be." 
, Then, glad at heart, the hero took his place, 
And ate and drank his fill, but when the space 
Was cleared of flesh and bread, he took his lyre 
And sung them of the building up of Tyre, 
And of the fair things stored up over sea, 
Till there was none of them but fain would be 
Set in the ship, nor cared one man to stay 
On the green earth for one more idle day. 

But Jason, looking right and left on them, 
Took his fair cloak, wrought with a golden hem, 
And laid it upon Orpheus, and thereto 
Added the promised bowl, that all men knew 
No hand but that of Daedalus had wrought, 
So rich it was, and fair beyond all thought. 
Then did he say unto the Minyae : 
' ' Fair friends and well-loved guests, no more shall ye 
Feast in this hall until we come again 
Back to this land, well-guerdoned for our pain, 
Bearing the fleece, and mayhap many a thing 
Such as this god-like guest erewhile did sing, 

6* 



58 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Scarlet, and gold, and brass ; but without fail 
Bearing great fame, if aught that may avail 
To men who die j and our names certainly 
Shall never perish, wheresoe'er we lie. 

"And now behold within the haven rides 
Our good ship, swinging in the changing tides, 
Gleaming with gold, and blue, and cinnabar, 
The long new oars beside the rowlocks are, 
The sail hangs napping in the light west wind, 
Nor aught undone can any craftsman find 
From stem to stern ; so is our quest begun 
To-morrow at the rising of the sun. 
And may Jove bring us all safe back to see 
Another sun shine on this fair city, 
When elders and the flower-crowned maidens meet 
With tears and singing our returning feet." 

So spake he, and so mighty was the shout, 
That the hall shook, and shepherd-folk without 
The well-walled city heard it as they went 
Unto the fold across the thymy bent. 



BOOK IV. 

BUT through the town few eyes were sealed by sleep 
When the sun rose ; yea, and the upland sheep 
Must guard themselves for that one morn at least 
Against the wolf ; and wary doves may feast 
Unscared that morning on the ripening corn. 
Nor did the whetstone touch the scythe that morn ; 
And all unheeded did the mackerel shoal 
Make green the blue waves, or the porpoise roll 
Through changing hills and valleys of the sea. 



OF JASON. 59 

For 'twixt the thronging people solemnly 
The heroes went afoot along the way 
That led unto the haven of the bay, 
And as they went the roses rained on them 
From windows glorious with the well-wrought hem 
Of many a purple cloth ; and all their spears 
Were twined with flowers that the fair earth bears ; 
And round their ladies' tokens were there set 
About their helmets, flowery wreaths, still wet 
With beaded dew of the scarce vanished night. 

So as they passed, the young men at the sight 
Shouted for joy, and their hearts swelled with pride ; 
But scarce the elders could behold dry-eyed 
The glorious show, remembering well the days 
When they were able too to win them praise, 
And in their hearts was hope of days to come. 

Nor could the heroes leave their fathers' home 
Unwept of damsels, who henceforth must hold 
The empty air unto their bosoms cold, 
And make their sweet complainings to the night 
That heedeth not soft eyes and bosoms white. 
And many such an one was there that morn, 
Who, with lips parted and grey eyes forlorn, 
Stood by the window and forgot to cast 
Her gathered flowers as the heroes passed, 
But held them still within her garment's hem, 
Though many a winged wish she sent to them. 

But on they went, and as the way they trod, 
His swelling heart nigh made each man a god ; 
While clashed their armour to the minstrelsy 
That went before them to the doubtful sea. 

And now, the streets being passed, they reached the bay, 
Where by the well-built quay long Argo lay, 
Glorious with gold, and shining in the sun. 
Then first they shouted, and each man begun 
Against his shield to strike his brazen spear ; 



60 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And as along the quays they drew a-near, 
Faster they strode and faster, till a cry 
Again burst from them, and right eagerly 
Into swift running did they break at last, 
Till all the wind-swept quay being overpast, 
They pressed across the gangway, and filled up 
The hollow ship as wine a golden cup. 

But Jason, standing by the helmsman's side 
High on the poop, lift up his voice and cried : 

" Look landward, heroes, once, before ye slip 
The tough well-twisted hawser from the ship, 
And set your eager hands to rope or oar ; 
For now, behold, the king stands on the shore 
Beside a new-built altar, while the priests 
Lead up a hecatomb of spotless beasts, 
White bulls and coal-black horses, and my sire 
Lifts up the barley-cake above the fire ; 
And in his hand a cup of ruddy gold 
King Pelias takes ; and now may ye behold 
The broad new-risen sun light up the God, 
Who, holding in his hand the crystal rod 
That rules the sea, stands by Daedalian art 
Above his temple, set right far apart 
From other houses, nigh the deep green sea. 

"And now, fellows, from no man but me 
These gifts come to the God, that, ere long years 
Have drowned our laughter and dried up our tears, 
We may behold that glimmering brazen God 
Against the sun bear up his crystal rod 
Once more, and once more cast upon this land 
This cable, severed by my bloodless brand." 

So spake he, and raised up the glittering steel, 
That fell, and seaward straight did Argo reel, 
Set free, and smitten by the western breeze, 



OF JASON. 6 1 

And raised herself against the ridgy seas, 

With golden eyes turned toward the Colchian land, 

Still heedful of wise Tiphys' skilful hand. 

But silent sat the heroes by the oar, 
Hearkening the sounds borne from the lessening shore ; 
The lowing of the doomed and flower-crowned beasts, 
The plaintive singing of the ancient priests, 
Mingled with blare of trumpets, and the sound 
Of all the many folk that stood around 
The altar and the temple by the sea. 
So sat they pondering much and silently, 
Till all the landward noises died away, 
And, midmost now of the green sunny bay, 
They heard no sound but washing of the seas 
And piping of the following western breeze, 
And heavy measured beating of the oars : 
So left the Argo the Thessalian shores. 

Now Neptune, joyful of the sacrifice 
Beside the sea, and all the gifts of price 
That Jason gave him, sent them wind at will, 
And swiftly Argo climbed each changing hill, 
And ran through rippling valleys of the sea ; 
Nor toiled the heroes unmelodiously, 
For by the mast sat great (Eager's son, 
And through the harp-strings let his fingers run 
Nigh soundless, and with closed lips for a while ; 
But soon across his face there came a smile, 
And his glad voice brake into such a song 
That swiftlier sped the eager ship along. 

" bitter sea, tumultuous sea, 
Full many an ill is wrought by thee ! 
Unto the wasters of the land 
Thou holdest out thy wrinkled hand ; 
And when they leave the conquered town, 



62 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Whose black smoke makes thy surges brown, 
Driven betwixt thee and the sun, 
As the long day of blood is done, 
From many a league of glittering waves 
Thou smilest on them and their slaves. 

" The thin bright-eyed Phoenician 
Thou drawest to thy waters wan, 
With ruddy eve and golden morn 
Thou temptest him, until, forlorn, 
Unburied, under alien skies 
Cast up ashore his body lies. 

" Yea, whoso sees thee from his door, 
Must ever long for more and more ; 
Nor will the beechen bowl suffice, 
Or homespun robe of little price, 
Or hood well- woven of the fleece 
Undyed, or unspiced wine of Greece ; 
So sore his heart is set upon 
Purple, and gold, and cinnamon ; 
For as thou cravest, so he craves, 
Until he rolls beneath thy waves. 
Nor in some landlocked, unknown bay, 
Can satiate thee for one day. 

" Now, therefore, thou bitter sea, 
With no long words we pray to thee, 
But ask thee, hast thou felt before 
Such strokes of the long ashen oar % 
And hast thou yet seen such a prow 
Thy rich and niggard waters plough ? 

" Nor yet, sea, shalt thou be cursed, 
If at thy hands we gain the worst, 
And, wrapt in water, roll about 
Blind-eyed, unheeding song or shout, 
Within thine eddies far from shore, 
Warmed by no sunlight any more. 



OF JASON. 6$ 

" Therefore, indeed, we joy in thee, 
And praise thy greatness, and will we 
Take at thy hands both good and ill, 
Yea, what thou wilt, and praise thee still, 
Enduring not to sit at home, 
And wait until the last days come, 
When we no more may care to hold 
White bosoms under crowns of gold, 
And our dulled hearts no longer are 
Stirred by the clangorous noise of war, 
And hope within our souls is dead, 
And no joy is remembered. 

" So, if thou hast a mind to slay, 
Fair prize thou hast of us to-day ; 
And if thou hast a mind to save, 
Great praise and honour shalt thou have ; 
But whatso thou wilt do with us, 
Our end shall not be piteous, 
Because our memories shall live 
When folk forget the way to drive 
The black keel through the heaped-up sea, 
And half dried up thy waters be." 

Then shouted all the heroes, and they drove 
The good ship forth, so that the birds above, 
With long white wings, scarce flew so fast as they. 
And so they laboured well-nigh all the day, 
And ever in their ears divine words rung, 
For 'midmost of them still the Thracian sung 
Stories of Gods and men ; the bitter life 
Pandora brought to luckless men ; the strife 
'Twixt Pallas and the Shaker of the Earth, 
The theft of Bacchus, and the wondrous birth 
Of golden Venus. Natheless, when the sun 
To fall adown the heavens had begun, 
They trimmed the sails, and drew the long oars up, 



64 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And, having poured wine from a golden cup 
Unto the Gods, gladdened their hearts with food ; 
Then, having feasted as they thought it good, 
Set hands upon the oars again, and so 
Toiled on, until the broad sun, growing low, 
Reddened the green sea ; then they held their hands 
Till he should come again from unknown lands, 
And fell to meat again, and sat so long 
Over the wine-cups, cheered with tale and song, 
That night fell on them, and the moon rose high, 
And the fair western wind began to die, 
Though still they drifted slowly towards the east ; 
Then with sweet sleep the others crowned their feast, 
But Tiphys and the leader of the rest, 
Who watched till drew the round moon to the west, 
And Jason could behold beneath her light, 
Far oiF at first, a little speck of white, 
Which, as the grey dawn stole across the sea, 
And the wind freshened, grew at last to be 
Grey rocks and great, and when they nigher drew, 
The skilful helmsman past all doubting knew 
The land of Lemnos ; therefore from their sleep 
They roused their fellows, bidding them to keep 
The good ship from that evil rocky shore. 
So each man set his hand unto the oar, 
And, striking sail, along the coast they crept, 
Till the sun rose, and birds no longer slept ; 
Then as they went they saw a sandy beach 
Under the cliff, that no high wave could reach, 
And in the rock a deep cave cut, whereby 
A man was standing, gazing earnestly 
Upon their ship, and shouting words that, tost 
Hither and thither by the wind, were lost 
Amid the tumbling of the ridgy sea ; 
Natheless, they deemed that he still prayed to be 
Their fellow, and to leave those rocky shores ; 



OF JASON. 65 

Therefore, with backing of the ashen oars, 
They stayed the ship, and beckoned unto him 
To try the sea, if so be he could swim ; 
Because, indeed, they doubted there might be 
A-nigh the place some hidden enemy ; 
Nor cared they much to trust their oaken keel 
Too near those rocks, as deadly as sharp steel, 
That lay upon their lee : but with a shout 
He sprang into the sea, and beat about 
The waters bravely, till he reached the ship ; 
And clambering up, let the salt water drip 
From off his naked limbs, nor spoke he aught 
Until before the fair prince he was brought ; 
But Jason, when he set his eyes on him, 
And saw him famished and so gaunt of limb, 
Bade them to give him food and wine enow 
Before he told his tale ; and still to row 
Along the high cliffs eastward, nor to stay 
For town or tower, haven or deep bay. 

Then being clothed and fed, the island man 
Came back to Jason, and his tale began : 

" Lord, or Prince, or whoso thou mayst be, 
Great thanks I give thee ; yet, I pray, of me 
Ask not my name, for surely ere this day 
Both name, and house, and friends, have past away. 
A Lemnian am I, who within the town 
Had a fair house, and on the thy my down 
Full many a head of sheep : and I had too 
A daughter, old enough for men to woo, 
A wife and three fair sons ; of whom the first 
For love and gold had now begun to thirst ; 
Full rich I was, and led a pleasant life, 
Nor did I long for more, or doubt for strife. 

" Know that in Lemnos were the Gods well served, 
And duly all their awful rites observed, 
7 






66 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Save only that no temple Venus had, 

And from no altars was her heart made glad ; 

Wherefore for us she wove a bitter fate, 

For by her power she set an evil hate 

Of man, like madness in each woman's heart, 

And heavy sleep on us men, for our part, 

From which few woke, or woke in time to feel 

Against their throats the pitiless sharp steel. 

" But that there might be one to tell the thing, 
Nigh dawn I woke, and, turning, thought to cling 
Unto the warm side of my well-loved wife, 
But found nought there but a keen two-edged knife ; 
So, wondering much, I gat me from the bed, 
And going thence, found all the floor be-bled 
In my son's sleeping place, and nigh the door 
His body, hacked and hewn, upon the floor : 
Naked he was, but in his clenched right hand 
Held tufts of woman's hair. Then did I stand 
As in a dream a man stands, when draws nigh 
The thing he fears with such wild agony, 
Yet dares not flee from ; but the golden sun 
Came forth at last, and daylight was begun ; 
Then trembling I took heart to leave at last 
The lonely house, but, as I slowly passed 
Into the porch, a dreadful noise I heard, 
Nor shall I be again by aught so feared, 
How long soe'er I live, as I was then. 
Because that shout was worse than cries of men 
Drunken with blood ; but yet as in a dream 
I went to meet it, and heard many a scream 
From dying men ; but, as I gained the street, 
Men flying for their dear lives did I meet, 
And turned and fled with them, I knew not why, 
But looking back in running, could espy, 
With shrinking horror, what kept up the chase. 

"Because, indeed, the old familar place, 



OF JASON. 67 

From house-wall unto house-wall, was now filled 
With frantic women, whose thin voices shrilled 
With unknown war-cries ; little did they heed 
If, as they tore along, their flesh did bleed 
So that some man was slain, nor feared they now 
If they each other smote with spear or bow, 
For all were armed in some sort, and had set 
On head or breast what armour they might get ; 
And some were naked else, and some were clad 
In such-like raiment as the slain men had, 
And some their kirtles wore looped up or rent. 

" So ever at us shafts and spears they sent, 
And through the street came on like a huge wave, 
Until at last against the gates they drave, 
And we gained on them, till some two or three, 
As still the others strove confusedly, 
Burst from the press, and, heading all the rest, 
Kan mightily, and the last men, hard pressed, 
Turned round upon them, and straightway were slain, 
Unarmed and faint, and 'gan the growd to gain 
Upon the fleeing men, till one by one 
They fell, and looked their last upon the sun, 
And I alone was held in chase, until 
I reached the top of a high thymy hill 
Above the sea, bleeding from arm and back, 
Wherein two huntsmen's arrows lightly stack, 
Shot by no practised hands ; but nigh my death 
I was indeed, empty of hope and breath. 

" Yet, ere their changed hands could be laid on me, 
I threw myself into the boiling sea, 
And they turned back, nor doubted I was dead ; 
But I, though fearing much to show my head, 
Grot me, by swimming, to yon little beach, 
And there the mouth of yon cave scarce could reach, 
And lay there fainting till the sun was high. 
Then I awoke, and, rising fearfully, 



68 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Grat into the dark cave, and there have been, 
How long I know not, and no man have seen ; 
And as for food and drink, within the cave 
Good store of sweet clear water did I have, 
And in the nights I went along the beach 
And got me shell-fish, and made shift to reach 
Some few birds' eggs ; but natheless misery 
Must soon have slain me, had not the kind sea 
Sent you, lords, to give me life again ; 
Therefore, I pray, ye may not wish in vain 
For aught, and that with goods and happiness 
The father of all folk your lives may bless." 

Then said the prince : "And be thou strong of heart, 
For, after all thy woes, shalt thou have part 
In this our quest, if so thou wiliest it, 
But if so be that thou wouldst rather sit 
In rest and peace within a fair homestead, 
That shall some king give to thee by my head, 
For love of me ; or else for very fear 
Shall some man give thee what thou countest dear. 

" And if thou askest of us, know that we 
Are children of the conquering Minyse, 
And make for Colchis o'er the watery plain, 
And think we shall not fail to bring again 
The fleece of Neptune's ram to Thessaly." 

" Prince," said the Lemnian, " I will go with thee 
Whereso thou wiliest, neither have I will 
To wait again for ruin, sitting still 
Among such goods as grudging fate will give, 
Even at the longest, only while I live." 

Then Jason bade them bring him arms well wrought 
And robes of price ; and when all these were brought, 
And he was armed, he seemed a goodly man. 

Meanwhile, along the high cliffs Argo ran 
Until a fresh land-wind began to rise, 



OF JASON. 69 

Then did they set sail, and in goodly wise 

Draw off from Lemnos, and at close of day 

Again before them a new country lay, 

Which when they neared, the helmsman Tiphys knew 

To be the Mysian land ; being come thereto, 

They saw a grassy shore and trees enow, 

And a sweet stream that from the land did flow ; 

Therefore they thought it good to land thereon 

And get them water ; but, the day being gone, 

They anchored till the dawn, anigh the beach 

Till the sea's rim the golden sun did reach. 

But when the day dawned, most men left the ship, 

Some hasting the glazed water-jars to dip 

In the fresh water ; others among these 

Who had good will beneath the murmuring trees 

To sit awhile, forgetful of the sea. 

And with the sea-farers there landed three 

Amongst the best, Alcmena's godlike son, 

Hylas the fair, and that half-halting one, 

Great Polyphemus. Now both Hercules 

And all the others lay beneath the trees, 

When all the jars were filled, nor wandered far ; 

But Hylas, governed by some wayward star, 

Strayed from them, and up stream he set his face, 

And came unto a tangled woody place, 

From whence the stream came, and within that wood 

Along its bank wandered in heedless mood, 

Nor knew it haunted of the sea-nymphs fair, 

Whom on that morn the heroes' noise did scare 

From their abiding-place anigh the bay ; 

But these now hidden in the water lay 

Within the wood, and thence could they behold 

The fair-limbed Hylas, with his hair of gold, 

And mighty arms down-swinging carelessly, 

And fresh face, ruddy from the wind-swept sea. 



70 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then straight they loved him, and, being fain to have 
His shapely body in the glassy wave, 
And taking counsel there, they thought it good 
That one should meet him in the darksome wood, 
And by her wiles should draw him to some place 
Where they his helpless body might embrace. 

So from the water stole a fair nymph forth, 
And by her art so wrought, that from the north 
You would have thought her come from where a queen 
Rules over lands summer alone sees green ; 
For she in goodly raiment, furred, was clad, 
And on her head a golden fillet had, 
Strange of its fashion, and about her shone 
Many a fair jewel and outlandish stone. 

So in the wood, anigh the river side, 
The coming of the Theban did she bide, 
Nor waited long, for slowly pushing through 
The close-set saplings, o'er the flowers blue 
He drew nigh, singing, free from any care ; 
But when he saw her glittering raiment fair 
Betwixt the green tree-trunks, he stayed a space, 
For she, with fair hands covering up her face, 
Was wailing loud, as though she saw him not, 
And to his mind came old tales half forgot, 
Of women of the woods, the huntsman's bane. 

Yet with his fate indeed he strove in vain ; 
For, going farther forward warily, 
From tree-trunk unto tree-trunk, he could see 
Her lovely hands, with wrist set close to wrist, 
Her cheek as fair as any God has kissed, 
Her lovely neck and wealth of golden hair, 
That from its fillet straggled here and there, 
And all her body writhing in distress, 
Wrapped in the bright folds of her golden dress. 

Then forthwith he drew near her eagerly, 
Nor did she seem to know that he was high, 



OF JASON. 7 1 

Until almost his hand on her was laid ; 

Then, lifting up a pale wild face, she said, 

Struggling with sobs and shrinking from his hand : 

" fair young warrior of a happy land, 

Harm not a queen, I pray thee, for I come 

From the far northland, where yet sits at home 

The king, my father, who, since I was wooed 

By a rich lord of Greece, had thought it good 

To send me to him with a royal train, 

But they, their hearts being changed by hope of gain, 

Seized on my goods, and left me while I slept ; 

Nor do I know, indeed, what kind God kept 

Their traitorous hands from slaying me outright ; 

And surely yet, the lion-haunted night 

Shall make an end of me, who ere while thought 

That unto lovelier lands I was being brought, 

To live a happier life than heretofore. 

" But why think I of past times any more, 
Who, a king's daughter once, am now grown fain 
Of poorest living, through all toil and pain, 
If so I may but live : and thou, indeed, 
Perchance art come, some God, unto my need ; 
For nothing less thou seemest, verily. 
But if thou art a man, let me not die, 
But take me as thy slave, that I may live. 
For many a gem my raiment has to give, 
And these weak fingers surely yet may learn 
To turn the mill, and carry forth the urn 
Unto the stream, nor shall my feet unshod 
Shrink from the flinty road and thistly sod." 

She ceased; but he stooped down, and stammering said : 
11 Mayst thou be happy, most lovely maid, 
And thy sweet life yet know a better day : 
And I will strive to bring thee on thy way, 
Who am the well-loved son of a rich man 
Who dwells in Thebes, beside Ismenus wan." 



72 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Therewith he reached his hand to her, and she 
Let her slim palm fall in it daintily ; 
But with that touch he felt as through his blood 
Strange fire ran, and saw not the close wood, 
Nor tangled path, nor stream, nor aught but her 
Crouching before him in her gold and fur, 
With kind appealing eyes raised up to his, 
And red lips trembling for the coming kiss. 

But ere his lips met hers did she arise, 
Reddening with shame, and from before his eyes 
Drew her white hand, wherewith the robe of gold 
She gathered up, and from her feet did hold, 
Then through the tangled wood began to go, 
Not looking round ; but he cared not to know 
Whither they went, so only she was nigh. 
So to her side he hurried fearfully, 
She nought gainsaying, but with eyes downcast 
Still by his side betwixt the low boughs past, 
Following the stream, until a space of green 
All bare of trees they reached, and there between 
The river ran, grown broad and like a pool, 
Along whose bank a flickering shade and cool 
Grey willows made, and all about they heard 
The warble of the small brown river bird. 
And from both stream and banks rose up a haze 
Quivering and glassy, for of summer days 
This was the chiefest day and crown of all. 

There did the damsel let her long skirts fall 
Over her feet, but as her hand dropped down, 
She felt it stopped by Hylas' fingers brown, 
Whereat she trembled and began to go 
Across the flowery grass with footsteps slow, 
As though she grew aweary, and she said, 
Turning about her fair and glorious head : 
" Soft is the air in your land certainly, 
But under foot the way is rough and dry 



OF JASON. 73 

Unto such feet as mine, more used to feel 
The dainty stirrup wrought of gold and steel, 
Or tread upon the white bear's fell, or pass 
In spring and summer o'er such flowery grass 
As this, that soothly mindeth me too much 
Of that my worshipped feet were wont to touch, 
When I was called a queen ; let us not haste 
To leave this sweet place for the tangled waste, 
I pray thee, therefore, prince, but let us lie 
Beneath these willows while the wind goes by, 
And set our hearts to think of happy things, 
Before the morrow pain and trouble brings." 
She faltered somewhat as she spoke, but he 
Drew up before her and took lovingly 
Her other hand, nor spoke she more to him, 
Nor he to her awhile, till, from the rim 
Of his great shield, broke off the leather band 
That crossed his breast, whether some demon's hand 
Snapped it unseen, or some sharp, rugged bough 
Within the wood had chafed it even now ; 
But clattering fell the buckler to the ground, 
And, startled at the noise, he turned him round, 
Then, grown all bold within that little space, 
He set his cheek unto her blushing face, 

\nd smiling, in a low voice said : 

" sweet, 
Call it an omen that this, nowise meet 
For deeds of love, has left me by its will, 
And now by mine these toys that cumber still 
My arms shall leave me." 

And therewith he threw 
His brass-bound spear upon the grass, and drew 
The Theban blade from out its ivory sheath, 
And loosed his broad belt's clasp, that like a wreath 

lis father's Indian serving-man had wrought, 
And cast his steel coat off, from Persia brought ; 



74 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And so at last being freed of brass and steel, 
Upon his breast he laid her hand to feel 
The softness of the fine Phoenician stuff 
That clad it still, nor yet could toy enough 
With that fair hand ; so played they for a space, 
Till softly did she draw him to a place 
Anigh the stream, and they being set, he said : 

" And what dost thou, love 'I art thou afraid 
To cast thine armour off, as I have done, 
Within this covert where the fiery sun 
Scarce strikes upon one jewel of your gown ? " 

Then she spake, reddening, with her eyes cast down 
" prince, behold me as I am to-day, 
But if o'er many a rough and weary way 
It hap unto us both at last to come 
Unto the happy place that is thine home, 
Then let me be as women of thy land 
When they before the sea-born goddess stand, 
And not one flower hides them from her sight." 

But with that word she set her fingers white 
Upon her belt, and he said amorously : 
" Ah, God, whatso thou wilt must surely be, 
But would that I might die or be asleep 
Till we have gone across the barren deep, 
And you and I together, hand in hand, 
Some day, ere sunrise lights the quiet land, 
Behold once more the seven gleaming gates." 

" love," she said, " and such a fair time waits 
Both thee and me ; but now to give thee rest, 
Here, in the noontide, were it not the best 
To soothe thee with some gentle murmuring song, 
Sung to such notes as to our folk belong ; 
Such as my maids awhile ago would sing 
When on my bed a-nights I lay waking V " 

" Sing on," he said, " but let me dream of bliss 
If I should sleep, nor yet forget thy kiss." 



OF JASON. 75 

She touched his lips with hers, and then began 
A sweet song sung not yet to any man. 

" I know a little garden close 
Set thick with lily and red rose, 
Where I would wander if I might 
From dewy dawn to dewy night, 
And have one with me wandering. 

" And though within it no birds sing, 
And though no pillared house is there, 
And though the apple boughs are bare 
Of fruit and blossom, would to God 
Her feet upon the green grass trod, 
And I beheld them as before. 

" There comes a murmur from the shore, 
And in the place two fair streams are, 
Drawn from the purple hills afar, 
Drawn down unto the restless sea ; 
The hills whose flowers ne'er fed the bee, 
The shore no ship has ever seen, 
Still beaten by the billows green, 
Whose murmur comes unceasingly 
Unto the place for which I cry. 

* * For which I cry both day and night, 
For which I let slip all delight, 
That maketh me both deaf and blind, 
Careless to win, unskilled to find, 
And quick to lose what all men seek. 

" Yet tottering as I am, and weak, 
Still have I left a little breath 
To seek within the jaws of death 
An entrance to that happy place, 
To seek the unforgotten face 
Once seen, once kissed, once reft from me 
Anigh the murmuring of the sea." 



76 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

She ceased her song, that lower for a while 
And slower too had grown, and a soft smile 
Grew up within her eyes as still she sung. 
Then she rose up and over Hylas hung, 
For now he slept ; wherewith the God in her 
Consumed the northern robe done round with fur 
That hid her beauty, and the light west wind 
Played with her hair no fillet now did bind, 
And through her faint grey garment her limbs seemed 
Like ivory in the sea, and the sun gleamed 
In the strange jewels round her middle sweet, 
And in the jewelled sandals on her feet. 

So stood she murmuring till a rippling sound 
She heard, that grew until she turned her round 
And saw her other sisters of the deep 
Her song had called while Hylas yet did sleep, 
Come swimming in a long line up the stream, 
And their white dripping arms and shoulders gleam 
Above the dark grey water as they went, 
And still before them a great ripple sent. 

But when they saw her, toward the bank they drew, 
And landing, felt the grass and flowers blue 
Against their unused feet j then in a ring 
Stood gazing with wide eyes, and wondering 
At all his beauty they desired so much. 
And then with gentle hands began to touch 
His hair, his hands, his closed eyes ; and at last 
Their eager naked arms about him cast, 
And bore him, sleeping still, as by some spell, 
Unto the depths where they were wont to dwell ; 
Then softly down the reedy bank they slid, 
And with small noise the gurgling river hid 
The flushed nymphs and the needless sleeping man. 

But ere the water covered them, one ran 
Across the mead and caught up from the ground 
The brass-bound spear, and buckler bossed and round, 



OF JASON. 77 

The ivory-hilted sword, and coat of mail, 

Then took the stream ; so what might tell the tale, 

Unless the wind should tell it, or the bird 

Who from the reed these things had seen and heard ? 

Meanwhile, the ship being watered, and the day 
Now growing late, the prince would fain away ; 
So from the ship was blown a horn to call 
The stragglers back, who mustered one and all, 
But Theban Hylas ; therefore, when they knew 
That he was missing, Hercules withdrew 
From out the throng, if yet perchaneo his voice 
Hylas might hear, and all their hearts rejoice 
With his well-known shout in reply thereto ; 
With him must Polyphemus likewise go, 
To work out the wise counsel of the fates, 
Unhappy, who no more would see the gates 
Of white-walled, fair Larissa, or the plain 
Burdened by many an over-laden wain. 

For, while their cries and shouts rang through the wood, 
The others reached the ship, and thought it good 
To weigh the anchor, and anigh the shore, 
With loosened sail, and run-out ready oar, 
To trim the ship for leaving the fair bay ; 
And therefore, Juno, waiting for that day, 
And for that hour, had gathered store of wind 
Up in the hills to work out all her mind, 
Which, from the Mysian mountains now let slip, 
Tearing along the low shore, smote the ship 
In blinding clouds of salt spray mixed with rain. 

Then vainly they struck sail, and all in vain 
The rowers strove to keep her head to wind, 
And still they drifted seaward, drenched and blind. 

But, 'mid their struggling, suddenly there shone 
A light from Argo's high prow, and thereon 
Could their astonished, fearful eyes behold 



78 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

A figure standing, with wide wings of gold, 

Upright, amid the weltering of the sea, 

Calm 'midst the noise and cries, and presently 

To all their ears a voice pierced, saying : "No more, 

O Jove-blessed heroes, strive to reach the shore, 

Nor seek your lost companions, for of these 

Jove gives you not the mighty Hercules 

To help you forward on your happy way, 

But wills him in the Greek land still to stay, 

Where many a thing he has for him to do, 

With whom awhile shall Polyphemus go, 

Then build in Mysia a fair merchant-town, 

And when long years have passed, there lay him down 

And as for Hylas, never think to see 

His body more, who yet lies happily 

Beneath the green stream where ye were this morn, 

And there he praises Jove that he was born, 

Forgetting the rough world, and every care ; 

Not dead, nor living, among faces fair, 

White limbs, and wonders of the watery world. 

"And now I bid ye spread the sail ye furled, 
And make on towards the straits while Juno sends 
Fair wind behind you, calling you her friends ." 

Therewith the voice ceased, and the storm was still, 
And afterward they had good wind at will 
To help them toward the straits, but all the rest, 
Rejoicing at the speeding of their quest, 
Yet wondered much whence that strange figure came, 
That on the prow burnt like a harmless flame ; 
Yea, some must go and touch the empty space 
From whence those words flew from the godlike face ; 
But Jason and the builder, Argus, knew 
Whereby the prow foretold things strange and new, 
Nor wondered aught, but thanked the Gods therefore, 
As far astern they left the Mysian shore. 



OF JASON. 79 



BOOK V. 



NOW, driven by the oar, and feeling well 
The wind that made the fair white sail outs well, 
Thessalian Argo flew on toward the place 
Where first the rude folk saw dead Helle's face ; 
There, fearful of the darkness of the night, 
Without the rocks they anchored till the light, 
And when the clay broke, sped them through the straits 
With oars alone, and through the narrow gates 
Came out into Propontis, where with oar 
And sail together, within sight of shore, 
They went, until the sun was falling down, 
And then they saw the white walls of a town, 
And made thereto, and being come anigh, 
They found that on an isle the place did lie, 
And Tiphys called it Cyzicum, a place 
Built by a goodly man of a great race, 
Himself called Cyzicus, Euzorus' son, 
Who still in peace ruled over many an one, 
Merchants and other, in that city fair. 

Therefore, they thought it good to enter there, 
And going softly, with sails struck, at last 
Betwixt the two walls of a port they passed, 
And on the quays beheld full many a man 
Buying and selling, nigh the water wan. 

So, as they touched the shore, an officer 
Drew nigh unto them, asking who they were ; 
And when he knew, he cried : " heroes, land, 
For here shall all things be at your command '; 
And here shall you have good rest from the sea." 
Therewith he sent one to go speedily 
And tell the king these folks were landed there. 

Then passed the heroes forth upon the fair, 






80 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Well builded quays ; and all the merchant folk 
Beholding them, from golden dreams awoke, 
And of the sword and clattering shield grew fain, 
And glory for a while they counted gain. 

But Jason and his fair folk passing these 
Came to a square shaded about by trees, 
Where they beheld the crowned king glorious stand 
To wait them, who took Jason by the hand 
And led him through the rows of linden trees 
Unto his house, the crown of palaces ; 
And there he honoured them with royal feast 
In his fair hall, hung round with man and beast 
Wrought in fair Indian cloths, and on soft beds, 
When they grew weary, did they lay their heads. 

But he, when on the morn they would away, 
Full many a rich gift in their keel did lay, 
And while their oars were whitening the green sea, 
Within his temple he prayed reverently 
For their good hap to Jove the Saving God. 
Hapless himself that these had ever trod 
His quiet land ; for, sailing all the day, 
Becalmed at last at fall of night they lay ; 
And lying there, an hour before midnight 
A black cloud rose that swallowed up the light 
Of moon and stars, and therefrom leapt a wind 
That drave the Argo, tottering and blind, 
Back on her course, and, as it died, at last 
They heard the breakers roaring, and so cast 
Their anchors out within some shallow bay, 
They knew not where, to wait until the day. 

There, as they waited, they saw beacons flame 
Along the coast, and in a while there came 
A rout of armed men thereto, as might seem 
By shouts and clash of arms that now 'gan gleam 
Beneath the light of torches that they bore. 
Then could the heroes see that they from shore 



OF JASON. 8 1 

Were distant scarce a bowshot, and the tide 
Had ebbed so quick the sands were well nigh dried 
Betwixt them and the foremost of the foe, 
Who, ere they could push off, began to go 
Across the wet beach, and with many a cry 
The biting arrows from their bows let fly. 
Nor were the heroes slow to make return, 
Aiming where'er they saw the torches burn. 

So passed the night with little death of men ; 
But when the sky at last grew grey, and when 
Dimly the Argo's crew could see their foes, 
Then overboard they leapt, that they might close 
With these scarce seen far-fighting enemies, 
And so met man to man, crying their cries, 
In deadly shock, but Jason, for his part, 
Bushing before the rest, put by a dart 
A tall man threw, and closing with him, drave 
His spear through shield and breast-plate weak to save 
His heart from such an arm ; then straight he fell 
Dead on the sands, and with a wailing yell 
The others, when they saw it, fled away, 
And gat them swiftly to the forest grey 
The yellow sands fringed like a garment's hem, 
Nor gave the seafarers much chase to them, 
But on the hard sand all together drew. 

And now, day growing, they the country knew 
And found it Cyzicum, and Jason said : 
"Fellows, what have we done ? by likely-head 
An evil deed, and luckless, but come now, 
Draw ofTthe helmet from this dead man's brow 
And name him." So when they had done this thing 
They saw the face of Cyzicus the king. 

But Jason, when he saw him, wept, and said : 
" 111 hast thou fared, friend, that I was led 
To take thy gifts and slay thee ; in such guise, 

8* 



82 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Blind and unwitting, do fools die and wise, 
And I myself may hap to come to die 
By that I trusted, and like thee to lie 
Dead ere my time, a wonder to the world. 
But, poor king, thy corpse shall not be hurled 
Hither and thither by the heedless wave, 
But in an urn thine ashes will I save, 
And build a temple when I come to Greece 
A rich man, with the fair-curled golden fleece, 
And set them there, and call it by thy name, 
That thou mayst yet win an undying fame." 
Then hasted all the men, and in a while, 
'Twixt sea and woodland, raised a mighty pile, 
And there they burned him, but for spices sweet 
Could cast thereon but wrack from 'neath their feet, 
And wild wood flowers and resin from the pine ; 
And when the pile grew low, with odorous wine 
They quenehed the ashes, and the king's they set 
Within a golden vessel, that with fret 
Of twining boughs and gem-made flowers was wrought 
That they from Pelias' treasure-house had brought. 
Then, since the sun his high meridian 
Had left, they pushed into the waters wan, 
And so, with hoisted sail and stroke of oar, 
Drew off from that unlucky fateful shore. 

Now eastward with a fair wind as they went, 
And towards the opening of the ill sea bent 
Their daring course, Tiphys arose and said : 

" Heroes, it seems to me that hardihead 
Helps mortal men but little, if thereto 
They join not wisdom ; now needs must we go 
Into the evil sea through blue rocks twain 
No keel hath ever passed, although in vain 
Some rash men trying it of old, have been 
Pounded therein, as poisonous herbs and green 



OF JASON. 83 

Are pounded by some witch- wife on the shore 
Of Pontus, for these two rocks evermore 
Each against each are driven, and leave not 
Across the whole strait such a little spot 
Safe from the grinding of their mighty blows, 
As that through which a well-aimed arrow goes 
When archers for a match shoot at the ring. 

" Now, heroes, do I mind me of a king 
That dwelleth at a sea-side town of Thrace 
That men call Salmydessa, from this place 
A short day's sail, who hidden things can tell 
Beyond all men ; wherefore, I think it well 
That we for counsel should now turn thereto, 
Nor headlong to our own destruction go." 

Then all men said that these his words were good, 
And turning, towards the Thracian coast they stood, 
Which yet they reached not till the moonlit night 
Was come, and from the shore the wind blew light ; 
Then they lay to until the dawn, and then 
Creeping along, found an abode of men 
That Tiphys knew to be the place they sought. 
Thereat they shouted, and right quickly brought 
Fair Argo to the landing-place, and threw 
Grapnels ashore, and landing forthwith drew 
Unto the town, seeking Phineus the king. 
But those they met and asked about this thing 
Grew pale at naming him, and few words said ; 
Natheless, they being unto the palace led, 
And their names told, soon were they bidden in 
To where the king sat, a man blind and thin, 
And haggard beyond measure, who straightway 
Called out aloud : " Now blessed be the way 
That led thee to me, happiest of all 
Who from the poop see the prow rise and fall 
And the sail bellying, and the glittering oars ; 
And blessed be the day whereon our shores 



84 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

First felt thy footsteps, since across the sea 

My hope and my revenge thou bring'st with thee." 

Then Jason said : " Hail, Phineus, that men call 
Wisest of men, and may all good befall 
To thee and thine, and happy mayst thou live ; 
Yet do we rather pray thee gifts to give, 
Than bring thee any gifts, for, soothly, we 
Sail, desperate men and poor, across the sea." 

Then answered Phineus : " Guest, I know indeed 
What gift it is that on this day ye need, 
Which I will not withhold ; and yet, I pray, 
That ye will eat and drink with me to-day, 
Then shall ye see how wise a man am I, 
And how well-skilled to 'scape from misery." 

Therewith he groaned, and bade his folk to bring 
Such feast as 'longed unto a mighty king, 
And spread the board therewith ; who straight obeyed, 
Trembling and pale, and on the tables laid 
A royal feast most glorious in show. 

Then said the king : " I give you now to know 
That the Gods love me not, guests ; therefore, 
Lest your expected feast be troubled sore, 
Feast by yourselves alone while I sit here 
Looking for that which scarcely brings me fear 
This day, since I so long have suffered it." 

So, wondering at his words, they all did sit 
At that rich board, and ate and drank their fill ; 
But yet with little mirth indeed, for still 
Within their ears the king's words harshly rang, 
And his blind eyes, made restless by some pang, 
They still felt on them, though no word he said. 

At last he called out : " Though ye be full fed, 
Sit still at table and behold me eat, 
Then shall ye witness with what royal meat 
The Gods are pleased to feed me, since I know 
As much as they do both of things below 
And things above." 



OF JASON. 85 

Then, hearkening to this word, 
The most of them grew doubtful and afeard 
Of what should come ; but now unto the board 
The king was led, and nigh his hand his sword, 
Two-edged and ivory-hilted, did they lay, 
And set the richest dish of all that day 
Before him, and a wine-crowned golden cup, 
And a pale, trembling servant lifted up 
The cover from the dish j then did they hear 
A wondrous rattling sound that drew anear, 
Increasing quickly : then the gilded hall 
Grew dark at noon, as though the night did fall, 
And open were all doors and windows burst, 
And such dim light gleamed out as lights the cursed 
Unto the torments behind Minos' throne : 
Dim, green, and doubtful through the hall it shone, 
Lighting up shapes no man had seen, before 
They fell, awhile ago, upon th?t shore. 

For now, indeed, the trembling Minyae 
Beheld the daughters of a earth and sea, 
The dreadful snatchers, who like women were 
Down to the breast, with scanty coarse black hair 
About their heads, and dim eyes ringed with red, 
And bestial mouths set round with lips of lead, 
But from their gnarled necks there began to spring 
Half hair, half feathers, and a sweeping wing 
Grew out instead of arm on either side, 
And thick plumes underneath the breast did hide 
The place where joined the fearful natures twain. 
Grey feathered were they else, with many a stain 
Of blood thereon, and on birds' claws they went. 

These through the hall unheard-of shrieking sent, 
And rushed at Phineus, just as to his mouth 
He raised the golden cup to quench his drouth, 
And scattered the red wine, and buffeted 






86 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The wretched king, and one, perched on his head, 
Laughed as the furies laugh, when kings come down 
To lead new lives within the fiery town, 
And said : "0 Phineus, thou art lucky now 
The hidden things of heaven and hell to know ; 
Eat, happy man, and drink." Then did she draw 
From off the dish a gobbet with her claw, 
And held it nigh his mouth, the while he strove 
To free his arm, that one hovering above, 
Within her filthy vulture-claws clutched tight, 
And cried out at him : " Truly, in dark night 
Thou seest, Phineus, as the leopard doth." 

Then cried the third : " Fool, who would fain have both 
Delight and knowledga, therefore with blind eyes 
Clothe thee in purple, wrought with braveries, 
And set the pink-veined marble 'neath thy throne ; 
Then on its golden cushions sit alone, 
Hearkening thy chain-galled slaves without singing 
For joy, that they behold so many a thing." 

Then shrieked the first one in a dreadful voice : 
" And I, Phineus, bid thee to rejoice, 
That 'midst thy knowledge still thou know'st not this 
Whose flesh the lips, wherewith thy lips I kiss, 
This morn have fed on." Then she laughed again, 
And fawning on him, with her sisters twain 
Spread her wide wings, and hid him from the sight, 
And mixed his groans with screams of shrill delight. 

Now trembling sat the seafarers, nor dared 
To use the weapons from their sheaths half-bared, 
Fearing the Grods, who there, before their eyes, 
Had shown them with what shame and miseries 
They visit impious men : yet from the board 
There started two, with shield and ready sword, 
The North-winds' offspring, since, upon that day, 
Their father wrought within them in such way, 
They had no fear : but now, when Phineus knew, 



OF JASON. 87 

By his divine art, that the godlike two 

Were armed to help him, then from 'twixt the wings 

He cried aloud : " 0, heroes, more than kings, 

Strike, and fear not, but set me free to-day, 

That ye within your brazen chests may lay 

The best of all my treasure-house doth hold, 

Fair linen, scarlet cloth, and well-wrought gold." 

Then shrieked the snatchers, knowing certainly 
That now the time had come when they must fly 
From pleasant Salmydessa, casting off 
The joys they had in shameful mock and scoff. 
So gat they from the blind king, leaving him 
Pale and forewearied in his every limb ; 
And, flying through the roof, they set them down 
Above the hall-doors, 'mid the timbers brown, 
Chattering with fury. Then the fair dyed wings 
Opened upon the shoulders of the kings, 
And on their heels, and shouting, they uprose, 
And poised themselves in air to meet their foes. 

Then here and there those loathly things did fly 
Before the brazen shields, and swords raised high, 
But as they flew unlucky words they cried. 

The first said : " Hail, folk who wander wide, 
Seeking a foolish thing across the sea, 
Not heeding in what case your houses be, 
Where now perchance the rovers cast the brand 
Up to the roof, and leading by the hand 
The fair-limbed women with their fettered feet 
Pass down the sands, their hollow ship to meet." 

" Fair hap to him who weds the sorceress," 
The second cried, "and may the just Gods bless 
The slayer of his kindred and his name." 

" Luck to the toilsome seeker after fame," 
The third one from the open hall door cried, 
" Fare ye well, Jason, still unsatisfied, 
Still seeking for a better thing than best, 



88 THE LIFE AND DEATfl 

A fairer thing than fairest, without rest ; 
Good speed, O traitor, who shall think to wed 
Soft limbs and white, and find thy royal bed 
Dripping with blood, and burning up with fire ; 
Good hap to him who henceforth ne'er shall tire 
In seeking good that ever flies his hand 
Till he lies buried in an alien land ! " 

So screamed the monstrous fowl, but now the twain 
Sprung from the North-wind's loins to be their bane, 
Drew nigh unto them ; then, with huddled wings, 
Forth from the hall they gat, but evil things 
In flying they gave forth with weakened voice, 
Saying unto them : " ye men, rejoice, 
Whose bodies worms shall feed on soon or late, 
Blind slaves, and foolish of unsparing fate, 
Seeking for that which ye can never get, 
Whilst life and death alike ye do forget 
In needless strife, until on some sure day 
Death takes your scarcely tasted life away." 

Quivering their voices ceased as on they flew 
Before the swift wings of the godlike two 
Far over land and sea, until they were 
Anigh the isles called Strophades, and there, 
With tired wings, all voiceless did they light, 
Trembling to see anigh the armor bright 
The wind-born brothers bore, but as these drew 
Their gleaming swords and to the monsters flew, 
From out the deep rose up a black-haired man, 
Who, standing on the white-topped waves that ran 
On towards the shore, cried : " Heroes, turn again, 
For on this islet shall ye land in vain, 
But without sorrow leave the chase of these 
Who henceforth 'mid the rocky Strophades 
Shall dwell for ever, servants unto me, 
Working my will, therefore rejoice that ye 
Win gifts and honour for your deed to-day." 



OF JASON. 89 

Then, even as he spoke, they saw but grey, 
White headed waves rolling where he had stood, 
Whereat they sheathed their swords, and through their blood 
A tremor ran, for now they knew that he 
Was Neptune, shaker of the earth and sea ; 
Therefore they turned them back unto the hall 
Where yet the others were, and ere nightfall 
Came back to Salmydessa and the king, 
And lighting down they told him of the thing. 

Who, hearing them, straight lifted up his voice, 
And 'midst the shouts cried : *' Heroes, now rejoice 
With me who am delivered on this day 
From that which took all hope and joy away ; 
Therefore to feast again, until the sun 
Another glad day for us has begun, 
And then, indeed, if ye must try the sea, 
With gifts and counsel shall ye go from me ; 
Such as the Gods have given me to give, 
And happy lives and glorious may ye live." 

Then did they fall to banqueting again, 
Forgetting all forebodings and all pain ; 
And when that they had ate and drank enow, 
With songs and music, and a goodly show, 
Their hearts were gladdened, for before their eyes 
Played youths and damsels with strange fantasies, 
Clad as in Saturn's time folk used to be, 
With green leaves gathered from the summer tree, 
When all the year was summer everywhere, 
And every man and woman blest and fair. 

So, set 'twixt pleasure and some soft regret, 
All cares of mortal men did they forget, 
Except the vague desire not to die, 
The hopeless wish to flee from certainty, 
That sights and sounds we love will bring on us 
In this sweet fleeting world and piteous. 



9 THE LIFE AND DEATH 



BOOK VI. 

BUT on the morrow did they get them gone, 
Gifted with gold and many a precious stone, 
And many a bale of scarlet cloth and spice, 
And arms well wrought, and goodly robes of price. 
But chiefly to the wind-born brothers strong 
Did gifts past telling on that morn belong. 

Now as they stood upon the windy quay, 
Ready their hands upon the ropes to lay, 
Phineus, who 'midst his mighty lords was there, 
Set high above them in a royal chair, 
Said : " Many a gift ye have of me to-day 
Within your treasuries at home to lay, 
If so it be that through hard things and pain 
Ye come to the horse-nurturing land again ; 
Natheless, one more gift shall ye have of me, 
For lacking that, beneath the greedy sea, 
The mighty tomb of mariners and kings, 
Doubt not to lay down these desired things, 
Nor think to come to Thessaly at all." 
And therewith turning, he began to call 
Unto his folk to bring what they had there. 
Then one brought forward a cage great and fair, 
Wherein they saw a grey, pink-footed dove. 

Then said the king : " The very Gods above 
Can scantly help you more than now I do. 
For listen ; as upon this day ye go 
Unto the narrow ending of the sea, 
Anigh the clashing rocks lie patiently, 
And let the keenest-eyed among you stand 
Upon the prow, and let loose from his hand 
This dove, who from my mouth to-day has heard 
So many a mystic and compelling word, 



OF JASON. 91 

He cannot choose, being loosed, but fly down straight 

Unto the opening of that dreadful gate ; 

So let the keen-eyed watch, and if so be 

He comes out safe into the evil sea, 

Then bend unto the oars, nor fear at all 

Of aught that from the dashers may befall ; 

But if he perish, then turn back again, 

And know the Gods have made your passage vain. 

Thereafter, if ye will, come back to me, 

And if ye find nought in my treasury 

That ye desire, yet ye at least shall have 

A king and a king's son to be your slave ; 

And all things here still may ye bind and loose, 

And from our women freely may ye choose, 

Nor spare the fairest or most chaste to kiss, 

And in fair houses shall ye live in bliss." 

" king," said Jason, V know that on this day 
I will not be foresworn, but by some way 
Will reach the oak-grove and the Golden Fleece, 
Or, failing, die at least far off from Greece, 
Not unremembered ; yet great thanks we give 
For this thy gift and counsel, and will strive 
To come to Colchis through the unknown land 
And whatso perils wait us, if Jove's hand 
Be heavy on us, and the great blue gates 
Are shut against us by the unmoved fates. 
Farewell, king, and henceforth, free from ill, 
Live happy as thou mayst, and honoured still." 

Then turned he, shouting, to the Minyae, 
Who o'er the gangways rushed tumultuously, 
And from the land great Argo straightway thrust, 
And gat them to their work, hot with the lust 
Of fame and noble deeds, and happy prize. 
But the bird Lynceus took, unto whose eyes 
The night was as the day, and fire as air. 



92 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then back into his marble palace fair 
The king turned, thinking well upon the way 
Of what had happed since morn of yesterday. 

Now from the port passed Argo, and the wind 
Being fair for sailing, quickly left behind 
Fair Salmydessa, the kind, gainful place ; 
And so, with sail and oar, in no long space 
They reached the narrow ending of the sea, 
Where the wind shifted, blowing gustily 
From side to side, so that their flapping sail 
But little in the turmoil could avail ; 
And now at last did they begin to hear 
The pounding of the rocks ; but nothing clear 
They saw them ; for the steaming clouds of spray, 
Cast by the meeting hammers every way, 
Quite hid the polished bases from their sight ; 
Unless perchance the eyes of Lynceus might 
Just now and then behold the deep blue, shine 
Betwixt the scattering of the silver brine ; 
But sometimes 'twixt the clouds the sun would pass 
And show the high rocks glittering like glass, 
Quivering, as far beneath the churned-up waves 
Were ground together the strong arched caves, 
Wherein none dwelt, no, not the giant's brood, 
Who fed the green sea with his lustful blood, 
Nor were sea-devils even nurtured there, 
Nor dared the sea-worm use them for its lair. 

And now the Minyae, as they drew anear, 
Had been at point to turn about for fear, 
Each man beholding his pale fellow's face, 
Whose speech was silenced in that dreadful place 
By the increasing clamour of the sea 
And adamantine rocks ; then verily 
Was Juno good at heed, who set strange fire 
In Jason's heart, and measureless desire 



OF JASON. 93 

To be the first of men, and made his voice 

Clear as that herald's whose sweet words rejoice 

The Gods within the flowery fields of Heaven, 

And gave his well-knit arm the strength of seven. 

So then, above the crash and thundering, 

The Minyae heard his shrill, calm voice, crying : 

" Shall this be, then, an ending to our quest % 

And shall we find the worst, who sought the best? 

Far better had ye sat beside your wives, 

And 'mid the wine-cups lingered out your lives, 

Dreaming of noble deeds, though trying none, 

Than as vain boasters, with your deed undone, 

Come back to Greece, that men may sing of you. 

Are ye all shameless ? are there not a few 

Who have slain fear, knowing the unmoved fates 

Have meted out already what awaits 

The coward and the brave? Ho ! Lynceus ! stand 

Upon the prow, and let slip from your hand 

The wise king's bird ; and all ye note, the wind 

Is steady now, and blowing from behind 

Drives us on toward the dashers, and I hold 

The helm myself; therefore, lest we be rolled 

Broadside against these horrors, take the oar, 

And hang here, half a furlong from the shore, 

Nor die of fear, until at least we know 

If through these gates the Gods will let us go : 

And if so be they will not, yet will we 

Not empty-handed come to Thessaly, 

But strike for Ja through this unknown land, 

Whose arms reach out to us on either hand." 

Then they for shame began to cast off* fear, 
And, handling well the oars, kept Argo near 
The changing, little-lighted, spray-washed space 
W T hereunto Lynceus set his eager face, 
And loosed the dove, who down the west wind flew ; 

9* 



94 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then all the others lost her, dashing through 
The clouds of spray, but Lynceus noted how 
She reached the open space, just as a blow 
Had spent itself, and still the hollow sound 
Of the last clash was booming all around ; 
And eagerly he noted how the dove 
Stopped 'mazed, and hovered for awhile above 
The troubled sea, then stooping, darted through, 
As the blue gleaming rocks together drew ; 
Then scarce he breathed, until a joyous shout 
He gave, as he beheld her passing out 
Unscathed, above the surface of the sea, 
While back again the rocks drew sluggishly. 

Then back their poised oars whirled, and straight they 
drave 
Unto the opening of the spray-arched cave ; 
But Jason's eyes alone, of all the crew, 
Beheld the sunny sea and cloudless blue, 
Still narrowing, but bright from rock to rock. 

Now as they neared, came the next thundering shock, 
That deafened all, and with an icy cloud 
Hid man from man j but Jason, shouting loud, 
Still clutched the tiller ; and the oars, grasped tight 
By mighty hands, drave on the ship forthright 
Unto the rocks, until, with blinded eyes, 
They blinked one moment at those mysteries 
Unseen before, the next they felt the sun 
Full on their backs, and knew their deed was done. 

Then on their oars they lay, and Jason turned, 
And o'er the rocks beheld how Iris burned 
In fair and harmless many-coloured flame, 
And he beheld the way by which they came 
Wide open, changeless, of its spray-clouds cleared ; 
And though in his bewildered ears he heard 
The tumult yet, that all was stilled he knew, 



OF JASON. 95 

While in and out the unused sea-fowl flew 
Betwixt them, and the now subsiding sea 
Lapped round about their dark feet quietly. 

So, turning to the Minyae, he cried : 
" See ye, fellows, the gates opened wide, 
And chained fast by the Gods, nor think to miss 
The very end we seek, or well-earned bliss 
When once again we feel our country's earth, 
And 'twixt the tears of elders, and the mirth 
Of young men grown to manhood since we left, 
And longing eyes of girls, the fleece, once reft 
From a king's son of Greece, we hang again 
In Neptune's temple, nigh the murmuring main." 

Then all men, with their eyes now cleared of brine, 
Beheld the many-coloured rainbow shine 
Over the rocks, and saw it fade away, 
And saw the opening cleared of sea and spray, 
And saw the green sea lap about the feet 
Of those blue hills, that never more should meet, 
And saw the wondering sea-fowl fly about 
Their much-changed tops ; then, with a mighty shout, 
They rose rejoicing, and poured many a cup 
Of red wine to the Gods, and hoisting up 
The weather-beaten sail, with mirth and song, 
Having good wind at will, then sped along. 

Three days with good hap and fair wind they went, 
That ever at their backs Queen Juno sent, 
But on the fourth day, about noon, they drew 
Unto a new-built city no man knew ; 
No, not the pilot ; so they thought it good 
To arm themselves, and thus in doubtful mood 
Brought Argo to the port, and being come nigh, 
A clear-voiced herald from the land did cry : 
" Whoso ye be, if that ye come in peace, 
King Lycus bids you hail, but if from Greece 



96 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Ye come, and are the folk of whom we hear 
Who make for Colchis, free from any fear 
Then doubly welcome are ye, here take land, 
For everything shall be at your command." 

So without fear they landed at that word, 
And told him who they were, which when he heard, 
Through the fair streets he brought them to the king. 
Who feasted them that night with everything 
That man could wish ; but when on the next day 
They gathered at the port to go away, 
The wind was foul and boisterous, so perforce 
There must they bide, lest they should come to worse. 

And there for fourteen days did they abide, 
And for their pastime oft would wander wide 
About the woods, for slaying of the beasts 
Whereby to furnish forth the royal feasts ; 
But on a day, a closely-hunted boar, 
Turning to bay, smote Idmon very sore, 
So that he died ; poor wretch, who could foresee 
Full many an unknown thing that was to be, 
And yet not this, whose corpse they burnt with fire 
Upon a purple-covered spice-strewn pyre, 
And set his ashes in a marble tomb. 
Neither could Tiphys there escape his doom, 
Who, after suffering many a bitter storm, 
Died bitten of a hidden crawling worm, 
As through the woods he wandered all alone. 
Now he being burned, and laid beneath a stone, 
The wind grew fair for sailing, and the rest 
Bade farewell to the king, and on their quest 
Once more were busied, and began to plough 
The unsteady plain ; for whom Erginus now, 
Great Neptune's son, the brass bound tiller held. 

Now leaving that fair land, nought they beheld 
For seven days but sea and changeful sky, 



OF JASON. 97 

But on the eighth day could Lynceus espy 

A land far off, and nigher as they drew 

A low green shore, backed up by mountains blue, 

Cleft here and there, all saw, 'twixt hope and fear, 

For now it seemed to them they should be near 

The wished-for goal of Ma, and the place 

Where in the great sea Phasis ends his race. 

So, creeping carefully along the beach, 
The mouth of a green river did they reach, 
Cleaving the sands, and on the yellow bar 
The salt waves and the fresh waves were at war, 
As Phryxus erst beheld them, but no man 
Among them e'er had sailed that water wan, 
Now that wise Tiphys lay within his tomb. 

Natheless they, wrapt in that resistless doom 
The fates had woven, turned from off the sea 
Argo's fair head, and rowing mightily 
Drave her across the bar, who with straight keel 
The eddying stream against her bows did feel. 

So, with the wind behind them, and the oars 
Still hard at work, they went betwixt the shores 
Against the ebb, and now full oft espied 
Trim homesteads here and there on either side, 
And fair kine grazing, and much woolly sheep, 
And skin-clad shepherds, roused from mid-day sleep, 
Gazing upon them with scared wondering eyes. 
So now they deemed they might be near their prize ; 
And at the least knew that some town was nigh, 
And thought to hear new tidings presently, 
Which happed indeed, for on the turn of tide, 
At ending of a long reach, they espied 
A city wondrous fair, which seemed indeed 
To bar the river's course ; but, taking heed, 
And drawing nigher, soon found out the case, 
That on an island builded was the place 
The more part of it ; but four bridges fair, 



98 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Set thick with goodly houses everywhere, 
Crossed two and two on each side to the land, 
Whereon was built, with walls on either hand, 
A towered outwork, lest that war should fall 
Upon the land, and midmost of each wall 
A noble gate ; moreover did they note 
About the wharves full many a ship and boat. 
And they beheld the sunlight glistering 
On arms of men and many a warlike thing, 
As nigher to the city they were borne, 
And heard at last some huge deep booming horn 
Sound from a tower o'er the watery way, 
Whose last loud note was taken up straightway 
By many another farther and more near. 

Now when they did therewith loud shouting hear, 
Then Jason bade them arm for what might come, 
" For now," quoth he, " I deem we reach the home 
Of that great marvel we are sworn to seek, 
Nor do I think to find these folk so weak 
That they with few words and a gift or two 
Will give us that for which they did forego 
Fair fame, the love of Gods, and praise of men ; 
Be strong and play the man, I bid you then, 
For certes in none other wise shall ye 
Come back again to grassy Thessaly." 

Then loud they shouted, clean forgetting fear, 
And strong Erginus Argo straight did steer 
On to the port ; but through the crowded waist 
Kan Jason to the high prow, making haste 
To be the first to look upon that throng. 
Shieldless he was, although his fingers strong 
About a sharpened brass-bound spear did meet, 
And as the ashen oars swept on, his feet 
Moved lightly to their cadence under him ; 
So stood he like a God in face and limb. 



OF JASON. 99 

Now drawing quickly nigh the landing-place, 
Little by little did they slack their pace, 
Till half a bowshot from the shore they lay ; 
Then Jason shouted : " What do ye to-day 
All armed, warriors ? and what town is this 
That here by seeming ye have little bliss 
Of quiet life, but, smothered up in steel, 
Ye needs must meet each harmless merchant keel 
That nears your haven, though perchance it bring 
Good news, and many a much-desired thing 
That ye may get good cheap ? and such are we, 
But wayfarers upon the troublous sea, 
Careful of that stored up within our hold, 
Phoenician scarlet, spice, and Indian gold, 
Deep dyeing-earths, and woad and cinnabar, 
Wrought arms and vessels, and all things that are 
Desired much by dwellers in all lands j 
Nor doubt us friends, although indeed our hands 
Lack not for weapons, for the unfenced head, 
Where we have been, soon lies among the dead." 

So spake he with a smiling face, nor lied ; 
For he, indeed, was purposed to have tried 
To win the fleece neither by war or stealth ; 
But by an open hand and heaps of wealth, 
If so it might be, bear it back again, 
Nor with a handful fight a host in vain. 

But being now silent, at the last he saw 
A stir among those folk, who 'gan to draw 
Apart to right and left, leaving a man 
Alone amidst them, unarmed, with a wan 
And withered face, and black beard mixed with grey 
That swept his girdle, who these words did say : 

" seafarers, I give you now to know 
That on this town oft falletb many a foe, 
Therefore not lightly may folk take the land 
With helm on head, and naked steel in hand ; 



ioo THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Now, since indeed ye folk are but a few, 

We fear you not, yet fain would that we knew 

Your names and countries, since within this town 

Of iEa may a good man lay him down 

And fear for nought, at least while I am king, 

iEetes, born to heed full many a thing." 

Now Jason, hearing this desired name 
He thought to hear, grown hungrier for fame, 
With eager heart, and fair face flushed for pride, 
Said : " King iEetes, if not over wide 
My name is known, that yet may come to be, 
For I am Jason of the Minyse, 
And through great perils have I come from Greece ; 
And now, since this is iEa, and the fleece 
Thou slayedst once a guest to get, hangs up 
Within thine house, take many a golden cup, 
And arms, and dyestufTs, cloth, and spice, and gold, 
Yea, all the goods that lie within our hold ; 
Which are not mean, for neither have we come 
Leaving all things of price shut up at home, 
Nor have we seen the faces of great kings 
And left them giftless ; therefore take these things 
And be our friend ; or, few folk as we are, 
The Gods and we may bring thee bitter care." 

Then spake iEetes : " Not for any word, 
Or for the glitter of thy bloodless sword, 
O youngling, will I give the fleece to thee, 
Nor yet for gifts, for what are such to me ? 
Behold, if all thy folk joined hand to hand, 
They should not, striving, be enough to stand 
And girdle round my bursting treasure-house ; 
Yet, since of this thing thou art amorous, 
And I love men, and hold the Gods in fear, 
If thou and thine will land, then mayst thou hear 
What great things thou must do to win the fleece ; 
Then, if thou wilt not dare it, go in peace. 



OF JASON. 101 

But come now, thou shalt hear it amidst wine 
And lovely things, and songs well-nigh divine, 
And all the feasts that thou hast shared erewhile 
With other kings, to mine shall be but vile. 
Lest thou shouldst name me, coming to thy land, 
A poor guest-fearing man, of niggard hand." 

So spake he outwardly, but inly thought, 
" Within two days this lading shall be brought 
To lie amongst my treasures with the best, 
While 'neath the earth these robbers lie at rest." 

But Jason said : " King, if these things be such 
As man may do, I shall not fear them much, 
And at thy board will I feast merrily 
To-night, if on the morrow I must die ; 
And yet, beware of treason, since for nought 
Such lives as ours by none are lightly bought. 

" Draw on, heroes, to the shore, if ye 
Are willing still this great king's house to see." 

Thereat was Argo brought up to the shore, 
And straight all landed from her, less and more, 
And the king spake to Jason honeyed words, 
And idle were all spears, and sheathed all swords, 
As toward the palace they were gently brought. 
But Jason, smiling outwardly, yet thought 
Within his heart: "All this is fair enow, 
Yet do I think it but an empty show ; 
Natheless, until the end comes, will not I, 
Like a bad player, spoil the bravery 
By breaking out before they call my turn, 
And then of me some mastery they may learn." 

Amidst these thoughts, between the fair streets led, 
He noted well the size and goodly head 
Of all the houses, and the folk well clad, 
And armed as though good store of wealth they had, 
Peering upon them with a wondering gaze. 
10 



102 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

At last a temple, built in ancient days 

Ere iEa was a town, they came unto ; 

Huge was it, but not fair unto tbe view 

Of one beholding from without, but round 

The ancient place they saw a spot of ground 

Where laurels grew each side the temple door, 

And two great images set up before 

The brazen doors, whereof the one was She, 

Who draws this way and that the fitful sea ; 

The other the great God, the Life of man, 

Who makes the brown earth green, the green earth wan, 

From spring to autumn, through quick following days, 

The lovely archer with his crown of rays. 

Now over against this temple, towering high 
Above all houses, rose majestically 
iEetes' marble house : silent it stood, 
Brushed round by doves, though many a stream of blood 
Had trickled o'er its stones since it was built, 
But now, unconscious of all woe and guilt, 
It drank the sunlight that fair afternoon. 

Then spake iEetes : " Stranger, thou shalt soon 
Hear all thou wouldst hear in my house of gold ; 
Yet ere thou enterest the door, behold 
That ancient temple of the Far Darter, 
And know that thy desire hangeth there, 
Against the gold wall of the inmost shrine, 
Guarded by seven locks, whose keys are thine 
When thou hast done what else thou hast to do, 
And thou mayst well be bold to come thereto." 

" King," said the prince, "fear not, but do thy part, 
Nor look to see me turn back faint of heart, 
Though I may die as my forefathers died, 
Who, living long, their loved souls' failed to hide 
From death at last, however wise they were. 
But verily, King, thy house is fair, 



OF JASON. 103 

And here I think to see full many a thing 

Men love ; so, whatso the next day may bring, 

Eight merrily shall pass these coming hours 

Amidst fair things and wine-cups crowned with flowers." 

" Enter, guests," the king said, " and doubt not 
Ye shall see things to make the heart grow hot 
With joy and longing." 

As he spoke, within 
Blew up the horns, as when a king doth win 
His throne at last, and from behind, the men 
Who hedged the heroes in, shouted as when 
He stands up on his throne, hidden no more. 
Then those within threw open wide the door, 
And straight the king took Jason by the hand, 
And entered, and the Minyae did stand 
In such a hall as there has never been 
Before or afterwards, since Ops was queen. 

The pillars, made the mighty roof to hold, 
The one was silver and the next was gold, 
All down the hall ; the roof, of some strange wood 
Brought over sea, was dyed as red as blood, 
Set thick with silver flowers, and delight 
Of intertwining figures wrought aright. 
With richest webs the marble walls were hung, 
Picturing sweet stories by the poets sung 
From ancient days, so that no wall seemed there, 
But rather forests black and meadows fair, 
And streets of well-built towns, with tumbling seas 
About their marble wharves and palaces ; 
And fearful crags and mountains ; and all trod 
By many a changing foot of nymph and Grod, 
Spear-shaking warrior and slim-ankled maid. 

The floor, moreover, of the place was laid 
With coloured stones, wrought like a flowery mead ; 
And ready to the hand for every need : 
Midmost the hall, two fair streams trickled down 



104 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

O'er wondrous gem-like pebbles, green and brown, 
Betwixt smooth banks of marble, and therein 
Bright-colonred fish shone through the water thin. 

Now 'midst these wonders were there tables spread, 
"Whither the wondering seafarers were led, 
And there with meat and drink full delicate 
Were feasted, and strange dainty things they ate, 
Of unused savour, and drank godlike wine ; 
While from the golden galleries, divine, 
Heart-softening music breathed about the place ; 
And 'twixt the pillars, at a gentle pace, 
Passed lovely damsels, raising voices sweet 
And shrill unto the music, while their feet 
From thin dusk raiment now and then would gleam 
Upon the polished edges of the stream. 

Long sat the Minyae there, and for their parts 
Few words they said, because, indeed, their hearts, 
O'er-burdened with delight, still dreaded death ; 
Nor did they think that they might long draw breath 
In such an earthly Paradise as this, 
But looked to find sharp ending to their bliss. 



BOOK VII. 

SO long they sat, until at last the sun 
Sank in the sea, and noisy day was done. 
Then bade JEetes light the place, that they 
Might turn grim-looking night into the day ; 
Whereon, the scented torches being brought, 
As men with shaded eyes the shadows sought, 
Turning to Jason, spake the king these words : 

" Dost thou now wonder, guest, that with sharp swords 
And mailed breasts of men I fence myself, 



OF JASON. 105 

Not as a pedlar guarding his poor pelf, 

But as a God shutting the door of heaven? 

Behold ! Prince, for threescore years and seven 

Have I dwelt here in bliss, nor dare I give 

The fleece to thee, lest I should cease to live ; 

Nor dare I quite this treasure to withhold, 

Lest to the Gods I seem grown over-bold ; 

For many a cunning man I have, to tell 

Divine foreshowings of the oracle, 

And thus they warn me. Therefore shalt thou hear 

What well may fill a hero's heart with fear ; 

But not from my old lips ; that thou mayst have, 

Whether thy life thou here wilt spill or save, 

At least one joy before thou comest to die : 

Ho, ye, bid in my lady presently ! " 

But Jason, wondering what should come of this, 
With heart well steeled to suffer woe or bliss, 
Sat waiting, while within the music ceased, 
But from without a strain rose and increased, 
Till shrill and clear it drew anigh the hall, 
But silent at the entry did it fall ; 
And through the place there was no other sound 
But falling of light footsteps on the ground, 
For at the door a band of maids was seen, 
Who went up towards the dais, a lovely queen 
Being in their midst, who, coming nigh the place 
Where the king sat, passed at a gentle pace 
Alone before the others to the board, 
And said : " iEetes, father, and good lord, 
What is it thou wouldst have of me to-night ? " 

" daughter," said iEetes, " tell aright 
Unto this king's son here, who is my guest, 
What things he must accomplish, ere his quest 
Is finished, who has come this day to seek 
The golden fell brought hither by the Greek, 
The son of Athamas, the unlucky king, 
10* 



106 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

That he may know at last for what a thing 
He left the meadowy land and peaceful stead." 

Then she to Jason turned her golden head, 
And reaching out her lovely arm, took up 
From off the board a rich fair-jewelled cup, 
And said : "0 Prince, these hard things must ye do : 
First, going to their stall, bring out the two 
Great brazen bulls, the king my father feeds 
On grass of Pontus and strange-nurtured seeds ; 
Nor heed what they may do, but take the plough 
That in their stall stands ever bright enow, 
And on their gleaming necks cast thou the yoke, 
And drive them as thou mayst, with cry and stroke, 
Through the grey acre of the God of War. 

" Then, when turned up the long straight furrows are, 
Take thou the sack that holds the serpent's teeth 
Our fathers slew upon the sunless heath ; 
There sow those evil seeds, and bide thou there 
Till they send forth a strange crop, nothing fair, 
Which garner thou, if thou canst 'scape from death. 

" But if thereafter still thou drawest breath, 
Then shalt thou have the seven keys of the shrine 
Wherein the beast's fair golden locks yet shine ; 
But yet sing not the song of triumph then, 
Or think thyself the luckiest of men ; 
For just within the brazen temple-gates 
The guardian of the fleece for ever waits, 
A fork-tongued dragon, charmed for evermore 
To writhe and wallow on the precious floor, 
Sleepless, upon whose skin no steel will bite. 

" If then with such an one thou needs must fight, 
Or knowest arts to tame him, do thy worst, 
Nor, carrying off the prize, shalt thou be cursed 
By us or any God. But yet, think well 
If these three things be not impossible 
To any man ; and make a bloodless end 



OF JASON. 107 

Of this thy quest, and as my father's friend 
Well gifted, in few days return in peace, 
Lacking for nought, forgetful of the fleece." 

Therewith she made an end ; but while she spoke 
Came Love unseen, and cast his golden yoke 
About them both, and sweeter her voice grew, 
And softer ever, as betwixt them flew, 
With fluttering wings, the new-born, strong desire ; 
And when her eyes met his grey eyes, on fire 
With that that burned her, then with sweet new shame 
Her fair face reddened, and there went and came 
Delicious tremors through her. But he said : 

" A bitter song thou singest, royal maid, 
Unto a sweet tune ; yet doubt not that I 
To-morrow this so certain death will try ; 
And dying, may perchance not pass unwept, 
And with sweet memories may my name be kept, 
That men call Jason of the Minyae." 

Then said she, trembling : " Take, then, this of me, 
And drink in token that thy life is passed, 
And that thy reckless hand the die has cast." 

Therewith she reached the cup to him, but he 
Stretched out his hand, and took it joyfully, 
As with the cup he touched her dainty hand, 
Nor was she loth, awhile with him to stand, 
Forgetting all else in that honeyed pain. 

At last she turned, and with head raised again 
He drank, and swore for nought to leave that quest 
Till he had reached the worst end or the best ; 
And down the hall the clustering Minyae 
Shouted for joy his godlike face to see. 
But she, departing, made no further sign 
Of her desires ; but, while with song and wine 
They feasted till the fevered night was late, 
Within her chamber sat, made blind by fate. 



108 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But, when all hushed and still the palace grew, 
She put her gold robes off, and on her drew 
A dusky gown, and with a wallet small 
And cutting wood-knife girt herself withal, 
And from her dainty chamber softly passed 
Through stairs and corridors, until at last 
She came down to a gilded Watergate, 
Which with a golden key she opened straight, 
And swiftly stept into a little boat, 
And, pushing off from shore, began to float 
Adown the stream, and with her tender hands 
And half-bared arms, the wonder of all lands, 
Rowed strongly through the starlit gusty night 
As though she knew the watery way aright. 

So, from the city being gone apace, 
Turning the boat's head, did she near a space, 
Where, by the water's edge, a thick yew wood 
Made a black blot on the dim gleaming flood ; 
But when she reached it, dropping either oar 
Upon the grassy bank, she leapt ashore, 
And to a yew-bough made the boat's head fast. 
Then here and there quick glances did she cast, 
And listened, lest some wanderer should be nigh. 
Then by the river's side she tremblingly 
Undid the bands that bound her yellow hair 
And let it float about her, and made bare 
Her shoulder and right arm, and, kneeling down, 
Drew off her shoes, and girded up her gown, 
And in the river washed her silver feet 
And trembling hands, and then turned round to meet 
The yew-wood's darkness, gross and palpable, 
As though she made for some place known full well. 

Beneath her feet the way was rough enow, 
And often would she meet some trunk or bough, 
And draw back shrinking, then press on again 
With eager steps, not heeding fear or pain ; 



OF JASON. 109 

At last an open space she came unto, 
Where the faint glimmering starlight, shining through, 
Showed in the midst a circle of smooth grass, 
Through which, from dark to dark, a stream did pass, 
And all around was darkness like a wall. 

So, kneeling there, she let the wallet fall, 
And from it drew a bundle of strange wood 
Wound all about with strings as red as blood ; 
Then breaking these, into a little pyre 
The twigs she built, and swiftly kindling fire, 
Set it alight, and with her head bent low 
Sat patiently, and watched the red flames grow 
Till it burned bright and lit the dreary place ; 
Then, leaving it, she went a little space 
Into the shadow of the circling trees 
With wood-knife drawn, and whiles upon her knees 
She dropt, and sweeping the sharp knife around, 
Took up some scarce-seen thing from off the ground 
And thrust it in her bosom, and at last 
Into the darkness of the trees she passed. 

Meanwhile, the fire burned with clear red flame, 
Not wasting aught ; but when again she came 
Into its light, within her caught-up gown 
Much herbs she had, and on her head a crown 
Of dank night-flowering grasses, known to few. 

But, casting down the mystic herbs, she drew 
From out her wallet a bowl polished bright, 
Brazen, and wrought with figures black and white, 
Which from the stream she filled with water thin, 
And, kneeling by the fire, cast therein 
Shreddings of many herbs, and setting it 
Amidst the flames, she watched them curl and flit 
About the edges of the blackening brass. 
But when strange fumes began therefrom to pass, 
And clouds of thick white smoke about her flew, 
And colourless and dull the fire grew, 



HO THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Unto her fragrant breast her hand she set, 

And drew therefrom a bag of silken fret, 

x\nd into her right palm she gently shook 

Three grains of something small that had the look 

Of millet seeds, then laid the bag once more 

On that sweet hidden place 'it kissed before, 

And, lifting up her right hand, murmured low : 

u Three-formed, Venerable, dost thou know 
That I have left to-night my golden bed 
On the sharp pavement of thy wood to shed 
Blood from my naked feet, and from mine eyes 
Intolerable tears ; to pour forth sighs 
In the thick darkness, as with footsteps weak 
And trembling knees I prowl about to seek 
That which I need forsooth, but fear to find? 
What wouldest thou, my Lady? art thou blind, 
Or sleepest thou, or dost thou, dread one, see 
About me somewhat that misliketh thee ? 
What crown but thine is on mine unbound hair, 
What jewel on mine arms, or have I care 
Against the flinty windings of thy wood 
To guard my feet ? or have I thought it good 
To come before thee with unwashen hands ? 

"And this my raiment : Goddess, from three lands 
The fleeces it was woven with were brought 
Where deeds of thine in ancient days were wrought, 
Delos, and Argos, and the Carian mead ; 
Nor was it made, Groddess, with small heed ; 
By unshod maidens was the yarn well spun, 
And at the moonrise the close web begun, 
And finished at the dawning of the light. 

" Nought hides me from the unseen eyes of night 
But this alone : what dost thou then to me, 
That at my need my flame sinks wretchedly, 
And all is vain I do ? Ah, is it so 



OF JASON. 1 1 1 

That to some other helper I must go 
Better at need ? wilt thou then take my part 
Once more, and pity my divided heart? 
For never was I vowed to thee alone, 
Nor didst thou bid me take the tight-drawn zone, 
And follow through the twilight of the trees 
The glancing limbs of trim-shod huntresses. 
Therefore, look down upon me, and see now 
These grains of what thou knowest, I will throw 
Upon the flame, and then, if at my need 
Thou still wilt help me, help ; but if indeed 
I am forsaken of thee utterly, 
The naked knees of Yenus will I try ; 
And I may hap ere long to please her well, 
And one more story they may have to tell 
Who in the flowery isle her praises sing." 

So speaking, on the fire did she fling 
The unknown grains ; but when the Three-formed heard 
From out her trembling lips that impious word, 
She granted all her asking, though she knew 
What evil road Medea hurried to 
She fain had barred against her on that night. 
So, now again the fire flamed up bright, 
The smoke grew thin, and in the brazen bowl, 
Boiling, the mingled herbs did twine and roll, 
And with new light Medea's wearied eyes 
Gleamed in the fireshine o'er those mysteries ; 
And, taking a green twig from off the ground, 
Therewith she stirred the mess, that cast around 
A shower of hissing sparks and vapour white, 
Sharp to the taste, and 'wildering to the sight ; 
Which when she saw, the vessel off she drew, 
As though the ending of her toil she knew, 
And cooling for a while she let it stand, 
But at the last therein she laid her hand, 



112 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And when she drew it out she thrust the same 
Amidst the fire, but neither coal or flame 
The tender rosy hand could harm a whit, 
Nor was there mark or blemish left on it. 

Then did she pour whatso the bowl did hold 
Into a fair gemmed phial wrought of gold 
She drew out from the wallet, and straightway 
Stopping the mouth, in its own place did lay 
The well-wrought phial, girding to her side 
The wallet that the precious thing did hide ; 
Then all the remnants of the herbs she cast 
On to the fire, and straight therefrom there passed 
A high white flame, and when that sunk, outright 
The fire died into the voiceless night. 

But toward the river did she turn again, 
Not heeding the rough ways or any pain, 
But running swiftly came unto her boat, 
And in the mid-stream soon was she afloat, 
Drawn onward toward the town by flood of tide. 

Nor heeded she that by the river side 
Still lay her golden shoes, a goodly prize 
To some rough fisher in whose sleepy eyes 
They first should shine, the while he drew his net 
Against the yew wood of the Goddess set. 

But she, swept onward by the hurrying stream, 
Down in the east beheld a doubtful gleam 
That told of dawn j so bent unto the oar 
In terror lest her folk should wake before 
Her will was wrought ; nor failed she now to hear 
From neighbouring homesteads shrilly notes and clear 
Of waking cocks, and twittering from the sedge 
Of restless birds about the river's edge ; 
And when she drew within the city walls, 
She heard the hollow sound of rare footfalls 




OF JASON. 



From men who needs must wake for that or this 
While upon sleepers gathered dreams of bliss, 
Or great distress at ending of the night, 
And grey things coloured with the gathering light. 

At last she reached the gilded water-gate, 
And though nigh breathless, scarce she dared to wait 
To fasten up her shallop to the stone, 
Which yet she dared not leave ; so this being done, 
Swiftly by passages and stairs she ran, 
Trembling and pale, though not yet seen by man, 
Until to Jason's chamber door she came. 

And there awhile indeed she stayed, for shame 
Rose up against her fear ; but mighty love 
And the sea-haunting rose-crowned seed of Jove 
O'ermastered both ; so trembling, on the pin 
She laid her hand, but ere she entered in 
She covered up again her shoulder sweet, 
And dropped her dusky raiment o'er her feet ; 
Then entering the dimly-lighted room, 
Where with the lamp dawn struggled, through the gloom, 
Seeking the prince she peered, who sleeping lay 
Upon his gold bed, and abode the day 
Smiling, still clad in arms, and round his sword 
His fingers met ; then she, with a soft word, 
Drew nigh him, and from out his slackened hand 
With slender rosy fingers drew the brand, 
Then kneeling, laid her hand upon his breast, 
And said : " Jason, wake up from thy rest, 
Perchance from thy last rest, and speak to me." 

Then fell his light sleep from him suddenly, 
And on one arm he rose, and clenched his hand, 
Raising it up, as though it held the brand, 
And on this side and that began to stare. 

But bringing close to him her visage fair, 
She whispered : " Smite not, for thou hast no sword, 
11 



H4 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Speak not above thy breath, for one loud word 
May slay both thee and me. Day grows apace ; 
What day thou knowest ! Canst thou see ray face ? 
Last night thou didst behold it with such eyes, 
That I, Medea, wise among the wise, 
The safeguard of my father and his land, 
Who have been used with steady eyes to stand 
In awful groves alone with Hecate, 
Henceforth must call myself the bond of thee, 
The fool of love ; speak not, but kiss me, then, 
Yea, kiss my lips, that not the best of men 
Has touched ere thou. Alas, quick comes the day ! 
Draw back, but hearken what I have to say, 
For every moment do I dread to hear 
Thy wakened folk, or our folk drawing near ; 
Therefore I speak as if with my last breath, 
Shameless, beneath the shadowing wings of death, 
That still may let us twain again to meet, 
And snatch from bitter love the bitter sweet 
That some folk gather while they wait to die. 

" Alas, I loiter, and the day is nigh ! 
Soothly I came to bring thee more than this, 
The memory of an unasked fruitless kiss 
Upon thy death-day, which this day would be 
If there were not some little help in me." 

Therewith from out her wallet did she draw 
The phial, and a crystal without flaw 
Shaped like an apple, scored with words about, 
Then said : " But now I bid thee have no doubt. 
With this oil hidden by these gems and gold 
Anoint thine arms and body, and be bold, 
Nor fear the fire-breathing bulls one whit, 
Such mighty virtue have I drawn to it, 
Whereof I give thee proof." Therewith her hand 
She thrust into the lamp-flame that did stand 
Anigh the bed, and showed it him again 
Unscarred by any wound or drawn with pain, 



OF JASON. 115 

Then said : " Now, when Mars' plain is ploughed at last, 

And in the furrows those ill seeds are cast, 

Take thou this ball in hand and watch the thing ; 

Then shalt thou see a horrid crop upspring 

Of all-armed men therefrom to be thy bane, 

Were I not here to make their fury vain. 

Draw not thy sword against them as they rise, 

But cast this ball amid them, and their eyes 

Shall serve them then but little to see thee, 

And each of others' weapons slain shall be. 

" Now will my father hide his rage at heart, 
And praise thee much that thou hast played thy part, 
And bid thee to a banquet on this night, 
And pray thee wait until to-morrow's light 
Before thou tryest the Temple of the Fleece. 
Trust not to him, but see that unto Greece 
The ship's prow turns, and all is ready there. 
And at the banquet let thy men forbear 
The maddening wine, and bid them arm them all 
For what upon this night may chance to fall. 

" Now will I get by stealth the keys that hold 
The seven locks which guard the Fleece of Gold ; 
And while we try the fleece, let thy men steal, 
How so they may, unto thy ready keel, 
Thus art thou saved alive with thy desire. 

" But what thing will be left to me but fire ? 
The fire of fierce despair within my heart, 
The while I reap my guerdon for my part, 
Curses and torments, and in no long space 
Heal fire of pine-wood in some rocky place, 

Wreathing around my body greedily, 
A dreadful beacon o'er the leaden sea." 
But Jason drew her to him, and he said : 
" Nay, by these tender hands and golden head, 
That saving things for me have wrought to-night, 



Il6 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

I know not what ; by this unseen delight 
Of thy fair body, may I rather burn, 
Nor may the flame die ever if I turn 
Back to my hollow ship, and leave thee here, 
Who in one hour art become so dear, 
Thy limbs so longed for, that at last I know 
Why men have been content to suffer woe 
Past telling, if the Gods but granted this, 
A little while such lips as thine to kiss, 
A little while to drink such deep delight. 

" What wouldst thou? Wilt thou go from me ? The light 
Is grey and tender yet, and in your land 
Surely the twilight, lingering long, doth stand 
'Twixt dawn and day." 

" Prince," she said, " I came 
To save your life. I cast off fear and shame 
A little while, but fear and shame are here. 
The hand thou holdest trembles with my fear, 
With shame my cheeks are burning, and the sound 
Of mine own voice : but ere this hour comes round, 
We twain will be betwixt the dashing oars, 
The ship still making for the Grecian shores. 
Farewell, till then, though in the lists to-day 
Thyself shalt see me, watching out the play." 

Therewith she drew off from him, and was gone, 
And in the chamber Jason left alone, 
Praising the heavenly one, the Queen of Jove, 
Pondered upon this unasked gift of love, 
And all the changing wonder of his life. 

But soon he rose to fit him for the strife, 
And ere the sun his orb began to lift 
O'er the dark hills, with fair Medea's gift 
His arras and body he anointed well. 
And round about his neck he hung the spell 
Against the earth-born, the fair crystal ball 
Laid in a purse, and then from wall to wall, 



OF JASON. 117 

Athwart the chamber paced full eagerly, 
Expecting when the fateful time should be. 

Meanwhile, Medea coming to her room 
Unseen, lit up the slowly parting gloom 
With scented torches : then bound up her hair, 
And stripped the dark gown from her body fair, 
And laid it with the brass bowl in a chest, 
Where many a day it had been wont to rest, 
Brazen and bound with iron, and whose key 
No eye but hers had ever happed to see. 

Then wearied, on her bed she cast her down, 
And strove to think ; but soon the uneasy frown 
Faded from off her brow, her lips closed tight 
But now, just parted, and her fingers white 
Slackened their hold upon the coverlit, 
And o'er her face faint smiles began to flit, 
As o'er the summer pool the faint soft air. 
So instant and so kind the God was there. 



BOOK VIII. 

NOW when she woke again the bright sun glared 
In at the window, and the trumpets blared, 
Shattering the sluggish air of that hot day, 
For fain the king would be upon his way. 
Then straight she called her maidens, who forthright 
Did due observance to her body white, 
And clad her in the raiment of a queen, 
And round her crown they set a wreath of green. 

But she descending, came into the hall, 
And found her father clad in royal pall, 
Holding the ivory rod of sovereignty, 
And Jason and his folk were standing by, 
11* 



n8 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Now was iEetes saying : " Minyae, 
And you, my people, who are here by me, 
Take heed, that by his wilful act to-day 
This man will perish, neither will I slay 
One man among you. Nay, Prince, if you will, 
A safe return I give unto you still." 

But Jason answered, smiling in his joy : 
" Once more, JEetes, nay. Against this toy 
My life is pledged, let all go to the end." 
Then, lifting up his eyes, he saw his friend, 
Made fresh, and lovelier by her quiet rest, 
And set his hand upon his mailed breast, 
Where in its covering lay the crystal ball. 

But the king said : " Then let what will fall, fall ! 
Since time it is that we were on the way ; 
And thou, daughter, shalt be there to-day, 
And see thy father's glory once more shown 
Before our folk and those the wind has blown 
From many lands to see this play played out." 

Then raised the Colchians a mighty shout, 
And doubtful grew the Minyas of the end, 
Unwitting who on that day was their friend. 
But down the hall the king passed, who did hold 
Medea's hand, and on a car of gold 
They mounted, drawn anigh the carven door, 
And spearmen of the Colchians went before 
And followed after, and the Minyge 
Set close together followed solemnly, 
Headed by Jason, at the heels of these. 

So passed they through the streets and palaces 
Thronged with much folk, and o'er the bridges passed, 
And to the open country came at last, 
Nor there went far, but turning to the right, 
Into a close they came, where there were dight 
Long galleries about the fateful stead, 
Built all of marble fair and roofed with lead, 



OF JASON. 119 

And carved about with stories of old time, 
And all around them golden lines of rhyme. 
Moreover, midmost was an image made 
Of mighty Mars who maketh kings afraid, 
That looked down on an altar builded fair, 
Wherefrom already did a fire glare 
And made the hot air glassy with its heat. 

So in the gallery did the king take seat 
With fair Medea, and the Colchians stood 
Hedging the twain in with a mighty wood 
Of spears and axes, while the Minyae 
Stood off a space the fated things to see. 

Ugly and rugged was that spot of ground, 
And with an iron wall was closed around, 
And at the farther end a monstrous cage 
Of iron bars shut in the stupid rage 
Of those two beasts, and therefrom ever came 
The flashing and the scent of sulphurous flame, 
As with their brazen, clangorous bellowing 
They hailed the coming of the Colchian king ; 
Nor was there one of the seafaring men 
But trembled, gazing on the deadly pen, 
But Jason only, who before the rest 
Shone like a star, having upon his breast 
A golden corslet from the treasury 
Of wise king Phineus by the doubtful sea, 
By an Egyptian wrought who would not stay 
At Salmydessa more than for a day, 
But on that day the wondrous breast-plate wrought, 
Which, with good will and strong help, Jason bought ; 
And from that treasury his golden shoe 
Came, and his thighs the king's gift covered too j 
But on his head his father's helm was set 
Wreathed round with bay leaves, and his sword lay yet 
Within the scabbard, while his ungloved hand 
Bore nought within it but an olive wand. 



120 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Now King iEetes well beholding him, 
Fearless of mien and so unmatched of limb, 
Trembled a little in his heart as now 
He bade the horn-blowers the challenge blow, 
But thought, ' What strength can help him, or what heart, 
Or which of all the Gods be on his part ? ' 
Impious, who knew not through what doubtful days, 
E'en from his birth, and perilous rough ways, 
Juno had brought him safely, nor indeed 
Of his own daughter's quivering lips took heed, 
And restless hands wherein the God so wrought, 
The wise man seeing her had known her thought. 

Now Jason, when he heard the challenge blow, 
Across the evil fallow 'gan to go 
With face beyond its wont in nowise pale, 
Nor footstep faltering, if that might avail 
The doomed man aught; so to the cage he came, 
Whose bars now glowed red hot with spouted flame, 
In many a place ; nor doubted any one 
Who there beheld him that his days were done, 
Except his love alone, and even she, 
Sickening with doubt and terror, scarce could see 
The hero draw the brazen bolt aside, 
And throw the glowing wicket open wide. 

But he alone, apart from his desire, 
Stood unarmed, facing those two founts of tire, 
Yet feared not aught, for hope and fear were dead 
Within his heart, and utter hardihead 
Had Juno set there j but the awful beasts 
Beholding now the best of all their feasts, 
Boared in their joy and fury, till from sight 
They and the prince were hidden by the white, 
Thick rolling clouds of sulphurous pungent smoke, 
Through which upon the blinded man they broke. 

But when within a yard of him they came, 



OF JASON. 121 

Baffled they stopped, still bellowing, and the flame 

Still spouting out from nostril and from mouth, 

As from some island mountain in the south 

The trembling mariners behold it cast ; 

But still to right and left of him it passed, 

Breaking upon him as cool water might, 

Nor harming more, except that from his sight 

All corners of the cage were hidden now, 

Nor knew he where to seek the brazen plough ; 

As to and fro about the quivering cage 

The monsters rushed in helpless and blind rage. 

But as he doubted, to his eyes alone 
Within the place a golden light outshone, 
Scattering the clouds of smoke, and he beheld 
Once more the Goddess who his head upheld 
In rough Anaurus on that other tide ; 
She, smiling on him, beckoned, and 'gan glide 
With rosy feet across the fearful floor, 
Breathing cool odours round her, till a door 
She opened to him in the iron wall, 
Through which he passed, and found a grisly stall 
Of iron still, and at one end of it, 
By glimmering lamps with greenish flame half lit, 
Beheld the yoke and shining plough he sought ; 
Which, seizing straight, by mighty strength he brought 
Unto the door, nor found the Goddess there. 

Who in the likeness of a damsel fair, 
Colchian Metharma, through the spearmen passed, 
Bearing them wine, and causeless terror cast 
Into their foolish hearts, nor spared to go 
And 'mid the close seafaring ranks to sow 
Good hope of joyful ending, and then stood 
Behind the maid unseen, and brought the blood 
Back to her cheeks and trembling lips and wan, 
With thoughts of things unknown to maid or man. 

Meanwhile upon the foreheads of the twain 
Had Jason cast the yoke with little pain, 



122 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And drove them now with shouts out through the door 
Which in such guise ne'er had they passed before, 
For never were they made the earth to till, 
But rather, feeding fat, to work the will 
Of some all-knowing man ; but now they went 
Like any peasant's beasts, tamed by the scent 
Of those new herbs Medea's hand had plucked, 
Whose roots from evil earth strange power had sucked. 

Now in the open field did Jason stand 
And to the plough-stilts set his unused hand, 
And down betwixt them lustily he bent ; 
Then the bulls drew, and the bright ploughshare sent 
The loathly fallow up on the right side, 
Whilst o'er their bellowing shrilly Jason cried : 
" Draw nigh, King, and thy new ploughman see, 
Then mayst thou make me shepherd, too, to thee ; 
Nor doubt thou, doing so, from out thy flock 
To lose but one, who ne'er shall bring thee stock, 
Or ram or ewe, nor doubt the grey wolf, King, 
Wood-haunting bear, dragon, or such like thing. 
Ah the straight furrow ! how it mindeth me 
Of the smooth parting of the land-locked sea 
Over against Eubcea, and this fire 
Of the fair altar where my joyful sire 
Will pour out wine to Neptune when I come 
Not empty-handed back unto my home." 

Such mocks he said ; but when the sunlight broke 
Upon his armour through the sulphurous smoke, 
And showed the lengthening furrow cutting through 
The ugly fallow as anigh they drew, 
The joyful Minyas gave a mighty shout ; 
But pale the king sat with brows knit for doubt, 
Muttering : " Whose counsel hast thou taken, then, 
To do this thing, which not the best of men 
Could do unholpen of some sorcery ? 



OF JASON. 123 

Whoso it is, wise were he now to die 

Ere yet I know him, since for many a day 

Vainly for death I hope to hear him pray." 

Meanwhile, askance Medea eyed the king, 
Thinking nought safe until that everything 
Was finished in the Colchian land, and. she 
No more beheld its shores across the sea ; 
But he, beholding her pale visage, thought 
Grief like to his such paleness on her brought, 
And turning to her, said : " How pale thou art ! 
Yet let not this first foil go to thine heart 
Too deeply, since thou knowest certainly, 
One way or other this vain fool must die." 
" Father," she said, " a doubt is on me still, 
Some God this is come here our wealth to spill ; 
Nor is this first thing easier than the rest." 
Then stammering, she said : " Were it not best 
To give him that which he must have at last, 
Before he slays us?" But JEetes cast 
A sharp glance at her, and a pang shot through 
His weary heart as half the truth he knew. 
But for one moment, as he made reply 
In passionate words : " Then, daughter, let me die ! 
And, ere I die, beheld thee led along 
A wretched slave to suffer grief and wrong 
In far off lands, and iEa at thy back 
Nought but a huge flame hiding woe and wrack, 
Before from out my willing open hand 
This wonder, and the safeguard of my land 
A God shall take ; and such this man is not. 
What ! dost thou think because his eyes are hot 
On tender maidens he must be a God ? 
Or that because firmly this field he trod 
Well-fenced with magic ? Were he like to me, 
Grey-haired and lean, what Godhead wouldst thou see 
In such an one ? Hold, then, thy peace of this, 



124 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And thou shalt see thy God full widely miss 
The mark he aims at, when from out the earth 
Spring up those brothers of an evil birth." 

And therewithal he gazed at her, and thought 
To see the rosy flush by such words brought 
Across her face ; as in the autumn eve, 
Just as the sun's last half begins to leave 
The shivering world, both east and west are red. 
But calm and pale she turned about her head, 
And said : ' ' My father, neither were these words 
My words, nor would I struggle with my lords ; 
Thou art full wise ; whatso thine heart would have 
That do, and heed me not, who fain would save 
This glory of thy kingdom and of thee. 
But now look up, and soothly thou shalt see 
Mars' acre tilled : the field is ready then, 
Bid them bring forth the seed that beareth men." 

Again with her last words the shouts broke out 
From the seafarers, for, beside the yoke, 
Before Mars' altar did Prince Jason stand, 
Holding the wand of olive in his hand, 
And on the new turned furrow shone the sun 
Behind him, and his half day's work was done. 

And now another marvel : for, behold, 
As at the furrow's end he slacked his hold 
Upon the plough-stilts, all the bellowing 
Wherewith the beasts had made the grim close ring. 
Fell suddenly, and all the fire died 
That they were wont erewhile to scatter wide 
From mouth and nostril, and their loins and knees 
Stiffened, and they grew nought but images 
Lifelike but lifeless, wonderful but dead, 
Such as he makes, who many a day hath fed 
His furnace with the beechwood, when the clay 
Has grown beneath his deft hands day by day 



OF JASON. 125 

And all is ready for the casting, then 

Such things as these he makes for royal men. 

But 'mid the shouts turned Jason to the king, 
And said : " Fair sir, behold a wondrous thing, 
And since these beasts have been content to stay 
Before Mars' altar, from this very day 
His should they be if they were mine to give." 

" Jason," said the king, " well mayst thou live 
For many a day, since thou this deed hast done, 
But for the Gods, not unto any one 
Will I give gifts ; but let them take from me 
What once they gave, if so the thing must be. 
But do thou take this sack from out my hand 
And cast its seed about the new-tilled land, 
And watch the issue ; and keep words till then, 
I counsel thee, luckiest of men." 

Then Jason took the sack, and with it went 
About that field new turned, and broadcast sent 
The white teeth scattering, but or ere he came 
Back to the altar, and the flickering flame, 
He heard from 'neath the earth a muttered sound 
That grew and grew, till all that piece of ground 
Swelled into little hillocks, like as where 
A stricken field was foughten, but that there 
Quiet the heroes' bones lie underneath 
The quivering grasses and the dusky heath ; 
But now these heaps the labouring earth upthrew 
About Mars' acre, ever greater grew, 
And still increased the noise, till none could hear 
His fellow speak, and paleness and great fear 
Fell upon all j and Jason only stood 
As stands the stout oak in the poplar wood 
When winds are blowing. 

Then he saw the mounds 
Bursten asunder, and the muttered sounds 
12 



126 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Changed into loud strange shouts and warlike clang, 
As with freed feet at last the earth-born sprang 
On to the tumbling earth, and the sunlight 
Shone on bright arms clean ready for the fight. 

But terribly they showed, for through the place 
Not one there was but had his staring face, 
With great wide eyes, and lips in a set smile, 
Turned full on Jason, who, for a short while, 
Forgot indeed Medea's warning word, 
And from its golden sheath half drew his sword, 
But then, remembering all, cried valiantly : 
" New born ye are new slain too shall ye be, 
Take this, and round about it read your doom, 
And bid them make new dwellings in the tomb, 
Wherefrom ye came, nor ever should have passed." 

Therewith the ball among the host he cast, 
Standing to watch what next that folk would do. 
But he the ball had smitten turned unto 
The one who stood by him, and like a cup 
Shattered his head ; then the next lifted up 
His axe and slew the slayer, and straightway 
Among the rest began a deadly fray. 

No man gave back a foot, no breathing space 
One took or gave within that dreadful place, 
But where the vanquished stood there was he slain, 
And straight the conquering arm was raised again 
To meet its match and in its turn to fall. 
No tide was there of fainting and recall, 
No quivering pennon o'er their heads to flit, 
Nor name or eager shout called over it, 
No groan of pain, and no despairing cry 
From him who knows his time has come to die, 
But passionless each bore him in that fight, 
Scarce otherwise than as a smith might smite 
On sounding iron or bright glittering brass. 

So, little by little, did the clamour pass 
As one by one each fell down in his place, 



OF JASON. 127 

Until at last, midmost the bloody space, 
One man was left, alive but wounded sore, 
Who, staring round about and seeing no more 
His brothers' spears against him, fixed his eyes 
Upon the queller of those mysteries. 
Then dreadfully they gleamed, and with no word, 
He tottered towards him with uplifted sword. 
But scarce he made three paces down the field, 
Ere chill death reached his heart, and on his shield 
Clattering he fell. So satiate of fight 
Quickly the earth-born were, and their delight 
With what it fed on perished, and one hour 
Ripened the deadly fruit of that fell flower. 

Then Jason, mocking, cried unto the king : 
" wonderful, indeed, must be the thing 
Thou guardest with such wondrous guards as these ; 
Make no delay, therefore, but bring the keys 
That I may see this dear delight of all." 

But on JEetes' face a change did fall, 
As though a mask had been set over it, 
And smiles of little meaning 'gan to flit 
O'er his thin lips, as he spake out at last : 
" No haste, dear guest, for surely now is passed 
All enmity from 'twixt us, since I know 
How like a God thou art ; and thou shalt go 
To-morrow to thy ship, to make for Greece ; 
And with no trial more, bear back the fleece 
Along our streets, and like no conquered thing, 
But with much scattered flowers and tabouring, 
Bearing with it great gifts and all my love ; 
And in return, I pray thee, pray to Jove, 
That I may have a few more years of life, 
And end at last in honour, free from strife. 
And now to-night be merry, and let time 
Be clean forgotten, and bring Saturn's clime 
And golden days upon our flower-crowned brows, 
For of the unseen future what man knows? " 



128 THE LIFE A AD DEATH 

" King," said Jason, " for these words I praise 
Thy wisdom much, and wish thee happy days. 
And I will give thee honour as I can, 
Naming thee ever as a noble man 
Through all the lands I come to : and will take 
Thy gifts, indeed, and thou, for Jason's sake, 
Shalt have gifts too, whatso thy soul may wish, 
From out our keel that has escaped the fish." 

So spake those wary foes, fair friends in look, 
And so in words great gifts they gave and took, 
And had small profit, and small loss thereby. 
Nor less Medea feigned, but angrily 
Regarded Jason, and across her brow 
Drew close her veil, nor doubted the king now 
Her faith and loyalty. 

So from the place 
Back toward the town they turned at a soft pace, 
In guise of folk that hold high festival, 
Since straightly had iEetes bid that all 
Should do the strangers pleasure on that day. 
But warily went Jason on the way, 
And through his folk spread words, to take good heed 
Of what might come, and ready be at need, 
Nor yet to take iEetes for their friend, 
Since even then he plotted how to end 
Their quest and lives : therefore he bade them spare 
The wine that night, nor look on damsels fair ; 
But that, the feast done, all should stealthily 
Get to the quay, and round about to sea 
Turn Argo's head, and wait like hounds in slip, 
Holding the oars, within the hollow ship. 

" Nor doubt," said he, " that good and glorious 
The end shall be, since all the Gods for us 
Are fighting certainly : but should death come 
Upon me in this land, then turn back home, 
Nor wait till they shall lay your bones with mine, 



OF JASON. 129 

Since now I think to go unto the shrine, 
The while ye wait, and take therefrom the fleece, 
Not all unholpen, and depart in peace, 
While yet the barbarous king beholds us dead 
In dreams alone, or through his waking head 
The vile plots chase each other for our death." 

These things he said, but scarce above his breath, 
Unto wise Nestor, who beside him went, 
Who unto Butes straight the message sent, 
And he to Phlias, so the words at last 
Throughout the wondering seafarers had passed, 
And so were all made ready for the night. 

But on that eve, with manifold delight, 
iEetes feasted them in his fair hall j 
But they, well knowing what might chance to fall, 
Sat saying little, nor drank deep of wine ; 
Until at last the old king gave the sign 
To break the feast up, and within a while 
All seemed asleep throughout the mighty pile. 

All seemed asleep, but now Medea went 
With beating heart to work out her intent, 
Scarce doubtful of the end, since only two 
In all the world, she and iEetes, knew 
Where the keys were, far from the light of day, 
Beneath the palace. So, in garments grey, 
Like the soft creeping twilight did she go, 
Until she reached a passage far below 
The river, past whose oozing walls of stone 
She and the king alone had ever gone. 

Now she, who thus far had come through the dark, 
Stopped, and in haste striking a little spark 
From something in her hand, lit up a lamp, 
Whose light fell on an iron door, with damp 
All rusted red, which with a key of brass 
She opened, and there through made haste to pass, 



12* 



f^K Of THl X^ 



130 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Shuddering a little, as her feet 'gan tread 
Upon a dank cold floor, though overhead 
High-arched the place was, fairly built enow. 

But she across the slippery floor did go 
Unto the other wall, wherein was built 
A little aumbrye, with a door o'er-gilt, 
That with the story of King Athamas, 
And Phryxus, and the ram all carven was. 
There did she draw forth from her balmy breast 
A yellow flowering herb, that straight she pressed 
Upon the lock, low muttering the while ; 
But soon across her face there passed a smile, 
As backward in the lock the bolts did turn, 
And the door opened j then a golden urn 
She saw within the aumbrye, whereon she 
Drew out the thing she sought for eagerly, 
The seven keys with sere-cloth done about. 
Then through the dreary door did she pass out, 
And made it fast, and went her way once more 
Through the black darkness on from floor to floor. 

And so, being come to Jason, him she found 
All armed, and ready ; therefore, with no sound, 
She beckoned him to follow, and the twain 
Passed through the brazen doors, locked all in vain, 
Such virtue had the herb Medea bore, 
And passing, did they leave ajar each door, 
To give more ease unto the Minyae. 

So out into the fresh night silently 
The lovers passed, the loveliest of the land ; 
But as they went, neither did hand touch hand, 
Or face seek face ; for, gladsome as they were, 
Trembling with joy to be at last so near 
The wished-for day, some God yet seemed to be 
'Twixt the hard past and their felicity. 



OF JASON. 131 



BOOK IX. 

BUT when they reached the precinct of the God, 
And on the hallowed turf their feet now trod, 
Medea turned to Jason, and she said : 
" love, turn round, and note the goodlihead 
My father's palace shows beneath the stars. 
Bethink thee of the men grown old in wars, 
Who do my bidding ; what delights I have, 
How many ladies lie in wait to save 
My life from toil and carefulness, and think 
How sweet a cup I have been used to drink, 
And how I cast it to the ground for thee. 
Upon the day thou weariest of me, 
I wish that thou mayst somewhat think of this, 
And 'twixt thy new-found kisses, and the bliss 
Of something sweeter than thine old delight, 
Remember thee a little of this night 
Of marvels, and this starlit, silent place, 
And these two lovers standing face to face." 

11 love," he said, " by what thing shall I swear, 
That while I live thou shalt not be less dear 
Than thou art now? " 

" Nay, sweet," she said, " let be ; 
Wert thou more fickle than the restless sea, 
Still should I love thee, knowing fcbee for such ; 
Whom I know not, indeed, but fear the touch 
Of Fortune's hand when she beholds our bliss, 
And knows that nought is good to. me but this. 

" But now be ready, for I long full sore 
To hear the merry dashing of the oar, 
And feel the freshness of the following breeze 
That sets me free, and sniff the rough salt seas. 



132 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Look ! yonder thou mayst see armed shadows steal 

Down to the quays, the guiders of thy keel ; 

Now follow me, though little shalt thou do 

To gain this thing, if Hecate be true 

Unto her servant. Nay, draw not thy sword, 

And, for thy life, speak not a single w>rd 

Until I bid thee, else may all be lost, 

And of this game our lives yet pay the cost." 

Then toward the brazen temple-door she went, 
Wherefrom, half-open, a faint gleam was sent; 
For little need of lock it had forsooth, 
Because its sleepless guardian knew no ruth, 
And had no lust for precious things or gold, 
Whom, drawing near, Jason could now behold, 
As back Medea thrust the heavy door, 
For prone he lay upon the gleaming floor, 
Not moving, though his restless, glittering eyes 
Gave unto them no least hope of surprise. 
Hideous he was, where all things else were fair ; 
Dull-skinned, foul-spotted, with lank rusty hair 
About his neck ; and hooked yellow claws 
Just showed from 'neath his belly and huge jaws, 
Closed in the hideous semblance of a smile. 
Then Jason shuddered, wondering with what wile 
That fair king's daughter such a beast could tame, 
And of his sheathed sword had but little shame. 

But being within the doors, both mantle grey 
And heavy gown Medea cast away, 
And in thin clinging silk alone was clad, 
And round her neck a golden chain she had, 
Whereto was hung a harp of silver white. 
Then the great dragon, at that glittering sight, 
Raised himself up upon his loathly feet, 
As if to meet her, while her fingers sweet 
Already moved amongst the golden strings, 
Preluding nameless and delicious things ; 



OF JASON. 133 

But now she beckoned Jason to her side, 

For slowly towards them 'gan the beast to glide, 

And when close to his love the hero came, 

She whispered breathlessly : " On me the blame 

If here we perish ; if I give the word, 

Then know that all is lost, and draw thy sword, 

And manlike die in battle with the beast ; 

So dying shalt thou fail to see at least 

This body thou desiredst so to see, 

In thy despite here mangled wretchedly. 

Peace j for he cometh, thou Goddess bright, 

What help wilt thou be unto me this night ? " 

So murmured she, while ceaselessly she drew 
Her fingers through the strings, and fuller grew* 
The tinkling music, but the beast drawn nigh 
Went slower still, and turning presently 
Began to move around them in a ring. 
And as he went, there fell a strange rattling 
Of his dry scales ; but as he turned, she turned, 
Nor failed to meet the eyes that on her burned 
With steadfast eyes, and, lastly, clear and strong 
Her voice broke forth in sweet melodious song : 

" evil thing, what brought thee here 
To be a wonder and a fear 
Unto the river-haunting folk ? 
Was it the God of Day that broke 
The shadow of thy windless trees, 
Gleaming from golden palaces, 
And shod with light, and armed with light, 
Made thy slime stone, and day thy night, 
And drove thee forth unwillingly 
Within his golden house to lie ? 

" Or was it the slim messenger, 
Who, treading softly, free from fear, 
Beguiled thee with his smiling face 
From out thy dim abiding place, 



134 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

To follow him and set thee down 
Midst of this twice-washed royal town ? 

" Or was it rather the dread Lord 
Who slayeth without spear or sword, 
And with the flower-culling maid 
Of Enna, dwelleth in the shade, 
Who, with stern voice compelling thee, 
Hath set thee here, our bane to be ? 

" Or was it Venus, seeking far 
A sleepless guard 'gainst grief and war, 
Who, journeying through thy dismal land, 
Beside the heavy lake did stand, 
And with no word, but very sight 
Of tender limbs and bosom white, 
Drew forth thy scaly feet and hard, 
To follow over rock and shard ? 

" Or rather, thy dull, waveless lake 
Didst thou not leave for her dread sake, 
Who, passing swift from glade to glade, 
The forest-dwellers makes afraid 
With shimmering of her silver bow 
And dreadful arrows ? Even so 
I bid thee now to yield to me, 
Her maid, who overmastered thee, 
The three-formed dreadful one who reigns 
In heaven and the fiery plains, 
But on the green earth best of all. 

" Lo, now thine upraised crest let fall, 
Relax thy limbs, let both thine eyes 
Be closed, and bestial fantasies 
Fill thy dull head till dawn of day 
And we are far upon our way." 

As thus she sung the beast seemed not to hear 
Her words at first, but ever drew anear, 
Circling about them, and Medea's face 



OF JASON. 135 

Grew pale unto the lips, though still the place 
Rung with the piercing sweetness of her song ; 
*But slower soon he dragged his length along, 
And on his limbs he tottered, till at last 
All feebly by the wondering prince he passed, 
And whining to Medea's feet he crept, 
With eyes half closed, as though well-nigh he slept, 
And there before her laid his head adown ; 
Who, shuddering, on his wrinkled neck and brown 
Set her white foot, and whispered : " Haste, love ! 
Behold the keys ; haste ! while the Gods above 
Are friendly to us ; there behold the shrine 
Where thou canst see the lamp of silver shine. 
Nay, draw not death upon both thee and me 
With fearless kisses ; fear, until the sea 
Shall fold green arms about us lovingly, 
And kindly Venus to thy keel be nigh." 

Then lightly from her soft side Jason stept, 
While still upon the beast her foot she kept, 
Still murmuring softly many an unknown word, 
As when through half-shut casements the brown bird 
We hearken when the night is come in June, 
And thick-leaved woods are 'twixt us and his tune. 

But Jason, going swiftly with good heart, 
Came to the wished-for shrine built all apart 
Midmost the temple, that on pillars stood 
Of jasper green, and marble red as blood, 
All white itself, and carven cunningly 
With Neptune bringing from the wavy sea 
The golden shining ram to Athamas ; 
And the first door thereof of silver was, 
Wrought over with a golden glittering sun 
That seemed well-nigh alike the heavenly one. 
Such art therein the cunningest of men 
Had used, which little Jason heeded then, 



136 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But thrusting in the lock the smallest key 

Of those he bore, it opened easily ; 

And then five others, neither wrought of gold, 

Or carved with tales, or lovely to behold, 

He opened ; but before the last one stayed 

His hand, wherein the heavy key he weighed, 

And pondering, in low muttered words he said : 

" The prize is reached, which yet I somewhat dread 
To draw unto me ; since I know indeed, 
That henceforth war and toil shall be my meed. 
Too late to fear, it was too late, the hour 
I left the grey cliffs and the beechen bower, 
So here I take hard life and deathless praise, 
Who once desired nought but quiet days, 
And painless life, not empty of delight ; 
I, who shall now be quickener of the fight, 
Named by a great name a far-babbled name, 
The ceaseless seeker after praise and fame. 

" May all be well, and on the noisy ways 
Still may I find some wealth of happy days." 

Therewith he threw the last door open wide, 
Whose hammered iron did the marvel hide, 
And shut his dazzled eyes, and stretched his hands 
Out toward the sea-born wonder of all lands, 
And buried them deep in the locks of gold, 
Grasping the fleece within his mighty hold. 

Which when Medea saw, her gown of grey 
She caught up from the ground, and drew away 
Her wearied foot from off the rugged beast, 
And while from her soft strain she never ceased, 
In the dull folds she hid her silk from sight, 
And then, as bending 'neath the burden bright, 
Jason drew nigh, joyful, yet still afraid, 
She met him, and her wide grey mantle laid 
Over the fleece, whispering : " Make no delay ; 



OF JASON. 137 

He sleeps, who never slept by night or day 

Till now ; nor will his charmed sleep be long. 

Light-foot am I, and sure thine arms are strong ; 

Haste, then ! No word ! nor turn about to gaze 

At me, as he who in the shadowy ways 

Turned round to see once more the twice-lost face." 

Then swiftly did they leave the dreadful place, 
Turning no look behind, and reached the street, 
That with familiar look and kind did greet 
Those wanderers, mazed with marvels and with fear. 
And so, unchallenged, did they draw anear 
The long white quays, and at the street's end now 
Beheld the ships' masts standing row by row 
Stark black against the stars : then cautiously 
Peered Jason forth, ere they took heart to try 
The open starlit place ; but nought he saw 
Except the night-wind twitching the loose straw 
From half-unloaded keels, and nought he heard 
But the strange twittering of a caged green bird 
Within an Indian ship, and from the hill 
A distant baying : yea, all was so still ; 
Somewhat they doubted, natheless forth they passed, 
And Argo's painted sides they reached at last. 

On whom down-looking, scarce more noise they heard 
Than from the other ships, some muttered word, 
Some creaking of the timbers, as the tide 
Kan gurgling seaward past her shielded side. 
Then Jason knelt, and whispered : " Wise be ye, 
O fair companions on the pathless sea, 
But come, Erginus, Nestor, and ye twain 
Of Lacedaemon, to behold my gain j 
Take me amongst you, neither be afraid 
To take withal this gold, and this fair maid. 
Yare ! for the ebb runs strongly towards the sea, 
The east wind drives the rack to Thessaly, 

13 



138 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And lightly do such kings as this one sleep 

If now and then small watch their servants keep." 

Then saw Medea men like shadows grey 
Rise from the darksome decks, who took straightway 
With murmured joy, from Jason's outstretched hands, 
The conquered fleece, the wonder of all lands, 
While with strong arms he took the royal maid, 
And in their hold the precious burthen laid, 
And scarce her dainty feet could touch the deck, 
Ere down he leapt, and little now did reck 
That loudly clanged his armour therewithal. 

But, turning townward, did Medea call : 
" noble Jason, and ye heroes strong, 
To sea, to sea ! nor pray ye loiter long ; 
For surely shall ye see the beacons flare 
Ere in mid stream ye are, and running fair 
On toward the sea with tide, and oar, and sail. 
My father wakes, nor bides he to bewail 
His loss and me ; I see his turret gleam 
As he goes towards the beacon, and down stream 
Absyrtus lurks before the sandy bar 
In mighty keel well manned and dight for war." 

But as she spoke, rattling the cable slipped 
From out the hawse-hole, and the long oars dipped 
As from the quays the heroes pushed away, 
And in the loosened sail the wind 'gan play ; 
But e'en as they unto the stroke leaned back, 
And Nauplius, catching at the main-sheet slack 
Had drawn it taut, out flared the beacon wide, 
Lighting the waves, and they heard folk who cried : 
" Awake, awake, awake, Colchian folk ! " 
And all about the blare of -horns outbroke, 
As watch-tower answered watch-tower down the stream, 
Where far below they saw the bale-fires gleam j 
And galloping of horses now they heard, 
And clang of arms, and cries of men afeard, 



OF JASON. 139 

For now the merchant mariners who lay 
About the town, thought surely an ill day 
Had dawned upon them while they slept at ease, 
And, half awake, pushed madly from the quays 
With crash of breaking oars and meeting ships, 
And cries and curses from outlandish lips ; 
So fell the quiet night to turmoil sore, 
While in the towers, over the uproar, 
Melodiously the bells began to ring. 

But Argo, leaping forward to the swing 
Of measured oars, and leaning to the breeze, 
Sped swiftly 'twixt the dark and whispering trees ; 
Nor longer now the heroes silence kept, 
So joyously their hearts within them leapt, 
But loud they shouted, seeing the gold fell 
Laid heaped before them, and longed sore to tell 
Their fair adventure to the maids of Greece ; 
And as the mingled noises did decrease 
With added distance, and behind them night 
Grew wan with coming of the eastern light, 
Across the strings his fingers Orpheus drew, 
And .through the woods his winged music flew : 

tf surely, now the fisherman 
Draws homeward through the water wan 
Across the bay we know so well, 
And in the sheltered chalky dell 
The shepherd stirs ; and now afield 
They drive the team with white wand peeled, 
Muttering across the barley-bread 
At daily toil and dreary head. 

" And 'midst them all, perchance, my love 
Is waking, and doth gently move 
And stretch her soft arms out to me, 
Forgetting thousand leagues of sea ; 



140 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And now her body I behold, 

Unhidden but by hair of gold, 

And now the silver water kiss, 

The crown of all delight and bliss. 

And now I see her bind her hair 

And do upon her raiment fair, 

And now before the altar stand, 

With incense in her outstretched hand, 

To supplicate the Gods for me ; 

Ah, one day landing from the sea, 

Amid the maidens shall I hear 

Her voice in praise, and see her near, 

Holding the gold-wrapt laurel crown, 

'Midst of the shouting, wondering town ! " 

So sung he joyously, nor knew that they 
Must wander yet for many an evil day 
Or ever the dread Gods should let them come 
Back to the white walls of their long-left home. 
But on the shouting heroes gazed adown 
The foundress of their triumph and renown, 
And to her lover's side still drew anear, 
With heart now swelled with joy, now sick with fear, 
And cheeks now flushed with love, now pale and wan, 
As now she thought upon that goodly man, 
And now on the uncertain, dreadful Gods, 
And now upon her father, and the odds 
He well might raise against the reckless crew, 
For all his mighty power well she knew ; 
And at that thought well might her heart grow cold, 
And well might she her wretched self behold, 
Led helpless through some old familiar place, 
With none to turn on her a pitying face, 
Unto the death in life, she still might win ; 
And yet, if she should 'scape the meed of sin 
This once, the world was fair and bright enough, 



OF JASON. 141 

And love there was to lead her o'er the rough 
Of life, and love to crown her head with flowers, 
And fill her days and nights with happy hours. 

Now swift beneath the oar-strokes Argo flew, 
While the sun rose behind them, and they drew 
Unto the river's mouth, nor failed to see 
Absyrtus' galley waiting watchfully 
Betwixt them and the white-topped turbid bar. 
Therefore they gat them ready now for war, 
With joyful hearts, for sharp they sniffed the sea, 
And saw the great waves tumbling green and free 
Outside the bar upon the way to Greece, 
The rough green way to glory and sweet peace. 

Then to the prow gat Jason, and the maid 
Must needs be with him, though right sore afraid, 
As nearing now the Colchian ship, they hung 
On balanced oars; but the wild Areas strung 
His deadly bow, and clomb into the top. 

Then Jason cried : " Absyrtus, will ye stop 
Our peaceful keel, or let us take the sea ? 
Soothly, have we no will to fight with thee 
If we may pass unfoughten : therefore say, 
What is it thou wilt have this dawn of day ? " 

Now on the other prow Absyrtus stood, 
His visage red with eager wrathful blood, 
And in his right hand shook a mighty spear, 
And said : "0 seafarers, ye pass not here, 
For gifts or prayers, but if it must be so, 
Over our sunken bulwarks shall ye go ; 
Nor ask me why, for thus my father wills. 
Yet, as I now behold you, my heart thrills 
With wrath indeed ; and hearken for what cause, 
That ye against all friendship and good laws 
Bear oif my sister with you ; wherefore now 
Mars give you courage and a brazen brow ! 

13* 



142 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

That ye may try this dangerous pass in vain, 
For soothly, of your slaughter am I fain." 

Then Jason wrathfully threw up his head, 
But ere the shout came, fair Medea said, 
In trembling whisper thrilling through his ear : 

" Haste, quick upon them ! if before is fear, 
Behind is death ! " Then Jason turning, saw 
A tall ship staggering with the gusty flaw, 
Just entering the long reach where they were, 
And heard her horns through the fresh morning air. 

Then lifted he his hand, and with a cry 
Back flew the balanced oars full orderly, 
And toward the doomed ship mighty Argo passed ; 
Thereon Absyrtus shouted loud, and cast 
His spear at Jason, that before his feet 
Stuck in the deck ; then out the arrows fleet 
Burst from the Colchians ; and scarce did they spare 
Medea's trembling side and bosom fair j 
But Jason, roaring as the lioness 
When round her helpless whelps the hunters press, 
Whirled round his head his mighty brass-bound spear, 
That, flying, smote the Prince beneath the ear, 
As Areas' arrow sunk into his side. 
Then falling, scarce he met the rushing tide, 
Ere Argo's mighty prow had thrust apart 
The huddled oars, and through the fair ship's heart 
Had thrust her iron beak, then the green wave 
Rushed in as rush the waters through a cave 
That tunnels half a sea-girt lonely rock. 
Then drawing swiftly backward from the shock, 
And heeding not the cries of fear and woe, 
They left the waters dealing with their foe ; 
Then at the following ship threw back a shout, 
And seaward o'er the bar drave Argo out. 

Then joyful felt all men as now at last 
From hill to green hill of the sea they passed ; 



OF JASON. 143 

But chiefly joyed Medea, as now grew 
The Colchian hills behind them faint and blue, 
And like a white speck showed the following ship. 
There 'neath the canopy, lip pressed to lip, 
They sat and told their love, till scarce he thought 
What precious burden back to Greece he brought 
Besides the maid, nor for his kingdom cared, 
As on her beauty with wet eyes he stared, 
And heard her sweet voice soft as in a dream, 
When all seems gained, and trouble dead does seem, 
And on his face her red lips he could feel, 
And round her painting side his fingers steal. 

So passed this day, and she no less forgot 
That wreck upon the bar, the evil spot, 
Bed with a brother's blood, where long was stayed 
The wrathful king as from the stream he weighed 
The bleeding body of his well-loved son. 

Lo in such wise their journey was begun, 
And so began short love and long decay, 
Sorrow that bides and joy that fleets away. 



BOOK X. 

NIGHT came, but still on by the stars they sailed 
Before the wind, till at the dawn it failed, 
And faded soon the sunrise pure away, 
Leaving the heavens colourless and grey, 
And dull and lightless the decreasing swell 
About the watery ways now rose and fell, 
And Lynceus, looking back, no more beheld 
The galley that so long the chase had held. 
Then were all glad, and toiled on at the oar, 
When now the drooping soils would help no more. 



144 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But soon before their way it seemed as though 
A curtain hung they needs must journey through, 
A low black mist so brooded o'er the sea. 
Then did they hold their hands, but presently, 
Moving to meet them, did it hide from sight 
The dog-vane and the maintop gilded bright, 
Yea in heart-chilling waves it so enwound 
The seafarers, that each man gazed around 
And saw but shadows where his fellows were. 
So with the windless swell did Argo fare 
Two days with furled sails purposeless and blind, 
And bearing heavy hearts ; the third, the wind 
Sprung up at daybreak, and straight drove away 
That hideous mist, that after sunrise lay 
A heavy purple bank down in the west. 

Then by the sun his way Erginus guessed, 
For on no side could they see any land ; 
But as upon the helm he set his hand, 
Such mighty light blazed out upon the prow, 
That faint and yellow did the sunlight show 
Beside it, and amidst it they beheld 
The figure that ere now their hands had held 
Anigh the Mysian shore ; and now it said : 

" heroes, wherefore haste ye to be dead ? 
Behold, while through the heart of yonder fog 
I, Argo, drifted as an un steered log, 
iEetes passed us going towards the straits, 
And now is lying ready by the gates ; 
Nor with one ship alone, but with ten keels, 
Raised from his subject kings and commonweals, 
Abides your coming, hoping soon to see 
Your bodies on the shore lie wretchedly, 
While to the Gods he offers bulls and sheep ; 
But your fair helper, and your joy will keep, 
That she in iEa unavenged may burn. 



OF JASON. 145 

"But now the Gods, taking your swift return 
Away from you, yet will not let you die; 
But bid you, taking heart, turn presently 
Unto the northern shore of this ill sea ; 
There by a mighty river shall ye be, 
Along whose sides dwell the Sarmatian folk, 
Knowing no arts, untaught to bear the yoke 
Of equal laws j into this river's mouth 
Straight must ye enter, and forget the south, 
And many unknown lands and unknown seas, 
And deadly forests, vocal with no breeze, 
Shall ye go wandering through, but long time past,' 
Unto the seas ye know shall come at last, 
And passing by the western garden fair 
Toward the Italian shore, shall ye find there 
Circe the wise, the wonder of all lands, 
Thy father's sister, lady, at whose hands 
Of late-wrought guilt shall ye be purified. 

"And so, by many troubles being tried, 
Unto Iolchos shall ye all come back 
Except some few ; nor there find any lack 
Of much-desired wealth and babbling praise, 
And so each man depart unto such days 
As the fates grant him, be they good or ill, 
With death at last according to their will." 

With these last words she vanished quite away, 
And these, left floating on that dawn of day, 
Felt severed utterly from hoped-for things ; 
Like some caged eagle that, with fluttering wings, 
Beats at his bars, beholding far away 
His windy eyrie up the mountain grey. 
A while ago, and every man nigh saw 
The long white walls rise sunny without flaw 
From out the curled white edges of the sea ; 
Yea, almost felt as if they well might be 
In fair Iolchos that same afternoon. 



146 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And now how many and many a glittering moon 
Must fill her horns up, while their lives were spent 
In unknown lands and helpless dreariment ! 

But as his fellows, speechless and amazed, 
Upon the weary sea so stood and gazed, 
Spake Jason to them : " Heroes, tell me where 
Your hearts are gone, since helpless thus ye stare 
On that which helpeth not ? in no such wise 
A while ago, before JEetes' eyes 
Ye smote the Colchian ship ; with other heart 
Ye drave the dark blue dashers far apart j 
No eyes I saw like these upon the day, 
When with the Colchian spears on every way, 
Unto Mars' acre on a doubtful quest 
We passed, and dared the worst to get the best. 

' ' What will ye ? Is it then so hard a thing 
That we, through many countries wandering, 
Shall see unheard-of things, nor fail to come, 
When yet our blood is warm, back to our home ? 
Be merry, think upon the lives of men, 
And with what troubles threescore years and ten 
Are crowded oft, yea, even unto him 
Who sits at home, nor fears for life and limb, 
But trembles the base slave unto a slave ; 
Or holding trifles he is fain to save, 
Sits pleasureless and wearing out his life, 
Or with vain words wages disgraceful strife 
That leads nowhither, till forgotten death 
Seizes the babbler, choking out his breath. 

' ' But ye forget all get ye to the oar, 
And steer rejoicing to the northern shore, 
Since we shall win such glory and renown, 
That, coming home again to our fair town, 
Those left behind shall count us all for lords, 
And tremble, gazing at our sheathed swords. 




OF JASON. 



Fair is the wind, the sunny dawn is clear, 
Nor are we bound for Pluto's kingdom drear, 
But for fair forests, plentiful of beasts, 
Where, innocent of craft, with joyous feasts, 
The wise folk live as in the golden age, 
Not reddening spears and swords in useless rage ; 
Nor need they houses, but in fair-wrought cave 
Their bodies from the winter's cold they save ; 
Nor labour they at all, or weave, or till, 
For everything the kind land bears at will. 
Doubt not at all that they will welcome us 
As very Gods, with all things plenteous." 

So spake he, knowing nought of that same land ; 
Natheless, they noting him as he did stand 
Beside Erginus, with unclouded face, 
Took heart again, and to the oars apace 
They gat and toiled, forgetting half the word 
That from great Argo's sprite ere now they heard, 
Nor thinking of the ills that they might meet, 
But of the day when their returning feet 
Should bear them, full of knowledge, wealth, and fame, 
Up to the royal hall wherefrom they came. 

But Jason in his heart thought : " Now, indeed, 
Of home and fame full little is my need, 
The days will change, and time will bring a day 
When through my beard are sprinkled locks of grey, 
And love no more shall be enough for me, 
And no fair woman much delight shall be ; 
But little do we want when we are young, 
The bended knee and nattering false tongue, 
Which we, grown old, and drained of half our fire, 
Knowing them false, do yet so much desire." 

But for his love, she, set quite free from fear 
Of frightful death, held life itself so dear, 
That where she went she scarcely heeded yet, 



148 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

For still she seemed to see the black pile set 
For her undoing by the temple-gate ; 
And seemed to see the thronging people wait 
For her, who there to make the tragedy 
Alone was wanting : then she saw anigh 
His face, and with her fingers felt him toy, 
And therewithal trembled for very joy, 
And set aside for that time all her care, 
So sweet was love, and life so blithe and fair. 

Now northward Argo steered for two days more, 
Until at last they came in sight of shore, 
And creeping on, they found a river-mouth, 
That a long spit of land fenced from the south, 
And turned due west : and now, at ebb full strong, 
Turbid and yellow rolled its stream along, 
That scarce could Argo stem it ; wherefore they, 
It being but early, anchored till mid-day, 
And as they waited, saw an eddy rise 
Where sea joined river, and before their eyes 
The battle of the waters did begin. 
So, seeing the mighty ocean best therein, 
Weighing their anchor, they made haste to man 
Both oars and sails, and therewith plying, ran 
With the first wave of the great conquering flood 
Far up the stream, on whose banks forests stood, 
Darkening the swirling water on each side. 

And now between them swiftly did they glide, 
And now no more they smelt the fresh salt sea, 
Or heard the steady wind pipe boisterously 
Through the strained rigging, neither with their feet 
Set wide, the pitching of their ship to meet, 
Went to and fro ; for all was quiet now 
But gurgling of the stream beside the prow, 
x\nd flapping of the well-nigh useless sail, 
And from the black woods some faint dismal wail, 
Whether of man or beast they knew not well. 



OF JASON. 149 

Then o'er their hearts a melancholy fell, 
And they began to think they might forget 
The quest whereon their hearts had once been set, 
Now half accomplished, and all wealth and fame, 
All memory of the land wherefrom they came, 
Their very names, indeed, to wander on, 
Unseen, unheard of, till their lives were done. 

In such-like thoughts they anchored for the night, 
Nor slept they much, but wishing for daylight, 
About the deck they paced, or sat them down 
In longing thought of some fair merchant-town. 

So sadly passed the weary night away, 
That, dreary, yet was noisier than the day ; 
For all about them evil beasts 'gan stir 
At nightfall, and great soft-winged bats to whirr 
About their raiment and their armour bright. 
And when the moon rose, and her crescent white 
Made the woods blacker, then from either shore 
They heard the thundering of the lion's roar, 
Now coming nigher, dying now away ; 
And once or twice, as in the stream they lay 
A spear-cast from the shore, could they behold 
The yellow beast stalk forth, and, stark and bold, 
Stand in the moonlight on the muddy beach. 
Then, though they doubted not their shafts could reach 
His kingly heart, they held their hands, for here 
All seemed as in a dream, where deadly fear 
Is mingled with the most familiar thing ; 
And in the cup we see the serpent's sting, 
And common speech we answer with a scream. 
Moreover, sounds they heard they well might deem 
To be men's voices ; but whatso they were, 
Unto the river side they drew not near, 
Nor yet of aught like man did they have sight. 

So dawned the day j but like another night 
Unto their wearied eyes it seemed to be, 

14 



150 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Amid that solitude, where tree joined tree 
For ever, as it seemed ; and natheless, they 
Ran out the oars and gat them on their way 
Against the ebb, and little help the flood 
Gave them that day ; but yet for bad or good 
They labonred on, though still with less intent, 
More hopeless past the changeless woods they went. 

But every day, more and more sluggishly 
And shorter time, the water from the sea 
Ban up, and failed ere eve of the third day, 
Though slower took the downward stream its way, 
Grown wide and dull, and here and there the wood 
Would draw away and leave some dismal rood 
Of quaggy land about the river's edge, 
Where 'mid the oozes and decaying sedge 
There wallowed ugly, nameless, dull-scaled things. 

These now the weary company of kings, 
As they passed by, could not endure to see 
Unscathed of arrows, turning lazily 
Blue-gleaming slimy sides up in the sun, 
Whose death swift Atalanta first begun. 
For as anigh the prow she chanced to stand, 
Unto her bow did she set foot and hand, 
And strung it, and therefrom an arrow sent 
That through the belly of a monster went, 
Legged like a lizard, maned with long lank hair. 
He, screaming, straight arose from out his lair, 
With many another of his kith and kin, 
And swiftly getting to the water thin, 
Made for the ship ; and though upon the way 
Some few among them lost the light of day, 
Smit by Thessalian arrows, yet the most 
The narrow strip of water fairly crossed, 
And scaled the ship's sides, and therewith began 
A fearful battle betwixt worm and man. 



OF JASON. 151 

Not long it dured ; though Ceneus through the mail 
Was bitten, and one monster's iron tail 
Smote down Asterion, whom Eribotes 
Made shift to save ; but chiefly amid these 
She who had been the first to raise the strife 
Was hard bested, and scarce escaped with life. 

One worm 'twixt ship and shore her arrow slew, 
But ere her Amazonian axe she drew, 
Another monster had got slimy hold 
Of her slim ankles, and cast fold on fold 
About her legs, and binding thigh to thigh, 
Wrapt round her sides, enfolding mightily 
Her foiled right hand, then raised aloft his crest 
Against her unembraced tender breast ; 
But she, with one unharmed hand yet left free, 
Still strove to ward the blow but giddily, 
Because the deadly rings still tighter grew 
About her heart ; yet as she fell, there flew 
A feathered javelin swiftly from the left, 
By Areas desperately cast, that cleft 
The monster's head, and dulled his glittering eyes. 

Then the glad Minyse with joyous cries 
Cleared Argo's decks of all the monstrous things, 
As from the maiden's limbs the slimy rings 
Slacked and fell off: but she, so saved from death, 
Sat weary by the mast, and drew glad breath, 
And vowed the grey and deadly thing should shine, 
Wrought all of gold, within Diana's shrine, 
In woody fair Arcadia. But the rest, 
When they with poured-out wine the Gods had blest, 
And flayed the slain worms, gat them to the oar, 
And 'gainst the sluggish stream slid past the shore. 

But swifter the next day the river ran 
With higher banks, and now the woods began 
To be of trees that in their land they knew, 
And into clumps of close-set beeches grew, 



152 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And oak-trees thinly spread, and there-be tween 
Fair upland hillocks well beset with green ; 
And 'neath the trees great herds of deer and neat, 
And sheep, and swine, fed on the herbage sweet, 
Seeming all wild as though they knew not man, 
For quite untented here and there they ran, 
And while two great bucks raised the armed brow 
Each against each (since time of fight was now) , 
About them would the swine squeal, and the sheep 
In close-drawn flock their faint republic keep, 
With none to watch : nor saw they fence or fold, 
Nor any husbandry did they behold, 
But the last men their wearied eyes had seen 
Were those strong swimmers in the Phasis green. 

So seeing now these beasts in such plenty, 
It seemed good unto the Minyse 
To make provision thereof for their need. 
So drawing Argo up through sedge and reed, 
They made her fast, while divers took the land. 
Areas the hunter, Idas strong of hand, 
White Atalanta, wise Eurytion, 
Far-seeing Lynceus, and the Sminthian's son, 
Keen Theseus, with Pirithous his mate, 
Clitius, whose swift shaft smote as Sure as fate, 
iEtalides, the runner of the plain, 
Phocus, whose sling was seldom whirled in vain, 
Caeneus the cragsman, Periclimenes, 
And Apheus, haunter of the close-set trees. 

So forth these set, and none of them had lack 
Of spear or bow, or quiver at the back, 
As through the land they went with wary mirth, 
For they rejoiced once more to feel the earth 
Beneath their feet, while on their heads fell down 
The uncupped acorn, and the long leaves brown, 
For on that land the sad mid-autumn lay, 
And earlier came the sunset day by day. 



OF JASON. 153 

But now unto their hunting gave they heed, 
And of the more part happy was the speed, 
And soon to Argo did they turn again, 
Laden with that they had set forth to gain, 
Of deer and beasts the slaughtered carcasses 
Upborne on interwoven boughs of trees. 

With whom came Theseus not, nor Areas came, 
Nor yet iEtalides (who had the fame 
Next Atalanta among all the rest 
For swiftness, she being easily the best). 
There waiting till the night, yet none the more 
Came down those three unto the river's shore, 
Nor through the night : but swift iEtalides 
At dawn they saw come running through the trees, 
With Areas far behind, and Theseus slim 
The last of all, but straining every limb 
To be their equal : empty-handed they 
Came back to Argo on that dawn of day, 
And on being asked, a short tale had to tell. 

Unto their part to chase a great buck fell, 
That led them far, and he at last being lost, 
They sat them down with nought to pay the cost 
Of all their travail ; so being set, they heard 
A hubbub of strange voices, and afeard 
Leapt to their feet, and presently they saw 
Strange folk, both men and women, toward them draw, 
Who spread about them as to stop their flight 
On all hands more than they durst lightly tight. 

So being thus trapped they fain had spoke them fair, 
But knowing not their tongue, they yet had care 
To speak with smiles as though they feared not aught, 
Asking for food by signs, which soon was brought, 
No flesh, but roots and nuts, whereof they ate, 
And so by signs until the day grew late 
They dealt together, making clear indeed 
Each unto each but little of their need ; 
14* 



154 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

At last of their departure were they fain, 
But, being stayed, they durst not strive in vain 
For fear of worse j but now, the night being come, 
The wild folk seemed to think that place their home 
Just as another, and there gat to sleep, 
Nor yet upon the Greeks a watch did keep 
To stop their going; " So," said Areas, " we, 
An hour after midnight, warily 
Stole from among them, neither gave they chase, 
Being still asleep, like beasts, in that same place ; 
And for their semblance, neither were they clad, 
Nor in their hands a spear or sword they had, 
Or any brass or iron, but long slings, 
And scrips of stones, and ugly stone-set things 
Most like to knives, and clubs of heavy wood ; 
Soft- voiced they were, and gentle of their mood, 
And goodly made as such wild folk may be, 
But tanned with sun and wind j there did we see 
Old men and young, and women old and young, 
With many children scattered there among, 
All naked, and with unshorn yellow hair 
Blowing about ; and sooth we deem they were 
Houseless and lawless, without town or king, 
Knowing no Gods, and lacking everything." 

So said he, but Medea spoke, and said : 
" heroes, surely by all likelihead 
These are the folk of whom I erst heard tell 
In'iEa, where to me it oft befell 
To speak with many men from many lands, 
Long ere ye crossed the Phasis' yellow sands. 

" Of these I learned more tongues of speaking men 
Than ye might deem men spoke, who told me then 
Of such as these, that ye have seen but now. 
And yet indeed some Gods these folk do know, 
The Sun, the Moon, the mother of the earth, 
And more perchance, and days they have of mirth 






OF JASON. 155 

When these they honour ; yea, and unto these 
Within their temples, groves of ancient trees, 
Clad but in leaves, and crowned in solemn wise, 
They offer strangers up in sacrifice, 
Which was your doom had not the Glods been kind, 
Who for your bodies other graves will find." 

But when they heard her, glad they were indeed 
That they from such a bondage had been freed. 
But, day being fully come, they loosed from shore, 
And 'gainst the stream all bent unto the oar. 
All day they toiled, and every mile of way 
Still swifter grew the stream, so on that day 
Few leagues they made ; and still the banks were fair, 
But rising into scarped cliffs here and there, 
Where screamed the great ger-falcon as they passed, 
And whence the sooty swifts about the mast 
Went sweeping, with shrill cries at that new sight. 

Nought napped that day worth record, but at night, 
When they were moored, and sound of splashing oars 
Had ceased, and stiller grew the upland shores, 
Another sound they heard besides the stream 
That gurgled past them, that to them did seem 
Like sound of feet of men who pass to war, 
Rising and falling as the wind from far 
Would bear it on or drop it in the dark. 
So, while with strained ears they stood to hark 
The murmur, as folk use, scarce sure they heard 
That which already inward fear had stirred, 
Erginus spoke : " heroes, fear ye nought, 
This is not death, though ye to toil are brought ; 
This noise is but the river as it falls 
Over its mountainous and iron walls, 
Which, being passed, both calm and deep will be 
The pent-up stream, and Argo easily 
Will stem it ; but or ere we come thereto, 



156 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Needs must we heave her up and make her go 
Over the hard earth, till the falls are past. 
Eat therefore now, and sleep, that ye may last 
Through this and other toils, and so may come 
Through many labours, back unto your home." 
So, landing, many a pine-torch did they light, 
And made the dusky evening strange and bright, 
And there a mighty fire did they pile, 
And set the flesh thereto, and in a while, 
When all was ready, did they offer up 
That which the Gods claimed, pouring out a cup 
Of red wine to them from a new-pierced skin. 
Then in that lonely land did they begin 
Their feast, and first the flesh to Jason gave, 
And next to her who all their souls did save, 
Far up the Phasis on that other day, 
And then unto the swift Arcadian May 
The guarded treasure of the trim-shod queen. 
Then to the godlike singer, set between 
The twin Laconian stars, and then to these ; 
And then to Areas, haunter of the trees, 
Theseus, Pirithous, Erginus true, 
The North-wind's sons, the cleavers of the blue ; 
And all the kings being satisfied in turn, 
With vain desires 'gan their hearts to burn, 
So stirred within them wine and changing speech. 

But unto him his harp did Orpheus reach, 
And smote the strings, and through the ancient trees 
Rang the heart-piercing honeyed melodies : 

"Alas ! for Saturn's days of gold, 
Before the mountain men were bold 
To dig up iron from the earth 
Wherewith to slaughter health and mirth, 
And bury hope far underground. 



OF JASON. 157 

When all men needed did abound 
In every land ; nor must they toil, 
Nor wear their lives in strife to foil 
Each other's hands, for all was good, 
And no man knew the sight of blood. 

" With all the world man had no strife, 
No element against his life 
Was sworn and bitter ; on the sea, 
Dry-shod, could all walk easily ; 
No fire there was but what made day, 
Or hidden in the mountains grey ; 
No pestilence, no lightning flash, 
No over-mastering wind, to dash 
The roof upon some trembling head. 

" Then the year changed, but ne'er was dead, 
Nor was the autumn-tide more sad 
Than very spring ; and all unclad 
Folk went upon the harmless snow, 
For not yet did midwinter know 
The biting frost and icy wind, 
The very east was soft and kind. 

1 ' And on the crown of July days, 
All heedless of the mid-day blaze, 
Unshaded by the rosy bowers, 
Unscorched beside the tulip flowers, 
The snow-white naked girl might stand ; 
Or fearless thrust her tender hand 
Amidst the thornless rose-bushes. 

" Then, 'mid the twilight of the trees 
None feared the yellow beast to meet ; 
Smiling to feel their languid feet 
Licked by the serpent's forked tongue. 
For then no clattering horn had rung 
Through those green glades, or made afraid 
The timid dwellers in the shade. 
No lust of strength nor fear of death 



158 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Had driven men, with shortened breath, 
The stag's wide-open eyes to watch ; 
No shafts to slay, no nets to catch, 
Were yet j unyoked the neat might play 
On untilled meads, and mountains grey, 
Unshorn, the silly sheep might rove. 

" Nor knew that world consuming love, 
Mother of hate, or envy cold, 
Or rage for fame, or thirst for gold, 
Or longing for the ways untried, 
That, ravening and unsatisfied, 
Draw shortened lives of men to Hell. 

" Alas ! what profit now to tell 
The long unweary lives of men 
Of past days threescore years and ten, 
Unbent, un wrinkled, beautiful, 
Eegarding not death's flower-crowned skull, 
But with some damsel intertwined 
In such love as leaves hope behind. 

' ' Alas, the vanished days of bliss ! 
Will no God send some dream of this, 
That we may know what it has been s i 

"Oh, thou, the chapleted with green, 
Thou purpled-stained, but not with blood, 
Who on the edge of some cool wood 
Forge test the grim Indian plain, 
And all the strife and all the pain, 
While in thy sight the must foams out, 
And maid and man, with cry and shout, 
Toil while thou laughest, think of us, 
And drive away these piteous, 
Formless and wailing thoughts, that press 
About our hour of happiness. 

" Lyaeus, King ! by thee alone 
To song may change our tuneless moan, 



OF JASON. 159 

The murmur of the bitter sea 

To ancient tales be changed by thee. 

By thee the unnamed smouldering fire 

Within our hearts turns to desire 

Sweet, amorous, half satisfied ; 

Through thee the doubtful years untried t 

Seem fair to us and fortunate, 

In spite of death, in spite of fate." 

He ceased, and bent his head above the wine ; 
Then, as he raised his eyes, they saw them shine 
In the red torchlight with unwilling tears, 
And their hearts too, with thoughts of vanished years, 
Were pensive, as at ending of his song 
They heard the bubbling river speed along, 
Nor did they miss that doubtful noise to hear 
The rising night-wind through the branches bear, 
Till sleep fell on them, and the watch alone 
Waked in that place, and heard the distant moan 
Grow louder as the dead night stiller grew, 
And fuller of all fear, till daylight drew 
A faint wan streak between the thinner trees, 
And in their yellowing foliage the breeze 
Made a new sound, that through their waking dream 
Like to the surging sea well-nigh did seem. 

But the full day being come, all men awake, 
Fresh hold upon the oars began to take, 
Stemming the stream, that now at every mile 
Swifter and shallower ran, and in a while 
Above all noises did they hear that roar, 
And saw the floating foam borne past the shore : 
So but ten leagues they made upon that day ; 
And on the morrow, going on their way, 
They went not far, for underneath their keel 
Some once or twice the hard rock did they feel, 



160 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And looking on ahead, the stream could see 

White with the rapids ; therefore warily 

Some mile or two they went at a slow pace, 

And stayed their course where they beheld a place 

Soft-sloping to the river ; and there all, 

Half deafened by the noises of the fall 

And bickering rapids, left the ashen oar, 

And spreading over the well-wooded shore 

Cut rollers, laying on full many a stroke, 

And made a capstan of a mighty oak, 

And so drew Argc up, with hale and how, 

On to the grass, turned half to mire now. 

Thence did they toil their best, in drawing her 
Beyond the falls, whereto being come anear, 
They trembled when they saw them, for from sight 
The rocks were hidden by the spray-clouds white, 
Cold, wretched, chilling, and the mighty sound 
Their heavy-laden hearts did sore confound ; 
For parted from all men they seemed, and far 
From all the world, shut out by that great bar. 

Moreover, when with toil and pain, at last 
Unto the torrent's head they now had passed, 
They sent forth swift iEtalides to see 
What further up the river there might be. 
Who going twenty leagues, another fall 
Found, with great cliffs on each side, like a wall ; 
But, 'twixt the two, another unbarred stream 
Joined the main river ; therefore did they deem, 
When this they heard, that they perforce must try 
This smoother branch ; so somewhat heavily 
Argo they launched again, and gat them forth 
Still on toward the winter and the north. 



OF JASON. 161 



BOOK XI. 






NOW might the Minyae hoist up to the breeze 
Their well-wrought sail, for barren of all trees 
The banks were now become, not rising high 
Above the deep green stream that sluggishly 
Strove with the strenuous Argo's cleaving stem. 

So after all their toil was rest to them 
A little while, and on the deck they sat, 
Not wholly sad, and talked of this and that, 
Or watched the restless fishes turn and wind, 
Or the slim kestrel hanging in the wind, 
Or the wild cattle scouring here and there 
About the plain ; for in a plain they were, 
Edged round with hills, with quaggy brooks cleft through, 
That 'mid their sedges toward the river drew, 
And harboured noisome things, and death to man. 
But looking up stream, the green river ran 
Unto their eyes, from out the mountains high, 
For 'twixt no pass could they behold the sky, 
Though at the mountain's foot, far through the plain, 
They saw the wandering river shine again, 
Then vanish wholly, therefore through their ease, 
With fear did they the jealous Gods appease. 

Natheless, for two days did they speed along, 
Not toiling aught, and cheered with tale and song, 
But the third noonday, bringing them anear 
The mountains, turned to certain grief their fear, 
For now they saw the stream, grown swift but deep, 
Come from a cavern in the mountain steep, 
Nor would it help them aught upon that tide 
To heave the swift ship out on either side, 
For all that plain the mountain ridge bestrode, 
15 



1 62 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And scarcely could a horseman find a road 
Through any pass into the farther land. 

Then 'mid the downcast men did Jason stand, 
And lifting up his voice, said : " Minyae, 
Why right and left upon this plain look ye, 
Where dwell but beasts or beast-like men alone? 
Look rather to that heap of rugged stone, 
Pierced with the road that leadeth to the north. 
Yea, if from very hell this stream runs forth, 
Let us go thither, bearing in our hands 
This golden, hard-won marvel of all lands. 
Yet, since not death it bears, but living things, 
Shall we not reach thereby the sea that rings 
The whole world round, and so make shift to reach 
Sunny Euboea, and fair Argo beach 
Before Iolchos, having lost no whit 
Of all our gains ? Or else here must we sit 
Till hunger slays us on some evil day, 
Or wander till our raiment falls away 
From off our bodies, and we, too, become 
Like those ye saw, not knowing any home, 
Voiceless, desiring nought but daily food, 
And seeking that like beasts within the wood, 
Each for himself. And all our glory gone, 
Our names but left upon some carven stone 
In Greece, still growing fainter day by day. 
And this work wrought within the sunny bay, 
Nor yet without the help of Gods, shall lie 
A wonder to the wild beasts passing by, 
While on her fallen masts the sedge-birds sing, 
Unseen of men, a clean forgotten thing." 

So spake he, setting courage in their hearts 
To try the unknown dark, and to their parts 
All gat them swiftly, and they struck the mast, 
And deftly steered, from out the sunlight passed 
Into the cold, bat-haunted cavern low, 



OF JASON. 163 

And thrusting out with poles, made shift to go 
Against the stream, that with a hollow sound 
Smote Argo's stem. Then Jason, looking round, 
Trembled himself, for now, indeed, he thought, 
Though to the toiling heroes he said nought : 
"What do we, if this cavern narrows now, 
Or over falls these burrowing waters flow, 
And drive us back again into the sun, 
Cursing the day this quest was first begun, 
Or somewhat traps us here, as well it may, 
And ends us all, far from the light of day." 

Therewith he bade them light the torches up, 
And to the mountain Gods to pour a cup, 
And one unto the river Gods, and pray 
That they might come into the light of day, 
When they had pierced the mountain through and through. 
So from the torches trains of sparkles flew, 
And strangely flashed their arms in that dark place, 
And white and haggard showed each anxious face 
Against those dripping walls of unknown stone. 

But now in Jason's hand the cup outshone, 
Full of red wine, pressed by the Grecian sea, 
And lifting high his hand, he cried : " ye, 
Both Gods and nymphs who in this wild land dwell, 
In hill or river, henceforth may ye tell 
How through your midst have passed the Minyae ; 
And if, ye helping, the cold northern sea 
We safely reach, and our desired home, 
Thither the fame and fear of you shall come, 
And there a golden-pillared house shall stand 
Unto our helpers in this savage land. 
Nor when we reach the other side of this 
Grim cavern, due observance shall ye miss, 
For whatso on the teeming plain we snare, 
Slain with due rites shall smoke before you there." 

So spake he, and twice poured the fragrant wine ; 



1 64 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But they, well-pleased to have the gift divine, 
And noting well his promises, took heed 
Unto his prayers, and gave the heroes speed. 
Then Jason straightway bade more torches light, 
And Argo pushed along, flared through the night 
Of the dank cavern, and the dull place rang 
With Grecian names, as loud the heroes sang, 
For hope had come into their hearts at last. 

So through the winding cave three days they passed. 
But on the fourth day Lynceus gave a cry, 
Smiting his palms together, who could spy, 
Far off, a little white speck through the dark, 
As when the 'lated traveller sees the spark 
Of some fair-lighted homestead glitter bright. 
But soon to all men's eyes the joyous sight 
Showed clear, and with redoubled force they pushed 
Swift Argo forth, who through the water rushed 
As though she longed for daylight too and air. 
And so within an hour they brought her there, 
And on the outer world the sun shone high, 
For it was noon ; so mooring presently, 
On the green earth they clean forgot their pain, 
For joy to feel the sweet soft grass again, 
And see the fair things of the world, and feel 
The joyous sunlight that the sick can heal, 
And soft tormenting of the western wind. 

And there for joy about there heads they twined 
The yellow autumn flowers of the field, 
And of untimely sorrow were they healed 
By godlike conquering wine ; nor yet forgot 
Their promise to the Gods, but on that spot, 
Of turf and stones they built up altars twain, 
And sent the hunters forth, and not in vain ; 
For Atalanta, swifter than a man, 
Areas, and mighty Theseus, overran 
A white high-crested bull, and tough cords threw 



OF JASON. 165 

About his horns, and so by main force drew 
The great beast to the altars, where the knife 
Of wise Asclepius ended his hot life. 
And there they feasted far into the night. 

But when their toil the next returning light 
Brought back to them, they gat unto the oar, 
While Jason anxiously scanned either shore ; 
For now the stream was narrowing apace, 
And little more than just enough of space 
Was left the oars ; but deep it ran and slow, 
And through a like flat grassy plain did go 
As that which ere its burrowing it had cleft ; 
But lower were the hills, and on the left 
So low they grew, they melted quite away 
To woody swells before the end of day. 

Full many a league upon that day they made, 
And the next day the long oars down they laid, 
For at their back the steady south-west blew, 
And low anigh their heads the rain-clouds flew ; 
Therefore they hoisted up their sail to it, 
And idle by the useless oars did sit, 
Watching the long wave from their swift sea-plough 
Sweep up the low green bank, for soothly now, 
A pebble, ill-thrown by a stripling's hand 
From Argo's deck, had lighted on the land ; 
And yet far inland still they seemed to be, 
Nor noted aught to tell them of the sea. 

So on that night, for thought of many things, 
Full little sleep fell on the troubled kings ; 
But Argus slept, and at the dawn he dreamed, 
Not wholly sleeping, and to him it seemed 
That one said to him : " Where is now become 
The cunning that thou learnedst in thine home, 
wise artificer ? What dost thou here, 
While in thy fellows' hearts is gathering fear ? 

15* 



1 66 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Now from the north thou seest this river flow, 
Why doubtest thou to find another go 
Into the cold green icy northern sea? 
Lo ! if thou wiliest well to trust in me, 
About the noontide of this very day, 
At the wood's end I bid thee Argo stay, 
And from her straightway let the Minyae land 
And take the adze and wood-axe in the hand, 
And let them labour hard, with thee to guide, 
Until on wheels thy well-built keel shall glide ; 
And this being done as pleases thy wise mind, 
Doubt not a northern-flowing stream to find, 
For certainly some God shall show it thee. 
And if thou wishest now to ask of me, 
No dream I am, but lovely and divine, 
Whereof let this be unto thee a sign, 
That when thou wak'st the many-coloured bow 
Across the world the morning sun shall throw, 
But me indeed thine eyes shall not behold." 

Then he, awaking in the morning cold, 
A sprinkle of fine rain felt on his face, 
And leaping to his feet, in that wild place, 
Looked round and saw the morning sunlight throw 
Across the world the many-coloured bow, 
And trembling knew that the high Gods indeed 
Had sent the Messenger unto their need. 
And when the Minyse, running out the oars 
That windless morning, found them touch the shores 
On either side, then ere one said a word, 
He cried, and said : "0 Jason, chief and lord, 
And ye, fair fellows, to no bitter end 
Our quest is come ; but this sharp keel shall send 
A glittering furrow up in the wide sea, 
If ye will hear my words and trust in me." 

Therewith he told them of that dream divine, 



OF JASON. 167 

And of the many-coloured arched sign, 

And gladdened all their hearts, for well they knew 

That some God helped them, and straightway they threw 

Hawsers ashore, wherewith their keel to tow, 

And swiftly through the water made her go, 

Until they reached the ending of the wood, 

Just at the noonday, and there thought it good 

To rest till morning : but at dawn of day 

Gat forth, and mighty blows began to lay 

On many a tree, making the tall trunks reel, 

That ne'er before had felt the woodman's steel. 

So many days they laboured, cutting down 
The smooth grey beeches, and the pine-trees brown, 
And cleft them into planks and beams foursquare. 
And so, with Argus guiding all things there, 
A stage with broad wheels nigh the stream they made, 
And then from out the water Argo weighed 
Little by little, dealing cunningly, 
Till on the stage the great black ship did lie, 
And all things waited for the setting forth 
Unto some river flowing toward the north. 

But 'midst all this, as painfully they wrought, 
Passed twenty days, and on their heads was brought 
The first beginning of the winter cold ; 
For now the wind-beat twigs had lost their hold 
Of the faint yellow leaves, and thin and light 
The forest grew, and colder night by night, 
Or soaked with rain, and swept with bitter wind, 
Or with white creeping mist made deaf and blind. 

Meanwhile for long there came no sign at all, 
Nor yet did sight of man to them befall, 
To guide them on their way, though through the trees, 
Singly at times, at times in twos and threes, 
Both for their daily flesh they hunted oft, 
And also fain of fells to clad them soft, 
And guard their bodies from the coming cold ; 



1 68 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Yet never any man did they behold, 
Though underneath the shaft and hunting-spear 
Fell many a stag, and shuffling crafty bear, 
And strange the Minyae showed in shaggy spoil. 

But now, at ending of their woodwright's toil, 
It chanced Argus' self alone to go, 
One bitter day, when the first dusty snow 
Was driven through the bare boughs from the east, 
In hot chase of the honey-loving beast 
Far from his fellows : him he brought to bay 
Nigh to the dusk of that quick-darkening day, 
Deep in the forest 'mid a clump of yews, 
And ere the red-eyed beast again could choose 
To fight or flee, ran in, and thrust his spear 
Into his heart ; then fell the shaggy bear, 
As falls a landslip by the mining sea, 
With grass and bracken, and wind-bitten tree, 
And Argus, drawing out his two-edged knife, 
Let out the last spark of his savage life ; 
But as he arose, he heard a voice that said : 
" Grood luck, huntsman, to thine hardihead, 
Well met thou art to me, who wander far 
On this first winter night that shows no star." 

Then looking up, he saw a maid draw nigh, 
Like those who by Thermodon live and die ; 
Her legs and arms with brazen scales were clad, 
Well-plated shoes upon her feet she had, 
And fur-lined, gold-wrought raiment to the knee, 
And on her head a helm wrought royally ; 
In her slim hand a mighty bow she bore, 
And at her back well-feathered shafts good store, 
And in her belt a two-edged cutting sword. 
Then straightly answered Argus to her word : 
" Lady, not far hence are my fellows stayed, 
But on hard earth this night will they be laid, 
And eat the flesh of beasts their hands have slain. 



OF JASON. 169 

For from the sea we come, to meet again 
The ocean that the round world rings about, 
Still wandering on, in trouble and in doubt." 

" Nay," said she, " let us set on through the wood, 
For food and fire alone to me are good, 
And guarded sleep among such folk as thee, 
For being alone, I fear the enemy, 
The savage men our bands are wont to chase 
Through these wild woods, from tangled place to place." 

Then Argus swiftly flayed off the bear's hide, 
And through the wood went with her side by side ; 
But long ere they could reach the skirts of it, 
Across the world the wings of night 'gan flit ; 
Then blindly had he stumbled through the place, 
But still the damsel went before a pace, 
Leading him on j and as she went, she shed 
A faint light round, but no word Argus said, 
Because he deemed she was a thing divine, 
And in his heart still thought upon the sign. 

So went the twain till nigh the woods were past, 
And the new-risen moon slim shadows cast 
Upon the thin snow, and the windless sky 
Was cleared, and all the stars shone frostily. 
Therewith she stopped, and turned about on him, 
And with the sight his dazzled eyes did swim, 
So was she changed, for from her raiment light 
Her rosy limbs showed 'gainst the wintry white, 
Not shrinking from the snow ; her arms were bare, 
Her head unarmed set round with yellow hair, 
And starred with unnamed dainty glimmering things ; 
From her two shoulders many-coloured wings 
Rose up, and fanning in the frosty night, 
Shone as they moved with sparkles of strange light ; 
And on an ivory rod within her hand 
A letter bound round by a golden band 
He saw. Then to the dazed man she said : 



OF THX 



170 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" Argus, be glad, and lifting up thine head, 

Look through these few last trees upon the plain, 

Smooth and unseamed, though never crossed by wain, 

And thank the Gods that led you here at last, 

For in no long time shall the leagues be passed 

'Twixt you and a swift river running north. 

But now next morn at daybreak get ye forth, 

And labour all ye may, for see the sky 

How clear it is the few light clouds are high, 

And from the east light blows the frosty wind ; 

Firm will the way be now, nor ill to find, 

But surely in few days will come the snow, 

And all the plain, so smooth and even now, 

Shall be swept into drifts impassable. 

And now I bid thee heed the great downs well 

Thou seest bar the northern way to thee ; 

Left of the moon a wide pass thou mayst see ; 

Look where the yew-trees o'er the whitened grass 

Mix with the dark sky : make ye for that pass, 

While yet endures the east wind and the frost, 

And in your journey shall ten days be lost, 

If that ye labour hard : but coming there, 

Shall ye behold a clear green river fair, 

Unfrozen yet, swift-running, that will hold 

Great Argo well : now at my word be bold, 

And set her therein, and the black ship tow 

Adown the stream, though not far shall ye go, 

But, reaching a great forest, bide ye there, 

And there the coming unknown winter bear. 

The days shall darken, the north-wind shall blow, 

And all about shall swirl the drifting snow, 

And your astonished eyes shall soon behold 

Firm earth and river one with binding cold, 

And in mid-winter then shall ye be shut ; 

But ere that haps shall ye build many an hut, 

And dwell there as ye may, until the spring 

Unchains the streams, and quickens everything. 



OF JASON. 171 

Then get ye down the river to the sea. 

Nor doubt thou aught since thou beholdest me, 

For I indeed am Iris ; but farewell, 

For of my finished message must I tell 

To her that sent me to this dreary place." 

So spake she, and straightway before his face 
She spread her fair wings wide, and from the earth 
Rose upwards toward the place that gave her birth, 
Still growing faint and fainter 'neath the moon, 
Till from his wondering eyes she vanished soon. 
But she being gone, he gat him straight away 
Unto his fellows, bidding them 'gainst day 
Be ready to set forth, and told his tale. 
And they, not fearing that his word should fail, 
Gat them to sleep, and ere the late dawn came, 
By the faint starlight and the nickering flame 
Of their own watch-fires were upon the way. . 

So at the cables toiled all men that day 
In bands of twenty, and strong shoulders bore 
The unused yoke, and laboured very sore, 
And yet with all their toil few miles they made, 
Though 'gainst that bitter labour sweet hope, weighed, 
Was found the heavier, and their hearts were cheered 
With wine and food ere the noontide they neared ; 
Nor as they laboured did the Thracian spare 
To cast his music on the frosty air, 
That therewith ringing, gladdened every heart. 
So till the evening did each man his part, 
When all the night they slept, and at daybreak 
The twisted cables in strong hands did take 
And laboured on, not earning warriors' meed, 
But like some carl's unkempt and rugged steed, 
That to the town drags his corn-laden wain. 

But neither was the heavenly word in vain, 
For as the yew-clad hill they drew anear 



172 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The grey-eyed keen Messenian could see clear, 
From the bare top of a great ashen-tree, 
The river running to the northern sea, 
Showing all dull and heavy 'gainst the snow ; 
And when the joyful tidings they did know, 
Light grew their hearts indeed, and scarcely less 
They joyed than he who, lying all helpless 
In dreary prison, sees his door ope wide, 
And half-forgotten friends stand by his side. 

So on the tenth day through the pass they drew 
Their strange ship-laden wain, and came unto 
A deep dark river, their long promised road ; 
Then from the car they slipped its heavy load, 
And when safe in the stream the keel had slid, 
They with strong axes their own work undid, 
And to the Goddess a great altar made 
Of planks and beams, foursquare, and thereon laid 
A white wild bull, and barley cakes, and spice, 
Not sparing gold and goodly things of price ; 
And fire being set thereto, and all things done 
That they should do, by a faint mid-day sun, 
Seaward they turned, and some along the shore, 
With lightened hearts the hempen tow-ropes bore, 
And some on Argo's deck abode their turn. 

But now did Jason's heart within him burn 
To show his deeds to other men than these, 
Nor did he quite forget the palaces 
Of golden JEa, long left, as a dream, 
Or iEson's beauteous house, whose oaken beam 
Cleft the dark wintry river, as they went 
With longing eyes and hearts still northward bent ; 
And fain he was to see his dainty bride, 
That wrapt in muffling furs sat by his side, 
Sit 'neath some heavy rustling summer tree, 
Thin clad, to drink the breezes from the sea. 

Now the next day the great oak-wood they reached, 



OF JASON. 173 

And as the Goddess bade them, there they beached 
Their sea-beat ship, on which from side to side 
They built a roof against the snowy tide, 
And round about her huts wherein to dwell, 
When on their heads the full mid-winter fell, 
And round the camp a wooden wall they made, 
That by no men or beasts they might be frayed. 
Meanwhile, the frost increased, and the thin snow 
From off the iron ground the wind did blow, 
And in the cold, dark stream, from either bank 
The ice stretched forth ; at last, ere the sun sank, 
One bitter day, low grew the clouds and dun 
A little northward of the setting sun, 
Wherefrom, at nightfall, sprung a furious blast, 
That, ere the middle of the night was past, 
Brought up the snow from some untrodden land, 
Joyless and sunless, where in twilight stand, 
Amid the fleecy drift with faces wan, 
Giants immovable by God or man. 

So 'mid the many changes of the night, 
The silent snow fell till the world was white, 
And to those southland folk entrapped, forlorn 
The waking was upon the morrow morn, 
And few were light of foot enough to go 
Henceforth about the woods their darts to throw 
At bird or beast, though, as the wild-fowl passed 
South o'er their camp, yet flew they not so fast 
As Areas' arrows, and the elk at bay 
Deep in the forest, seldom found a way 
To 'scape from Jason's mighty well-steeled spear, 
And Atalanta's feet outran the deer 
And slew him, tangled in the wreathed drift. 

Nor for the rest, did they yet lack the gift 
Of sunny Bacchus, but by night and day, 
By firelight passed the snowy time away, 

16 



174 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Forgetting not their fathers, or the time 
When all the world still dwelt in equal clime, 
But each to each amid the wine-cups told 
Unwritten, half-forgotten tales of old. 



BOOK XIL 

MOST pitiless and stark the winter grew 
Meanwhile, beneath a sky of cloudless blue, 
And sun that warmed not, till they nigh forgot 
The green lush spring, the summer rich and hot, 
The autumn fragrant with slow-ripening fruit ; 
Till each grew listless, dull to the heart's root ; 
For day passed day, and yet no change they saw 
In the white sparkling plain without a flaw, 
No cloud, no change within the sunny sky, 
Or in the wind, that rose at noon, to die 
Before the sunset, and no change at all 
In the drear silence of the dead nightfall. 

Ten weeks they bode there, longing for the spring, 
And to the hearts of some the thought would cling 
That thus they should be till their lives were past, 
And into hopeless bonds that land was cast j 
But on a day the wind, that rose at noon, 
Died not at night, and the white, sharp-edged moon, 
Just as the west had given it to sight, 
Was hidden from the watchers of the night 
By fleecy clouds, and the next dawn of day 
Broke o'er the Minyse colourless and grey, 
With gusts of fitful wind 'twixt south and east, 
That with the day grew steadier and increased, 
Until a south-west gale blew o'er the snow, 
And northward drove the steel-blue clouds and low. 



OF JASON. 



175 



And on that night the pattering of the rain 
Roused them from sleep, and next they saw the plain 
Made grey and ugly with quick-coming thaw, 
And all the sky beset with fowl they saw, 
Who sniffed the wind and hastened from the sea 
Unto the floods now coming certainly. 

For from their camp the Minyae beheld 
How the swift river from the high ground swelled, 
And still tormented by the wind and rain, 
Burst from the ice and covered all the plain 
With breadth of turbid waters, while around 
Their high-raised camp again they saw the ground 
Freed from the swathing snow ; nor was it long 
Ere in the woods the birds began their song, 
For March was come and life to everything, 
Nor did the buds fear much the doubtful spring. 

Now in few days the sun shone out again, 
The waters drew from off the flooded plain, 
And all was bright and soft as it might be, 
Though bank-high rolled the river to the sea, 
Made perilous with trees and heavy drift ; 
Natheless on rollers Argo did they lift, 
And drew her toward the stream in spite of all 
The ills they saw, and chances that might fall ; 
And there they launched her, being now most fain 
Once more to try the green and shifting plain, 
And for the praise of other men they yearned, 
And all the goods of life so dearly earned, 
Nor failed desire and longing love to come 
That spring-tide to those rovers far from home. 

Therefore with joy they shouted, when once more 
They felt great Argo move, and saw the shore 
Keep changing as they swept on toward the sea, 
With cheerful hearts still rowing steadily ; 
For now the ashen oars could they thrust forth 
Into the widened stream, that toward the north 



176 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Ran swiftly, and thenceforward day by day 
Toiling, they made full many a league of way. 
Nor did they see great hills on either hand, 
When they had fairly passed the woody land 
"Where they abode the winter ; neither heard 
The sound of falls to make their hearts afeard, 
But through great woods the gentle river ran, 
And plains where fed the herds unowned of man ; 
Though sometimes in the night-time did they hear 
Men's voices calling out, far-off and near, 
But in some tongue not one among them knew, 
No, not the Queen : but Lynceus, passing through 
The woods, with Idas, following up a bear, 
A sudden clamour of men's tongues did hear, 
And in a cleared space came upon a throng 
Of naked men and women, fair and strong. 
About a fire, just at point to eat, 
But at the flash of arms they to their feet 
Rose suddenly, and swiftly gat away, 
Nor durst the twain give chase to them that day, 
But coming to that fire, laid their hands 
On a brass cauldron, and three woollen bands, 
That seemed like belts or fillets for their heads, 
Set thick with silver knots and amber beads. 
Now round the brazen cauldron, graven well, 
Were uncouth letters, that some tale might tell, 
If any them could read ; so when the fleece 
Was offered up unto the Gods of Greece, 
This thing in fair Messene Idas hung 
In the fair fane where deeds of war are sung. 

So through all this the wearied Minyas 
Were drawing nigh unto the northern sea, 
And marshier grew the plain as on they went, 
And eastward the still-widening river bent, 
Until one day at eve, with chilling rain, 
The north-wind blew across the marshy plain 



OF JASON. 177 

Most cold and bitter, but to them as sweet 
As the rose-scented zephyr those do meet 
Who near the happy islands of the blest ; 
For as upon their eager brows it pressed, 
They sniffed withal the odour of the sea, 
And going on a mile, they seemed to be 
Within some eddy rippling languidly ; 
And when the stream they tasted that went by 
Their shielded bulwark, better was the draught 
Than any wine o'er which a king has laughed, 
For still it savoured of the bitter sea. 

So fell the night, and next day joyously 
They met the full flood, whose first toppling wave 
Against the sturdy prow of Argo drave, 
And with good heart, as 'midst the sweeping oars 
It tossed and foamed, and swept the muddy shores, 
They toiled, and felt no weariness that day. 
But though right well they gat them on their way, 
They failed ere dark the open sea to reach ; 
But in the night the murmur of the beach, 
Tormented by the changeful dashing seas, 
Came to their ears upon the fitful breeze. 
Then sore they longed for dawn, and when it broke 
Again the waters foamed beneath their stroke, 
Till they had gained that river's utmost reach, 
Which from the sea by a low sandy beach 
Was guarded well, all but a little space, 
Through which now rushed in headlong, foaming race, 
The huddled waters of the flowing tide. 
So there the Minyae thought it good to bide 
And wait the ebb, dreading some hidden bank ; 
And while they waited to good hap they drank, 
And poured out wine unto the deity 
Who dwelt between the river and the sea, 
Forgetting not the great Earth-shaking One, 

16* 



178 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Nor Her by whose help thus far they had run 

Their happy course unto that river's mouth. 

And now the wind had changed, and from the south 

Blew softly, and the hot sun, shining forth, 

Made lovely land of that once bitter north, 

And filled their hearts with longing thoughts of love, 

And worship of the sea-born seed of Jove. 

But as they waited thus, with hearts that burned 
To try the sea, the tide grew high and turned, 
And seaward through the deepened channel ran 
In gentle ripple 'gainst the breakers wan. 
Then thither gat the joyous Minyae, 
And, shouting, drave out Argo to the sea. 

But when the first green ridge swept up her bow, 
Then Jason cried : " And who shall stop us now ? 
And who shall drive us unto other end 
Than that we will? Let whoso be our friend, 
Whoso our foe, henceforth, until the earth 
Forgets of changeful men the death and birth, 
We shall not be forgotten anywhere, 
But our deeds told shall free sad folk from care." 

So spake he, and his love beholding him, 
Trembled for joy and love in every limb, 
And inwardly she saw an ivory throne, 
And Jason sitting with her there alone, 
High o'er wise men and warriors worshipping. 
For they were young, nor yet had felt the sting 
Of poisonous fear, nor thought of coming age 
And bitter death, the turning of the page 
By those who quite forget what they have read, 
Taking no heed of living folk or dead. 

Now hoisting sail, and labouring with the oar, 
They passed along the amber-bearing shore, 
A low coast, backed by pine-woods : none the less 
Some days they needs must pass in idleness, 



OF JASON. 179 

And lie-to, 'midst white rolling mist and blind, 
Lest Argo on some shallow death should find ; 
Yet holpen by the steersman's mighty sire, 
Safely they sailed until the land rose higher, 
And through a narrow strait at last they went, 
Brushing the unknown coast, where, with bows bent, 
They saw a skin-clad folk awaiting them, 
Who stood to watch the well-built Argo stem 
The rushing tide upon the shingly beach, 
And thence, as knowing that they could not reach 
The heroes with their arrows, shook their spears, 
And shouted unknown threats to careless ears. 

But when against the midst of them they came, 
Forth strode a huge man, with red hair like flame, 
And his huge bow against them strongly drew, 
Wherefrom a swift shaft straight to Argo flew, 
And whistling over Jason's head, stuck fast 
Over the barb-points in the gleaming mast. 
Then all men praised that archer ; but the man 
Who in Arcadian woods all beasts outran, 
Straight drew his bow unto the arrow-head, 
And no man doubted that wild king was dead : 
Natheless, unmoved they saw the archer stand, 
And toward the Arcadian arrow stretch his hand, 
That midmost of his skin-clad body smote, 
But bounded back as from an iron coat. 
Then loud his people shouted, and all drew 
Their feeble bows, but short their arrows flew, 
And through the straits the wandering Minyse 
Passed out unscathed into the open sea, 
While still of wizardry and charms they spoke. 

But Jason from the mast the arrow broke, 
That erewhile had so scantly missed his life, 
And found it scored as by a sharp-edged knife, 
From barb to notch, with what seemed written words, 
In tongue unknown to aught but beasts and birds. 
So when Medea saw it, straight she said : 



180 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" Fair love, now praise some God- thou art not dead, 
For from the Cimbrian folk this arrow came, 
And its sharp barbs within a wizard's flame 
Were forged with peril, and the shaft of it 
Was carved by one who in great fear did sit 
Within the haunted places of the wood, 
And tears are on its feathers, and red blood : 
Nor ask me now the name of her who taught 
This wisdom to me : but two arrows brought 
From this same folk to iEa have I seen, 
By one whose wounds will evermore be green 
While on the earth he dwells." So spoke the maid, 
But Jason, wondering at the words she said, 
Gazed on her fair face, smiling lovingly, 
Nor cared to think that he must one day die. 

Now rose a south-east gale, and Argo lost 
All sight of land, and the vexed Minyse, tost' 
From sea to sea, began to feel a fear 
They yet might pass into some ocean drear 
Beyond the circling sea that rings the world, 
And down some bottomless abyss be hurled, 
To fall for ever : then the winged twain, 
That erst had been the loathly harpies' bane, 
Came forth, and on the prow with wings spread wide, 
Half stood, half floated, while aloud they cried : 

" What dost thou, Father? art thou sleeping then, 
And does it not suffice that trading men 
Float up and down, dead corpses on the sea, 
While all their wealth is lying wretchedly 
On Nereus' pavement ; but must we too drive 
Before this south wind, hopeless though alive, 
, Until the farthest gulfs shall suck us down, 
And land our battered keel at Pluto's town ? " 

So spake they ; but still blew the south the same 
Until the starless night upon them came, 



OF JASON. 181 

But then a little did its fury lull, 

And when the rain-beat night was at its full, 

Fell to a light breeze, though still many a sea 

Swept Argo's deck, and still the Minyae 

Had dread of some returning hideous blast. 

But when the doubtful night from them had past, 

Barefoot upon the prow Medea stood, 

And burning in a censer hallowed wood, 

With muttered words she swung it, nor took heed 

Of how the wind was dealing with her weed, 

Nor with firm-planted feet one whit did reck 

Of washing of the brine about the deck, 

But swung her censer till a bright red flame 

From out the piercings of its cover came ; 

Then round she turned and said : " Minyse, 

Fear not to die within the northern sea, 

For on my head hither the north wind comes, 

And ye some day shall surely see your homes. 

But since upon us yet lies heavily 

My brother's death, forget not we must see 

My father's godlike sister, who one day 

With all due rites that blood shall wash away. 

" And now, behold the sun shines through the clouds, 
And ye may hear across the well-strained shrouds 
The longed-for wind, therefore make no delay, 
For time it is that we were on our way, 
So let Erginus to the south-west steer ; 

" But sleep to me of all things now is dear, 
For with two mighty ones but for your sake 
Have I contended. He who still doth shake 
The firm-set earth, and She who draws the sea 
This way and that, the while in majesty 
She sits, regarding little but her will ; 
The fear of these my heavy heart doth fill." 

So said she, and with pale and languid face 
And half-shut eyes, unto the guarded place, 



1 82 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Where was her golden bed, the maiden came, 
And in her dreams at first saw blood and flame 
O'er all the world, and nothing green or fair; 
Then in a snowy land, with body bare, 
Went wandering, be-mocked of uncouth things ; 
Then stood before the judgment-seat of kings, 
Knowing no crime that she was charged withal, 
Until at last deep sleep on her did fall 
Like death itself, wherein the troublous past 
And fearsome future in one tomb are cast. 

Meanwhile the Minyae, joyful at her tale, 
Ran out the oars and hoisted up the sail, 
And toward the south with good hearts 'gan to go, 
While still they felt the favouring north wind blow, 
And the third day again they saw the land, 
That in white cliffs rose up on the right hand, 
Coasting whereby, they came into a strait, 
Or so they deemed, for as the day grew late, 
Beneath a frosty light-blue sky and cold 
Another country could they now behold 
Dim o'er the glittering sea ; but in the night 
They by the moon past the high cliff and white 
Ceased not to sail, and lost the other shore 
When the day broke, nor saw it any more 
As the first land they coasted, that changed oft 
From those high cliffs to meadows green and soft, 
And then to other cliffs, some red, some grey, 
Till all the land at noon of the fourth day 
They left astern, sailing where fate might lead, 
Of sun or stars scarce taking any heed, 
Such courage in their hearts the White-armed set, 
Since, clad in gold, was Pelias living yet. 

But to the Gods now did they sacrifice 
As seafarers may do, and things of price 
Gave to the tumbling billows of the sea, 



OF JASON. 183 

That for their lives still cried out hungrily, 

And though for many days they saw no shore, 

Yet fainted not their hearts as heretofore, 

For as along the pathless plain they went, 

The white-foot messenger the Goddess sent, 

Who, unseen, whispered in the helmsman's ear, 

And taught him how the goodly ship to steer ; 

And on a time it chanced as the day broke, 

And to their life the longing Minyse woke, 

Across the risen sun the west wind blew 

A thin light rain, that He, just shining through, 

Showed to them all the many-coloured sign ; 

Then to the Goddess did they pour out wine, 

Eight glad at heart ; but she the live-long day 

By Argo's prow flew o'er the shifting way 

Unseen of all, and turned them still to land ; 

And as they went the Thracian's cunning hand 

Stole o'er the harp-strings till Arion's steeds 

Gat them from 'twixt the tangled water-weeds, 

And lifted listening heads above the sea, 

And sea-birds, pensive with the harmony, 

About the mast, above the singer hung, 

With quivering wings, as from full heart he sung : 

l^ V death, that maketh life so sweet, 
fear, with mirth before thy feet, 
What have ye yet in store for us, 
The conquerors, the glorious ? 

' ' Men say : ' For fear that thou shouldst die 
To-morrow, let to-day pass by 
Flower-crowned and singing ; ' yet have we 
Passed our to-day upon the sea, 
Or in a poisonous unknown land, 
With fear and death on either hand, 
And listless when the day was done 
Have scarcely hoped to see the sun 
Dawn on the morrow of the earth, 



184 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Nor in our hearts have thought of mirth. 
And while the world lasts, scarce again 
Shall any sons of men bear pain 
Like we have borne, yet be alive. 

" So surely not in vain we strive 
Like other men for our reward ; 
Sweet peace and deep, the checkered sward 
Beneath the ancient mulberry-trees, 
The smooth-paved gilded palaces, 
Where the shy thin-clad damsels sweet 
Make music with their gold-ringed feet ; 
The fountain court amidst of it, 
Where the short-haired slave maidens sit, 
While on the veined pavement lie 
The honeyed things and spicery 
Their arms have borne from out the town. 

" The dancers on the thymy down 
In summer twilight, when the earth 
Is still of all things but their mirth, 
And echoes borne upon the wind 
Of others in like way entwined. 

"The merchant towns' fair market-place, 
Where over many a changing face 
The pigeons of the temple flit, 
And still the outland merchants sit 
Like kings above their merchandise, 
Lying to foolish men and wise. 

' ' Ah ! if they heard that we were come 
Into the bay, and bringing home 
That which all men have talked about, 
Some men with rage, and some with doubt, 
Some with desire, some with praise, 
Then would the people throng the ways, 
Nor heed the outland merchandise, 
Nor any talk, from fbols or wise, 
But tales of our accomplished quest. 



OF JASON. 185 

" What soul within the house shall rest 

When we come home ? The wily king 

Shall leave his throne to see the thing ; 

No man shall keep the landward gate, 

The hurried traveller shall wait n /- 

-Until our bulwarks graze the quay,, jfj/^ fJ^+-** 
I Unslain the milk-white bull shall be) 

Beside the quivering altar-flame ; / 

Scarce shall the maiden clasp for shame 

Over her breast the raiment thin 

The morn that Argo cometh in. 
" Then cometh happy life again 

That payeth well our toil and pain 

In that sweet hour, when all our woe 

But as a pensive tale we know, 

Nor yet remember deadly fear ; 

For surely now if death be near, 

Unthought of is it, and unseen 

When sweet is, that hath bitter been." 

So sung the Thracian, and the rowing-folk 
Sent Argo quivering with the well-timed stroke 
Over the green hills, through great clouds of spray, 
And as they went upon their happy way 
About the deck the longing men would stand 
With wistful eyes still gazing for the land ; 
Which yet they saw not, till the cool fresh night 
Had come upon them, with no lack of light, 
For moon and stars shone brightly overhead, 
Nor through the night did Iris fail to lead 
The wave-tossed Argo o'er the glittering sea. 

So as the moon set, did there seem to be, 
Upon their larboard, banks of high-piled cloud, 
Which from their sight the last dark hour did shroud. 
Then came the twilight, and those watchers fain 
Against the eastern light beheld again 



1 86 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The clouds unchanged ; and as the daylight grew, 
Lynceus cried out : " Some land we draw unto ! 
Look forth, Erginus, on these mountains grey, 
If thou, perchance, hast seen them ere to-day." 

Therewith all turned about, and some men ran 
To hear what words the God-begotten man 
Would say, who answered : " Lynceus, and all ye, 
The man we left ere while across the sea 
Might tell us this, the godlike Hercules ; 
Yet I myself think that the landless seas 
No more shall vex us now, but that we come 
Unto the gates that look into our home : 
So trim the sails, for thither will I steer, 
Seeking what lies beyond with little fear, 
Since surely now I see the Iberian land 
That 'gainst the shore of Africa doth stand. 
To break these mighty billows, ever pressed 
Each against each from out the landless west." 

So with glad hearts all men his bidding did, 
And swiftly through the water Argo slid, 
Till as the sun rose were they near the strait, 
At whose mouth but a little did they wait 
Till they had eaten, pouring honeyed wine 
Unto the Gods, then biding no new sign, 
They cried aloud, and running out the oars, 
They swept great Argo midmost 'twixt the shores 
Of either land, and as her gilded prow 
Cleft the new waters, clean forgotten now 
Grew all the wasteful washing of the main, 
And clean forgotten the dull hopeless pain, 
In the great swirling river left so long, 
And in all hearts the memory was strong 
Of the bright Grecian headlands and the bay 
They left astern upon a glorious day. 



OF JASON. 187 



BOOK XIII. 

BUT as along the shore they sailed next day, 
Full many a headland on their lucky way 
Erginus knew, but said no towns there were 
Within that land, but that from year to year 
Well-nigh un tilled the earth her produce gave, 
And many a herd the houseless people drave, 
And using neither roof nor sheltering wall, 
Dwelt but in tents, and had no want at all. 

With that he bade them trim the bellying sail, 
For from the land now blew a gentle gale, 
Spice-laden, warm, that made their full hearts yearn 
For unseen things, but soon they left astern 
That fruitful place, the lion-haunted land, 
Nor saw but tumbling seas on either hand. 

Three days they sailed, and passed on the third day 
A rock-bound coast upon their left that lay, 
But on the morrow eve made land again, 
Stretched right ahead across the watery plain, 
Whereto ere nightfall did they draw anear, 
And so lay-to till dawn with little fear ; 
For from the shore a light, soft land-wind blew. 

But as the dead night round about them drew, 
The ceaseless roar of savage beasts they heard, 
Mingled with sounds like cries of men afeard, 
And blare of horns, and clank of heavy chains, 
And noise of bells, such as in moonlit lanes 
Rings from the grey team on the market-night. 

And with these noises did they see a light, 
That seemed to light some crown of palaces, 
Shining from out a grove of thickset trees. 
Then did the Minyae doubt if they were come 
Unto some great king's well-adorned home, 



1 88 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Or if some temple of a God were there, 
Or if, indeed, the spirits of the air 
Haunted that place : so slowly passed away 
The sleepless night, and at the dawn of day 
Their longing eyes beheld a lovely land, 
Green meadows rising o'er a yellow strand, 
Well-set with fair fruit-bearing trees, and groves 
Of thick-leaved elms, all populous of doves, 
And watered by a wandering clear green stream ; 
And through the trees they saw a palace gleam 
Of polished marble, fair beyond man's thought. 

There as they lay, the sweetest scents were brought 
By sighing winds across the bitter sea, 
And languid music breathed melodiously, 
Steeping their souls in such unmixed delight, 
Their hearts were melted, and all dim of sight 
They grew, and scarce their hands could grip the oar, 
And as they slowly neared the happy shore, 
The young men well-nigh wept, and e'en the wise 
Thought they had reached the gate of Paradise. 

But 'midst them stood Medea, and thoughtfully 
Gazed landward o'er the ripple of the sea, 
And said no word, till from her precious things 
She drew a casket full of chains and rings, 
And took therefrom a chaplet brown and sere, 
And set it on her head : and now being near 
The yellow strand, high on the poop she stood, 
And said : " heroes, what has chilled your blood, 
That in such wise ye gaze upon this land 
With tearful eye, and nerveless, languid hand, 
And heaving breast, and measureless desire ? 
Be wise, for here the never-dying fire 
The God-begotten wonder, Circe, lights, 
The wise of women, framer of delights 
That being of man once felt, he ne'er shall cease 
To long for vainly, as the years increase 
On his dulled soul, shut in some bestial form. 



OF JASON. 189 

" And good it had been that some bitter storm 
Were tossing Argo's planks from sea to sea', 
Than ye had reached this fair land, but for me, 
Who amid tears and prayers, and nameless pain, 
Some little wisdom have made shift to gain : 
Look forth upon the green shore, and behold 
Those many beasts, all collared with fine gold, 
Lions and pards, and small-eyed restless bears, 
And tusked boars, who from uneasy lairs 
Are just come forth j nor is there 'mongst them one 
But once walked upright underneath the sun, 
And had the name of man : such shall ye be, 
If from the ship ye wander heedlessly, 
But safely I my kinswoman may meet, 
And learn from her the bitter and the sweet 
That waits us ere ye come to Greece again, 
And see the wind-swept green Thessalian plain. 

" Meanwhile, let nothing tempt you to the land, 
Nor unto anything stretch forth the hand 
That comes from shore, for all ye may see there 
Are but lost men and their undoers fair." 

But with that word they furrowed the wet sand, 
And straight they ran the gangway out to land, 
O'er which, with girded raiment, passed the queen j 
But now another marvel was there seen, 
For to the shore, from many a glade and lawn, 
The golden-collared, sad-eyed beasts were drawn 
In close-set ranks above the sea-beat shore, 
And open-mouthed, with varying moan and roar, 
White-foot Medea did they seem to threat ; 
Whereat the Minyse on their bow-strings set 
The notches of their arrows, but the maid 
Turned round about, with calm face unafraid, 
And said : "0 Minyae, lay your weapons down, 
Nor fear for me j behold this chaplet brown, 
Whose withered leaves rest lightly on my head, 
17* 



190 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

This is the herb that Grods and mortals dread, 
The Pontic Moly, the unchanging charm." 

Then up the beach she passed, and her white arm 
This way and that the leopards thrust aside, 
And 'mid the grisly swine her limbs did glide, 
And on a lion's mane her hand she laid ; 
]$ut still with moans they thronged about the maid, 
As she passed onward to the palace white, 
Until the elm-groves hid her from the sight. 

Then they with fearful hearts did sacrifice 
Unto the Grods in their seafaring wise, 
But of the lovely land were they so fain 
That their return they scarcely counted gain, 
Unto the green plain dotted o'er with folds 
And that fair bay that Pelion beholds. 

Meanwhile Medea through the thick-leaved grove 
Passed underneath the moaning of the dove, 
Not left by those strange beasts ; until at last 
Her feet from off the sparse long grasses passed 
Unto a sunny space of daisied sward, 
From which a strange-wrought silver grate did guard 
A lovely pleasance, set with flowers, foursquare, 
On three sides ending in a cloister fair 
That hid the fair feet of a marble house, 
Carved thick with flowers and stories amorous. 
And midmost of the slender garden trees 
A gilded shrine stood, set with images, 
Wherefrom the never-dying fire rose up 
Into the sky, and a great jewelled cup 
Ran over ever from a runlet red 
Of fragrant wine, that 'mid the flowers shed 
Strange scent that grapes yield not to any man, 
While round about the shrine four streamlets ran 
From golden founts to freshen that green place. 

So there Medea stayed a little space, 



OF JASON. 191 

Gazing in wonder through the silver rail 

That fenced the garden from the wooded vale ; 

For damsels wandered there in languid wise 

As though they wearied of that Paradise, 

Their jewelled raiment dragging from its stalk 

The harmless daisy in their listless walk. 

But though from rosy heel to golden head 

Most fair they were and wrought with white and red, 

Like to the casket-bearer who beguiled 

The hapless one, and though their lips still smiled, 

Yet to the Colchian heavy-eyed they seemed, 

And each at other gazed as though she dreamed, 

Not noting aught of all the glorious show 

She joined herself, nor seeming more to know 

What words she spoke nor what her fellows sung, 

Nor feeling arms that haply round her clung. 

For here and there the Colchian maid could see 
Some browned seafarer kissing eagerly 
White feet or half-bared bosom, and could hear 
A rough voice stammering 'twixt love and fear 
Amid the dreamy murmur of the place, 
As on his knees, with eager upturned face, 
Some man would pour forth many a fruitless word, 
That did but sound like song of a wild bird 
Unto his love ; while she for all reply, 
Still gazing on his flushed face wearily, 
Would undo clasp and belt, and show to him 
Undreamed-of loveliness of side or limb. 

And in such guise of half-stripped jewelled weed, 
The men entrapped, Medea saw them lead 
Into the dark cool cloister, whence again 
They came not forth, but four-foot, rough of mane, 
Uncouth with spots and dangerous of claw. 

But when the sad-eyed beasts about her saw 
These draw towards them, and beheld the gate 
Open and shut, and fellows to that state 



192 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

New come, they whined, and brushing round her feet 

Prayed for return unto that garden sweet, 

Their own undoing once, that yet shall be 

Death unto many a toiler of the sea, 

Because all these outside the silver grate 

Were men indeed though inarticulate, 

And, spite of seeming, in none otherwise 

Did longing torture them, than when in guise 

Of men they stood before that garden green, 

And first their eyes the baneful place had seen. 

But now the queen grew wroth, for in her way, 
Before the gate a yellow lion lay, 
A tiger-cat her raiment brushed aside, 
And o'er her feet she felt a serpent glide, 
The swine screamed loud about her, and a pard 
Her shining shoulder of her raiment bared 
With light swift clutch j then she from off her head 
Took the sere moly wreath, and therewith said : 
" What do ye, wretches? know ye not this sign, 
That whoso wears is as a thing divine ? 
Get from this place, for never more can ye 
Become partakers of the majesty 
That from man's soul looks through his eager eyes. 
Go wail that ever ye were made so wise 
As men are made who chase through smooth and rough 
Their own undoing, nor can have enough 
Of bitter trouble and entangling woe." 

Then slowly from her did those monsters go, 
In varied voices mourning for their lot, 
And that sweet poison ne'er to be forgot. 

But straight with serious face the Colchian maid 
Her slender fingers on the latchet laid 
That held the silver gate, and entered in ; 
Nor did those weary images of sin 
Take any heed of her as she passed by, 






OF JASON. 193 

But, if they met her eyes, stared listlessly, 
Like those who walk in sleep, and as they dream 
Turn empty faces to the lightning's gleam, 
And murmur softly while the thunder rolls. 

Swiftly she passed those bodies void of souls, 
And through the darkling corridor she passed, 
And reached a huge adorned hall at last, 
Where sat alone the deathless sorceress, 
Upon whose knees an open book did press, 
Wherein strange things the Gods knew not, she read. 
A golden vine-bough wreathed her golden head, 
And her fair body a thin robe did touch 
With silken folds, but hid it not so much 
As the cool ripple hides Diana's feet, 
When through the brook the roe-deer, slim and fleet, 
She follows at the dawning of the day. 

Smiling, she put the wondrous book away ; 
As the light footsteps fell upon her ear, 
She raised her head, and when the queen drew near, 
Shefsaid : " wanderer from sea to sea, 
I greet thee well, and dear thou art to me ; 
Though verily if I could wish for aught, 
I could have wished thou hadst been hither brought 
Ere that had happed to thee that haps to all, 
Into the troublous sea of love to fall, 
Then like unto the gods shoulclst thou have been, 
Nor ever died, but sitting here have seen 
The fashion of the foolish world go by, 
And drunk the cup of power and majesty. 

" But now it may not be, and thou must come, 
With him thou boughtedst, to a troublous home ; 
But since indeed the fates will have it so, 
Take heed thou dost the things I bid thee do. 
And, first, since thou wouldst have me purify 
Your hands of his blood that thou sawest die 
'Twixt yellow Phasis and the green-ridged sea, 



194 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Behold, this is not possible to me, 
Nor ever must another altar stand 
In this green nook of the Italian land 
To aught but me, no, not unto my Sire ; 
But unto him shall ye light ruddy fire, 
When, drawing nigh to your desired home, 
Unto the headland of Malea ye come ; 
And then, indeed, I bid you not to spare 
Spices and golden things and raiment fair, 
But to the country folk give things of price, 
And from them take wherewith to sacrifice, 
A hundred milk-white bulls, a hundred kine, 
And many a jar of unmixed honeyed wine, 
And, crowned with olive, round the altars sing 
Unto the God who gladdens everything, 
Thy father's father, the all-seeing Sun. 
And then the deed thy Jason's spear has done 
Mayst thou forget, it shall not visit thee. 
Moreover, sailing hence across the sea, 
A waste of yellow sand shall ye pass by 
'Neath the Trinacrian cliffs, whereon shall lie 
Fair women, fairer than thine eyes have seen. 
And if thou still wouldst be a Grecian queen, 
When to that deadly place ye draw anear, 
And sweetest music ye begin to hear, 
Bid your bold love steer Argo from the land, 
While Thracian Orpheus takes his harp in hand, 
And sings thereto some God-delighting strain. 
And surely else shall all your toil be vain, 
For deadlier than my gardens are those sands ; 
And when the mariner's toil-hardened hands 
Keach out unto those bodies fair and white, 
They clasp but death instead of their delight. 

" But, doing as I bid, Malea reach, 
And after, nigh Iolchos Argo beach, 
Yet at the city haste ye not to land, 



OF JASON. 195 

For still the sceptre presses Pelias' hand, 

And iEson is at rest for evermore ; 

Bid then thy folk lurk by some wooded shore, 

And to the white-walled city straightly wend 

Thyself alone, and safely there make end 

Of the King's life ; nor need I teach thee how, 

For deep unfailing wiles thy soul doth know. 

" What more ? what more? I see thy grey eyes ask, 
What course, what ending to the tangled task 
The Gods have set before me, ere I die ? 
child, I know all things, indeed, but why 
Shouldst thou know all, nor yet be wise therefore, 
Me knowledge grieves not, thee should it grieve sore, 
Nor knowing, shouldst thou cease to hope or fear. 
What ! do men think of death ere it draws near ? 
Not so, else surely would they stint their strife, 
For lengthening out their little span of life, 
But where each found himself there should he sit, 
Not moving hand or foot for thought of it. 
Wherefore the Gods, wishing the earth to teem 
With living wills like theirs, nor as a dream 
To hold but beauty and the lives of beasts, 
That they may have fair stories for their feasts, 
Have given them forgetfulness of death, 
Longings and hopes, and joy in drawing breath. 
And they live happy, knowing nought at all, 
Nor what death is, where that shall chance to fall. 
For while he lives, few minutes certainly 
Does any man believe that he shall die. 
Ah, what? thou hang'st thine head, and on thy feet 
Down rain the tears from thy grey eyes and sweet ; 
Weep not, nor pity thine own life too much : 
Not painless shall it be, indeed, or such 
As the Gods live in their unchanged abode, 
And yet not joyless j no unmeasured load 
Of sorrow shall thy dull soul learn to bear, 



196 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

With nought to keep thee back from death but fear, 
Of what thou know'st not, knowing nought but pain. 
" But though full oft thou shalt lift hands in vain, 
Crying to what thou know'st not in thy need, 
And blind with agony, yet oft, indeed, 
Shalt thou go nigh to think thyself divine, 
For love of what thou deemest to be thine, 
For joy of what thou dreamest cannot die. 

" Live then thy life, nor ask for misery, 
Most certain if thou knewest what must be, 
And then, at least, this shall not hap to thee, 
To be like those who people my sad groves, 
Beneath the moaning of the grey-winged doves. 
And 'midst all pain and joy, and wrong and right, 
Thy name to all shall be a dear delight 
While the world lasts, if this avail thee aught. 

" Farewell, child, whose feet alone have brought 
An earthly damsel to my house of gold, 
For surely those thou didst ere while behold, 
These hands have made, and can unmake again, 
Nor know they aught of love, or fear, or pain. 
Go, loiter not, this place befits thee nought, 
Thou knowest many things full dearly bought, 
And well I love thee, being so wise and fair, 
But what is knowledge in this deadly air, 
That floats about thee, poisoning hearts of man ? 
Behold I see thy cheeks, that erst were wan, 
Flaming with new desire, and in thine eyes 
Shine out new thoughts that from thine heart arise ; 
Gird up thy raiment, nor run slower now 
Than from the amorous bearer of the bow 
Once Daphne ran ; nor yet forget the word 
That thou from deadly lips this day hast heard." 



OF JASON. 197 

So said she, and thereat the Colchian maid 
Turned from her fair face shuddering and afraid, 
With beating heart, and flushed face like the rose 
That in the garden of Damascus grows, 
And catching up her raiment, hurried through 
The mighty hall, where thick the pillars blue 
Stood like a dream to hold the roof aloft ; 
But as she left it, musky odours soft 
Were cast about her by the dallying breeze, 
That 'twixt the heavy-fruited garden-trees 
Blew o'er those golden heads and bodies white, 
And limbs well made for manifold delight, 
From 'twixt whose fingers and the strings did flow 
Sweet music such as Helicon might know. 

But dizzied, hurrying through the place she past, 
Nor any look upon their beauty cast, 
Nor any thought unto the music gave, 
But set herself her own vext soul to save 
From that dread place ; beginning now to run 
Like to a damsel of the lightfoot One, 
Who oft from twilight unto twilight goes 
Through still dark woods, where never rough wind blows. 

So, the grove passed, she made good speed to reach 
The edges of the sea, the wind-swept beach ; 
But as she ran, afar the heroes saw 
Her raiment fluttering, and made haste to draw 
Their two-edged swords, and their strong bows to string, 
Doubting that she was chased of some dread thing ; 
And Jason leapt ashore, and toward her ran, 
And with him went the arrow-loving man, 
The wise Arcadian, and the Minyae 
Grot ready shielded Argo for the sea. 

But ere these met her, with uplifted hand, 
She cried : " Turn back, nor deeper in this land 
Thrust ye your souls ; nought chases me but fear, 
And all is well if on the sea we were ; 

18 



198 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Yea, if we once were free from fear and spell, 
Then, truly, better were all things than well." 

Thereat they stayed, but onward still she ran 
Until she reached them, and the godlike man 
Took by the arm, and hurrying him along, 
Stayed not until their feet were set among 
The last faint ripples of the gentle sea, 
Wherefrom they boarded Argo speedily, 
And Jason bid all men unto the oar. 

With that they left the fair death-bearing shore, 
Not gladlier than some fair young man may leave 
His love, upon the odorous summer eve, 
When she turns sighing to her father's house, 
And leaves him there alone and amorous, 
Heartsick with all that shame has let him see, 
Grieved that no bolder he has dared to be. 



BOOK XIV. 

NOW o'er the open sea they took their way, 
For three days, and at dawning of the day, 
Upon the fourth, saw the Trinacrian shore, 
And there-along they coasted two days more. 
Then first Medea warned them to take heed, 
Lest they should end all memory of their deed 
Where dwell the Sirens on the yellow sand, 
And folk should think some tangled poisonous land 
Had buried them, or some tumultuous sea 
O'er their white bones was tossing angrily; 
Or that some muddy river, far from Greece, 
Drove seaward o'er the ringlets of the fleece. 

But when the Minyae hearkened to this word, 
With many a thought their wearied hearts were stirred, 



OF JASON. 199 

And longing for the near-gained Grecian land, 
Where in a little while their feet should stand ; 
Yet none the less like to a happy dream, 
Now, when they neared it, did their own home seem, 
And like a dream the glory of their quest, 
And therewithal some thought of present rest 
Stole over them, and well-nigh made them sigh 
To hear the sighing restless wind go by. 

But now, nigh even on the second day, 
As o'er the gentle waves they took their way, 
The orange-scented land-breeze seemed to bear 
Some other sounds unto the listening ear 
Than all day long they had been hearkening 
The land-born signs of many a well-known thing. 
Thereat Medea trembled, for she knew 
That nigh the dreadful sands at last they drew, 
For certainly the Sirens' song she heard, 
Though yet her ear could shape it to no word, 
And by their faces could the queen behold 
How sweet it was, although no tale it told, 
To those worn toilers o'er the bitter sea. y 

Now, as they sped along, they presently, 
Rounding a headland, reached a little bay, 
Walled from the sea by splintered cliffs and grey, 
Capped by the thymy hills' green wind-beat head, 
Where 'mid the whin the burrowing rabbits fed. 
And 'neath the cliff they saw a waste of sand, 
'Twixt Nereus' pasture and the high scarped land, 
Whereon, yet far off, could their eyes behold 
White bodies moving, crowned and girt with gold, 
Wherefrom it seemed that lovely music welled. 

So when all this the grey-eyed queen beheld, 
She said: " Jason, I have made thee wise 
In this and other things ; turn then thine eyes 
Seaward, and note the ripple of the sea, 
Where there is hope as well as fear for thee. 



200 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Nor look upon the death that lurketh there 

'Neath the grey cliff, though sweet it seems and fair 

For thou art young upon this day to die. 

Take then the helm, and gazing steadily 

Upon the road to Greece, make strong thine hand, 

And steer us toward the lion-haunted land : 

And thou, Thracian ! if thou ere hast moved 

Men's hearts, with stories of the Gods who loved, 

And men who suffered, move them on this day, 

Taking the deadly love of death away, 

That even now is stealing over them, 

While still they gaze upon the ocean's hem, 

Where their undoing is if they but knew." 

But while she spake, still nigher Argo drew 
Unto the yellow edges of the shore, 
And little help she had of ashen oar, 
For as her shielded side rolled through the sea, 
Silent with glittering eyes the Minyse 
Gazed o'er the surge, for they were nigh enow 
To see the gusty wind of evening blow 
Long locks of hair across those bodies white, 
With golden spray hiding some dear delight ; 
Yea, nigh enow to see their red lips smile, 
Wherefrom all song had ceased now for a while, 
As though they deemed the prey was in the net, 
And they no more had need a bait to set, 
But their own bodies, fair beyond man's thought, 
Underthe grey cliff, hidden not of aught 
But of such mist of tears as in the eyes 
Of those seafaring men might chance to rise. 

A moment Jason gazed, then through the waist 
Ran swiftly, and with trembling hands made haste 
To trim the sail, then to the tiller ran, 
And thrust aside the skilled Milesian man, 
Who with half-open mouth, and dreamy eyes, 



OF JASON. 20 1 

Stood steering Argo to that land of lies, 
But as he staggered forward, Jason's hand 
Hard on the tiller steered away from land, 
And as her head a little now fell off 
Unto the wide sea, did he shout this scoff 
To Thracian Orpheus : " Minstrel, shall we die, 
Because thou hast forgotten utterly 
What things she taught thee that men call divine, 
Or will thy measures but lead folk to wine, 
And scented beds, and not to noble deeds ? 
Or will they fail as fail the shepherd's reeds 
Before the trumpet, when these sea-witches 
Pipe shrilly to the washing of the seas ? 
I am a man, and these but beasts, but thou 
Giving these souls, that all were men ere now 
Shall be a very God and not a man ! " 

So spake he ; but his fingers Orpheus ran 
Over the strings, and sighing turned away 
From that fair ending of the sunny bay ; 
But as his well-skilled hands were preluding 
What his heart swelled with, they began to sing 
With pleading voices from the yellow sands, 
Clustered together, with appealing hands 
Beached out to Argo as she turned away, 
While o'er their white limbs flew the flakes of spray, 
Since they spared not to set white feet among 
The cold waves heedless of their honeyed song. 

Sweetly they sung, and still the answer came * 
Piercing and clear from him, as bursts the flame 
From out the furnace in the moonless night ; 
Yet, as their words are no more known aright 
Through lapse of many ages, and no man 
Can any more across the waters wan 
Behold those singing women of the sea, 
Once more I pray you all to pardon me, 



202 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

If with my feeble voice and harsh I sing 
From what dim memories may chance to cling 
About men's hearts, of lovely things once sung 
Beside the sea, while yet the world was young. 

The Sirens. 

happy seafarers are ye, 

And surely all your ills are past, 

And toil upon the land and sea, 
Since ye are brought to us at last. 

To you the fashion of the world, 

Wide lands laid waste, fair cities burned, 

And plagues, and kings from kingdoms hurled, 
Are nought, since hither ye have turned. 

For as upon this beach we stand, 
And o'er our heads the sea-fowl flit, 

Our eyes behold a glorious land, 
And soon shall ye be kings of it. 

Orpheus. 

A little more, a little more, 

carriers of the Golden Fleece, 

A little labour with the oar, 

Before we reach the land of Greece. 

E'en now perchance faint rumours reach 

Men's ears of this our victory, 
And draw them down unto the beach 

To gaze across the empty sea. 

But since the longed-for day is nigh, 
And scarce a God could stay us now, 

Why do ye hang your heads and sigh, 
And still go slower and more slow ? 



OF JASON. 203 



The Sirens. 



Ah, had ye chanced to reach the home 
Your fond desires were set upon, 

Into what troubles had ye come ! 
What barren victory had ye won ! 

But now, but now, when ye have lain 

Asleep with us a little while 
Beneath the washing of the main, 

How calm shall be your waking smile ! 

For ye shall smile to think of life 

That knows no troublous change or fear, 

No unavailing bitter strife, 

That ere its time brings trouble near. 

Orpheus. 

Is there some murmur in your ears, 
That all that we have done is nought, 

And nothing ends our cares and fears, 
Till the last fear on us is brought ? 

The Sirens. 

Alas ! and will ye stop your ears, 

In vain desire to do aught, 
And wish to live 'mid cares and fears, 

Until the last fear makes you nought ? 

Orpheus. 

Is not the May time now on earth, 
When close against the city wall 

The folk are singing in their mirth, 

While on their heads the May-flowers fall ? 



204 THE LIFE AND DEATH 



The Sirens. 

Yes, May is come, and its sweet breath 
Shall well-nigh make you weep to-day, 

And pensive with swift-coming death, 
Shall ye be satiate of the May. 

Orpheus. 

Shall not July bring fresh delight, 
As underneath green trees ye sit, 

And o'er some damsel's body white 
The noontide shadows change and flit ? 

The Sirens. 

No new delight July shall bring 
But ancient fear and fresh desire, 

And, spite of every lovely thing, 
Of July surely shall ye tire. 

Orpheus. 

And now when August comes on thee, 
And 'mid the golden sea of corn 

The merry reapers thou mayst see, 

Wilt thou still think the earth forlorn ? 

The Sirens. 

Set flowers on thy short-lived head, 
And in thine heart forgetfulness 

Of man's hard toil, and scanty bread, 
And weary of those days no less. 

Orpheus. 

Or wilt thou climb the sunny hill, 

In the October afternoon, 
To watch the purple earth's blood fill 

The grey vat to the maiden's tune ? 



OF JASON 205 



The Sirens. 



When thou beginnest to grow old, 
Bring back remembrance of thy bliss 

With that the shining cup doth hold, 
And weary helplessly of this. 

Orpheus. 

Or pleasureless shall we pass by 
The long cold night and leaden day, 

That song, and tale, and minstrelsy 
Shall make as merry as the May ? 

The Sirens. 

List then, to-night, to some old tale 
Until the tears o'erflow thine eyes ; 

But what shall all these things avail, 
When sad to-morrow comes and dies ? 

Orpheus. 

And when the world is born again, 
And with some fair love, side by side, 

Thou wanderest 'twixt the sun and rain, 
In that fresh love-begetting tide ; 

Then, when the world is born again, 
And the sweet year before thee lies, 

Shall thy heart think of coming pain, 
Or vex itself with memories ? 

The Sirens. 

Ah ! then the world is born again 
With burning love unsatisfied, 

And new desires fond and vain, 
And weary days from tide to tide. 



206 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Ah ! when the world is born again, 
A little day is soon gone by, 

When thou, unmoved by sun or rain, 
Within a cold straight house shall lie. 

Therewith they ceased awhile, as languidly 
The head of Argo fell off toward the sea, 
And through the water she began to go, 
For from the land a fitful wind did blow, 
That, dallying with the many-coloured sail, 
Would sometimes swell it out and sometimes fail, 
As nigh the east side of the bay they drew ; 
Then o'er the waves again the music flew. 



The Sirens. 

Think not of pleasure, short and vain, 
Wherewith, 'mid days of toil and pain, 
With sick and sinking hearts ye strive 
To cheat yourselves that ye may live 
With cold death ever close at hand, 
Think rather of a peaceful land, 
The changeless land where ye may be 
Roofed over by the changeful sea. 

Orpheus. 

And is the fair town nothing then, 
The coming of the wandering men 
With that long talked of thing and strange, 
And news of how the kingdoms change, 
The pointed hands, and wondering 
At doers of a desperate thing ? 
Push on, for surely this shall be 
Across a narrow strip of sea. 



OF JASON. 207 



The Sirens. 



Alas ! poor souls and timorous, 
Will ye draw nigh to gaze at us 
And see if we are fair indeed ? 
For such as we shall be your meed, 
There, where our hearts would have you 
And where can the earth-dwellers show 
In any land such loveliness 
As that wherewith your eyes we bless, 
O wanderers of the Minyae, 
Worn toilers over land and sea ? 



Orpheus. 

Fair as the lightning thwart the sky, 
As sun-dyed snow upon the high 
Untrodden heaps of threatening stone 
The eagle looks upon alone, 
O fair as the doomed victim's wreath, 
fair as deadly sleep and death, 
What will ye with them, earthly men, 
To mate your threescore years and ten ? 
Toil rather, suffer and be free, 
Betwixt the green earth and the sea. 

The Sirens. 

If ye be bold with us to go, 
Things such as happy dreams may show 
Shall your once heavy eyes behold 
About our palaces of gold ; 
Where waters 'neath the waters run, 
And from o'erhead a harmless sun 
Gleams through the woods of chrysolite. 



208 HHE LIFE AND DEATH 

There gardens fairer to the sight 
Than those of the Phaeacian king 
Shall ye behold j and, wondering, 
Gaze on the sea-born fruit and flowers, 
And thornless and unchanging bowers, 
Whereof the May-time knoweth nought. 

So to the pillared house being brought, 
Poor souls, ye shall not be alone, 
For o'er the floors of pale blue stone 
All day such feet as ours shall pass, 
And, 'twixt the glimmering walls of glass, 
Such bodies garlanded with gold, 
So faint, so fair, shall ye behold, 
And clean forget the treachery 
Of changing earth and tumbling sea. 

Orpheus. 

the sweet valley of deep grass, 
Where through the summer stream doth pass, 
In chain of shadow, and still pool, 
From misty morn to evening cool ; 
Where the black ivy creeps and twines 
O'er the dark-armed, red-trunked pines, 
Whence clattering the pigeon flits, 
Or, brooding o'er her thin eggs, sits, 
And every hollow of the hills 
With echoing song the mavis fills. 
There by the stream, all unafraid, 
Shall stand the happy shepherd maid, 
Alone in first of sunlit hours ; 
Behind her, on the dewy flowers, 
Her homespun woollen raiment lies, 
And her white limbs and sweet grey eyes 
Shine from the calm green pool and deep, 
While round about the swallows sweep, 



OF JASON. 209 

Not silent ; and would God that we, 
Like them, were landed from the sea. 

The Sirens. 

Shall we not rise with you at night, 
Up through the shimmering green twilight, 
That maketh there our changeless day, 
Then going through the moonlight grey, 
Shall we not sit upon these sands, 
To think upon the troublous lands 
Long left behind, where once ye were, 
When every day brought change and fear ? 
There, with white arms about you twined, 
And shuddering somewhat at the wind 
That ye rejoiced erewhile to meet, 
Be happy, while old stories sweet, 
Half understood, float round your ears, 
And fill your eyes with happy tears. 

Ah ! while we sing unto you there, 
As now we sing, with yellow hair 
Blown round about these pearly limbs, 
While underneath the grey sky swims 
The light shell-sailor of the waves, 
And to our song, from sea-filled caves 
Booms out an echoing harmony, 
Shall ye not love the peaceful sea ? 

Orpheus. 

Nigh the vine-covered hillocks green, 
In days agone, have I not seen 
The brown-clad maidens amorous, 
Below the long rose-trellised house, 
Dance to the querulous pipe and shrill, 
When the grey shadow of the hill 
Was lengthening at the end of day ? 

19 



210 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Not shadowy or pale were tbey, 
But limbed like those who 'twixt the trees 
Follow the swift of Goddesses. 
Sunburnt they are somewhat, indeed, 
To where the rough brown woollen weed 
Is drawn across their bosoms sweet, 
Or cast from off their dancing feet ; 
But yet the stars, the moonlight grey, 
The water wan, the dawn of day, 
Can see their bodies fair and white 
As Hers, who once, for man's delight, 
Before the world grew hard and old, 
Came o'er the bitter sea and cold j 
And surely those that met me there 
Her handmaidens and subjects were ; 
And shame-faced, half-repressed desire 
Had lit their glorious eyes with fire, 
That maddens eager hearts of men. 
would that I were with them when 
The risen moon is gathering light, 
And yellow from the homestead white 
The windows gleam ; but verily 
This waits us o'er a little sea. 

The Sirens. 

Come to the land where none grows old, 
And none is rash or over-bold, 
Nor any noise there is or war, 
Or rumour from wild lands afar, 
Or plagues, or birth and death of kings ; 
No vain desire of unknown things 
Shall vex you there, no hope or fear 
Of that which never draweth near ; 
But in that lovely land and still 
Ye may remember what ye will, 
And what ye will, forget for aye. 



OF JASON. 211 



So while the kingdoms pass away, 
Ye sea-beat hardened toilers erst, 
Unresting, for vain fame athirst, 
Shall be at peace for evermore, 
With hearts fulfilled of Godlike lore, 
And calm, unwavering Godlike love, 
No lapse of time can turn or move. 
There, ages after your fair fleece 
Is clean forgotten, yea, and Greece 
Is no more counted glorious, 
Alone with us, alone with us, 
Alone with us, dwell happily, 
Beneath our trembling roof of sea. 

Orpheus. 

Ah ! do ye weary of the strife, 
And long to change this eager life 
For shadowy and dull hopelessness, 
Thinking indeed to gain no less 
Than this, to die and not to die, 
To be as if ye ne'er had been, 
Yet keep your memory fresh and green, 
To have no thought of good or ill, 
Yet keep some thrilling pleasure still ? 
idle dream ! Ah, verily 
If it shall happen unto me 
That I have thought of anything, 
When o'er my bones the sea-fowl sing, 
And I lie dead, how shall I pine 
For those fresh joys that once were mine, 
On this green fount of joy and mirth, 
The ever young and glorious earth ; 
Then, helpless, shall I call to mind 
Thoughts of the flower-scented wind, 
The dew, the gentle rain at night, 



212 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

The wonder-working snow and white, 
The song of birds, the water's fall, 
The sun that maketh bliss of all ; 
Yea, this our toil and victory, 
The tyrannous and conquered sea. 

The Sirens. 

Ah, will ye go, and whither then 
Will ye go from us, soon to die, 

To fill your threescore years and ten 
With many an unnamed misery ? 

And this the wretchedest of all, 
That when upon your lonely eyes 

The last faint heaviness shall fall 
Ye shall bethink you of our cries. 

Come back, nor, grown old, seek in vain 
To hear us sing across the sea ; 

Come back, come back, come back again, 
Come back, fearful Minyae ! 

Orpheus. 

Ah, once again, ah, once again, 

The black prow plunges through the sea, 

Nor yet shall all your toil be vain, 
Nor ye forgot, Minyae. 

In such wise sang the Thracian, in such wise 
Outgushed the Sirens' deadly melodies ; 
But long before the mingled song was done, 
Back to the oars the Minyae, one by one, 
Slunk silently ; though many an one sighed sore, 
As his strong fingers met the wood once more, 
And from his breast the toilsome breathing came. 



OF JASON. 213 

But as they laboured, some for very shame 
Hung down their heads, and yet amongst them some 
Grazed at the place whence that sweet song had come ; 
But round the oars and Argo's shielded side 
The sea grew white, and she began to glide 
Swift through the waters of that deadly bay ; 
But when a long wake now behind her lay, 
And still the whistle of the wind increased, 
Past shroud and mast, and all the song had ceased, 
Butes rose up, the fair Athenian man, 
And with wild eyes betwixt the rowers ran 
Unto the poop, and leapt into the sea ; 
Then all men rested on their oars, but he 
Rose to the top, and towards the shore swam fast. 
While all eyes watched him, who had well nigh past 
The place where sand and water 'gan to meet 
In wreaths and ripples round the ivory feet, 
When sun-burnt swimmer, snow-white glancing limb, 
And yellow sand unto their eyes grew dim, 
Nor did they see their fellow any more. 

But when they once again beheld the shore 
The wind sung o'er the empty beach and bare, 
And by the cliff uprose into the air 
A delicate and glittering little cloud, 
That seemed some many-coloured sun to shroud ; 
But as the rugged cliff it drew above 
The wondering Minyae beheld it move 
Westward, toward Lilybaeum and the sun. 

Then once more was their seaward course Hbegun, 
And soon those deadly sands were far astern, 
Nor ever after could the heroes learn 
If Butes lived or died : but old tales tell 
That as the tumbling waves he breasted well, 
Venus beheld him, as unseen she drew 
From sunny Cyprus to the headland blue 
Of Lilybaeum, where her temple is; 

19* 



214 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

She, with a mind his sun-burnt brows to kiss, 
E'en as his feet were dropping nigh the beach, 
And ere his hand the deadly hands could reach, 
Stooped, as the merlin stoops upon the dove, 
And snatched him thence to be awhile her love, 
Betwixt the golden pillars of her shrine, 
That those who pass the iEgades see shine 
From high-raised Lilybaeum o'er the sea. 

But far away the sea-beat Minyse 
Cast forth the foam, as through the growing night 
They laboured ever, having small delight 
In life all empty of that promised bliss, 
In love that scarce can give a dying kiss, 
In pleasure ending sweet songs with a wail, 
In fame that little can dead men avail, 
In vain toil struggling with the fateful stream, 
In hope, the promise of a morning dream. 

Yet as night died, and the cold sea and grey 
Seemed running with them toward the dawn of day, 
Needs must they once again forget their death, 
Needs must they, being alive and drawing breath, 
As men who of no other life can know 
In their own minds again immortal grow. 

But toward the south a little now they bent, 
And for awhile o'er landless sea they went, 
But on the third day made another land 
At dawn of day, and thitherward did stand, 
And since the wind blew lightly from the shore, 
Somewhat abeam, they feared not with the oar 
To push across the shallowing sea and green, 
That washed a land the fairest they had seen, 
Whose shell-strewn beach at highest of the tide 
'Twixt sea and flowery shore was nowise wide, 
And drawn a little backward from the sea 
There stood a marble wall wrought cunningly, 



OF JASON. 215 

Rosy and white, set thick with images, 

And over-topped with heavy-fruited trees, 

Which by the shore ran, as the bay did bend, 

And to their eyes had neither gap nor end ; 

Nor any gate : and looking over this,, 

They saw a place not made for earthly bliss, 

Or eyes of dying men, for growing there 

The yellow apple and the painted pear, 

And well-filled golden cups of oranges 

Hung amid groves of pointed cypress trees ; 

On grassy slopes the twining vine-boughs grew, 

And hoary olives 'twixt far mountains blue, 

And many-coloured flowers, like a cloud 

The rugged southern cliffs did softly shroud ; 

And many a green-necked bird they saw alight 

Within the slim-leaved, thorny pomegranate, 

That flung its unstrung rubies on the grass, 

And slowly o'er the place the wind did pass 

Heavy with many odours that it bore 

From thymy hills down to the sea-beat shore, 

Because no flower there is, that all the year, 

From spring to autumn, beareth otherwhere, 

But there it flourished ; nor the fruit alone 

From 'twixt the green leaves and the boughs outshone, 

For there each tree was ever flowering. 

Nor was there lacking many a living thing 
Changed of its nature, for the roe-deer there 
Walked fearless with the tiger, and the bear 
Rolled sleepily upon the fruit-strewn grass, 
Letting the 'conies o'er his rough hide pass, 
With blinking eyes, that meant no treachery. 
Careless the partridge passed the red fox by ; 
Untouched the serpent left the thrushes brown, 
And as a picture was the lion's frown. 

But in the midst there was a grassy space, 
Raised somewhat over all the flowery place, 



216 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

On marble terrace- walls wrought like a dream ; 
And round about it ran a clear blue stream, 
Bridged o'er with marble steps, and midmost there 
Grew a green tree, whose smooth grey boughs did bear 
Such fruit as never man elsewhere has seen, 
For 'twixt the sunlight and the shadow green 
Shone out fair apples of red gleaming gold. 
Moreover round the tree, in many a fold, 
Lay coiled a dragon, glittering little less 
Than that which his eternal watchfulness 
Was set to guard ; nor yet was he alone, 
For from the daisied grass about him shone 
Gold raiment wrapping round two damsels fair, 
And one upon the steps combed out her hair, 
And with shut eyes sung low as in a dream ; 
And one stood naked in the cold blue stream, 
While on the bank her golden raiment lay ; 
But on that noontide of the quivering day, 
She only, hearing the seafarers' shout, 
Her lovely golden head had turned about, 
And seen their white sail flapping o'er the wall, 
And as she turned had let her tresses fall, 
Which the thin water rippling round her knee 
Bore outward from her toward the restless sea. 

Not long she stood, but looking seaward yet, 
From out the water made good haste to get, 
And catching up her raiment hastily, 
Ran up the marble stair, and 'gan to cry : 
" Wake, my sisters, wake, for now are come 
The thieves of iEa to our peaceful home." 

Then at her voice they gat them to their feet, 
And when her raiment all her body sweet 
Once more had hidden, joining hand to hand, 
About the sacred apples did they stand, 
While coiled the dragon closer to the tree, 
And raised his head above them threateningly. 



OF JASON. 217 

Meanwhile, from Argo many a sea-beat face 
Gazed longingly upon that lovely place, 
And some their eager hands already laid 
Upon the gangway. Then Medea said : 
" Get back unto the oars, Minyae, 
Nor loiter here, for what have such as we 
To do herein, where, 'mid undying trees, 
Undying watch the wise Hesperides, 
And where, the while they watch, scarce can a God 
Set foot upon the fruit-besprinkled sod 
That no snow ever covers 1 therefore haste, 
Nor yet in wondering your fair lives waste ; 
For these are as the Gods, nor think of us, 
Nor to their eyes can aught be glorious 
That son of man can do ; would God that I 
Could see far off the misty headland lie, 
Where we the guilt of blood shall wash away, 
For I grow weary of the dashing spray, 
And ceaseless roll of interwoven seas, 
And fain were sitting 'neath the whispering trees 
In homely places, where the children play, 
Who change like me, grow old, and die some day." 

She ceased, and little soothly did they grieve, 
For all its loveliness, that land to leave, 
For now some God had chilled their hardihead, 
And in their hearts had set a sacred dread, 
They knew not why ; but on their oars they hung, 
A little longer as the sisters sung. 

"0 ye, who to this place have strayed, 
That never for man's eyes was made^ 
Depart in haste, as ye have come, 
And bear back to your sea-beat home 
This memory of the age of gold, 
And for your eyes, grown over-bold, 
Your hearts shall pay in sorrowing, 
For want of many a half-seen thing. 



218 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" Lo, such as is this garden green, 
In days past, all the world has been, 
And what we know all people knew, 
But this, that unto worse all grew. 

" But since the golden age is gone, 
This little place is left alone, 
Unchanged, unchanging, watched of us, 
The daughters of wise Hesperus. 

" Surely the heavenly Messenger 
Full oft is fain to enter here, 
And yet without must he abide, 
Nor longeth less the dark king's bride 
To set red lips unto that fruit 
That erst made nought her mother's suit. 
Here would Diana rest awhile, 
Forgetful of her woodland guile, 
Among these beasts that fear her nought. 
Nor is it less in Pallas' thought, 
Beneath our trees to ponder o'er 
The wide, unfathomed sea of lore ; 
And oft-kissed Cithersea, no less 
Weary of love, full oft would press 
These flowers with unsandalled feet. 

" But unto us our rest is sweet, 
Neither shall any man or God 
Or lovely Goddess touch the sod 
Where-under old times buried lie, 
Before the world knew misery. 
Nor will we have a slave or king, 
Nor yet will we learn anything 
But that we know, that makes us glad, 
While oft the very Gods are sad 
With knowing what the Fates shall do. 

" Neither from us shall wisdom go 
To fill the hungering hearts of men, 



OF JASON. 219 

Lest to them threescore years and ten 
Come but to seem a little day, 
Once given, taken soon away. 
Nay, rather let them find their life 
Bitter and sweet, fulfilled of strife, 
Restless with hope, vain with regret, 
Trembling with fear, most strangely set 
'Twixt memory and forgetfulness ; 
So more shall joy be, troubles less ; 
And surely when all this is past, 
They shall not want their rest at last. 

" Let earth and heaven go their way, 
While still we watch from day to day, 
In this green place left all alone, 
A remnant of the days long gone." 

There in the wind they hung, as word by word 
The clear-voiced singers silently they heard ; 
But when the air was barren of their song, 
Anigh the shore they durst not linger long, . 
So northward turned forewearied Argo's head, 
And dipping oars, from that fair country sped, 
Fulfilled of new desires and pensive thought, 
Which that day's life unto their hearts had brought. 

Then hard they toiled upon the bitter sea, 
And in two days they did not fail to be 
In sight of land, a headland high and blue, 
Which straight Milesian Erginus knew 
To be the fateful place which now they sought, 
Stormy Malea : so thitherward they brought 
The groaning ship, and, casting anchor, lay 
Beneath that headland's lee, within a bay, 
Wherefrom the more part landed, and their feet 
Once more the happy soil of Greece did meet. 

Therewith they failed not to bring ashore 
Rich robes of price and of fair arms good store, 



220 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And gold and silver, that they there might buy 

What yet they lacked for their solemnity ; 

Then, while upon the highest point of land 

Some built an altar, Jason, with a band 

Of all the chiefest of the Minyae, 

Turned inland from the murmur of the sea. 

Not far they went ere by a little stream 
Down in a valley they could see the gleam 
Of brazen pillars and fair-gilded vanes, 
And, dropping down by dank dark-wooded lanes 
From off the hill-side, reached a house at last 
Wherein and out men slaves and women passed, 
And guests were streaming fast into the hall 
Where now the oaken boards were laid for all. 
With these the Minyae went, and soon they were 
Within a pillared hall both great and fair, 
Where folk already sat beside the board, 
And on the dais was an ancient lord. 

But when these saw the fearless Minyae 
Glittering in arms, they sprang up hastily, 
And each man turned about unto the wall 
To seize his spear or staff : then through the hall 
Jason cried out : " Laconians, fear ye not, 
Nor leave the flesh-meat while it yet is hot 
For dread of us, for we are men as ye, 
And I am Jason of the Minyae, 
And come from Ma to the land of Greece, 
And in my ship bear back the Golden Fleece, 
And a fair Colchian queen to fill my bed. 
And now we pray to share your wine and bread, 
And other things we need, and at our hands 
That ye will take fair things of many lands." 

" Sirs," said the ancient lord, "be welcome here, 
Come up and sit by me, and make such cheer 
As here ye can : glad am I that to me 
The first of Grecian men from off the sea 
Ye now are come." 



OF JASON. 221 

Therewith the great hall rang 
With joyful shouts, and as, with clash and clang 
Of brass and steel, up to the dais they went, 
All eyes upon the Minyse were bent, 
Nor could they have enough of wondering 
At this or that sea-tossed victorious king. 

So with the strangers there they held high feast, 
And afterwards the slaves drove many a beast 
Down to the shore, and carried back again 
Great store of precious things in pack and wain ; 
Wrought gold and silver, gems, full many a bale 
Of scarlet cloth, and fine silk, fit to veil 
The perfect limbs of dreaded Goddesses ; 
Spices fresh-gathered from the outland trees, 
And arms well-wrought, and precious scarce-known wine, 
And carven images well-nigh, divine. 

So when all folk with these were satisfied, 
Back went the Minyse to the water-side, 
And with them that old lord, fain to behold 
Victorious Argo and the Fleece of Gold. 
And so aboard amid the oars he lay 
Throughout the night, and at the dawn of day 
Did all men land, nor spared that day to wear 
The best of all they had of gold-wrought gear, 
And every one, being crowned with olive grey, 
Up to the headland did they take their way, 
Where now already stood the crowned priests 
About the altars by the gilt-horned beasts. 
There, as the fair sun rose, did Jason break 
Over the altar the thin barley-cake, 
And cast the salt abroad, and there were slain 
The milk-white bulls, and there red wine did rain 
On to the fire from out the ancient jar, 
And high rose up the red flame, seen afar 
From many another headland of that shore, 
And through its fitful crackling and its roar, 
20 



222 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

From time to time in pleading song and prayer, 
Swept by the wind about the summer air, 
Clear rung the voices of the Minyse 
Unto the dashing of the conquered sea, 
That far below thrust on by tide and wind 
The crumbling bases of the headland mined. 



BOOK XV. 

BUT on the morrow did the Minyae 
Turn Argo's head once more to Thessaly, 
And surely now the steersman knew bis way, 
As island after island every day 
They coasted, with a soft land-wind abeam ; 
And now at last like to a troubled dream 
Seemed all the strange things they had seen erewhile, 
Now when they knew the very green sea's smile 
Beneath the rising and the setting sun, 
And their return they surely now had won 
To those familiar things long left behind, 
When on their sails hard drave the western wind. 

So past Euboea did they run apace, 
And swept with oars the perilous green race 
Betwixt Cerinthus and the islands white ; 
But, when they now had doubled that dread height, 
The shields that glittered upon Argo's side 
They drew inboard, and made a shift to hide 
Her golden eye and gleaming braveries, 
And heaped the deck with bales of merchandise, 
And on their yards sails patched and brown they bent, 
And crawling slowly, with six oars they went, 
Till Argo seemed like some Phoenician 
Grown old and leaky, on the water wan. 



OF JASON. 223 

Now at the entering of their own green bay 
There lies an island that men call to-day 
Green Cicynethus, low, and covered o'er 
With close-set trees, and distant from the shore 
But some five furlongs, and a shallow sea 
'Twixt main and island ripples languidly, 
And on the shore there dwells not any man 
For many a mile ; so there Erginus ran 
Argo disguised, and steering skilfully, 
Cast anchor with the island on his lea ; 
Hid from the straits, and there struck sail and mast ; 
Then to the island shore the heroes past, 
And with their wide war-axes 'gan to lop 
Full many a sapling with green-waving top 
And full-leaved boughs of spreading maple-trees, 
And covered Argo's seaward side with these. 
And then the shipmen did Medea bid 
To hold a shallop ready, while she hid 
Her lovely body in a rough grey gown 
And heavy home-spun mantle coarse and brown, 
And round about her a great wallet slung, 
And to her neck an uncouth image hung 
Of Tauric Artemis, the cruel maid. 

Then, all being ready, to the prince she said : 
" well-beloved, amongst our foes I go 
Alone and weak, nor do I surely know 
If I shall live or die there ; but do thou 
Keep a watch ever, who from off the prow 
Shall look towards white Iolchos o'er the bay, 
And watching, wait until the seventh day, 
And if no sign thou hast from me by then, 
Believe me slain at hands of wicked men, 
Or shut in some dark prison at the least, 
While o'er my head thy foe holds royal feast. 

" Then soothly if it lieth in thine heart 
To leave this land untouched, do thou thy part ; 



224 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Yet do I think thou wilt be man enow 

Unto the white-walled town to turn thy prow, 

And either die a man or live a king, 

Honoured of all, nor lacking anything 

But me thy love whom thou wilt soon forget, 

When with thy tears my lone tomb has been wet 

A little space ; so be it, do thy will. 

And of all good things mayst thou have thy fill 

Before thou comest to the shadowy land 

Where thou wilt strive once more to touch mine hand, 

And have no power e'en to meet these eyes 

That for thy love shall see such miseries." 

She ceased, nigh weeping, but he wept indeed, 
Such tears as come to men in utmost need, 
When all words fail them, and the world seems gone, 
And with their love they fill the earth alone, 
Careless of shame, and not remembering death. 

But she clung round about him, with her breath 
Shortened with sobs, as she began to say : 
" Weep not, love, for surely many a day 
May we be merry and forget all ill, 
Nor have I yet forgotten all my skill, 
And ere the days are gone thou well mayst see 
Thy deadly foe brought unto nought by me. 
And if indeed the Gods give me the day, 
Then shall thy wakeful watch see o'er the bay 
Smoke in the day-time, red flame in the night, 
Rise o'er Iolchos' well-built walls and white ; 
Then linger not, but run out every oar, 
And hasten toward the many-peopled shore 
That is thine own henceforth, as I am thine." 

Therewith from him she turned her face divine, 
And reached the shallop over Argo's side, 
That o'er the shallows soon began to glide, 
Driven by arms of strong Eurydamas, 
But when the keel dragged on the rank sea-grass, 



OF JASON. 225 

She stepped ashore, and back the hero turned 
Unto his fellows, who, with hearts that burned, 
Unto the quays to bring great Argo's stem, 
And gain the glory that was waiting them, 
Watched ever for the sign across the bay, 
Till nigh the dawning of the seventh day. 

But from the shore unto a thick-leaved wood 
Medea turned, drawing both cloak and hood 
Right close about her, lest perchance some man, 
Some hind, or fisher in the water wan, 
Should wonder at her visage, that indeed 
Seemed little worthy of that wretched weed. 

In that thick wood a little stream there was, 
That here was well-nigh hidden of the grass, 
And there swelled into pools both clear and deep, 
Wherein the images of trees did sleep, 
For it was noontide of the summer day. 
To such a pool Medea took her way, 
And reaching it, upon the grass laid down 
Her rough grey homespun cloak and wallet brown ; 
And when her eyes had swept the space around, 
Undid her tunic, that upon the ground 
Fell huddled round her feet ; nor did she spare 
To strip the linen from her body fair, 
And shoes from off her feet ; then she drew near 
The flowery edges of the streamlet clear, 
And gazing down upon her image, stood, 
Hearkening the drowsy murmur of the wood ; 
And since the wind was hushed that noon of day, 
And moveless down her back the long locks lay, 
Her very self an image seemed to be, 
Wrought in some wondrous faint-hued ivory, 
Carved by a master among cunning men. 

So still she stood, that the quick water-hen 
Noted her not, as through the blue mouse-ear 
20* 



226 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

He made his way ; the conies drew ariear, 
Nibbling the grass, and from an oak-twig nigh 
A thrush poured forth his song unceasingly. 

But in a while, sighing, she turned away, 
And, going up to where the wallet lay, 
She opened it, and thence a phial drew 
That seemed to be well wrought of crystal blue, 
Which when she had unstopped, therefrom she poured 
Into the hollow of an Indian gourd 
A pale green liquor, wherefrom there arose 
Such scent as o'er some poisonous valley blows, 
Where nought but dull-sealed twining serpents dwell, 
Nor any more now could the Colchian smell 
The water-mint, the pine-trees, or the flower 
Of the heaped-up sweet odorous virgin's bower. 

But shuddering, and with lips grown pale and wan, 
She took the gourd, and with shut eyes began 
Therefrom her body to anoint all o'er ; 
And this being done, she turned not any more 
Unto the woodland brook, but, hurrying, 
Drew on her raiment, and made haste to sling 
Her wallet round about her, nor forgot 
The Tauric image, ere the lovely spot 
She left unto the rabbit and the roe. 

And now straight toward Iolchos did she go, 
But as she went, a hideous, fearful change 
Had come on her ; from sunken eyes and strange 
She gazed around * white grew her golden hair, 
And seventy years her body seemed to bear ; 
As though the world that coppice had passed by 
For half an age, and caught her presently, 
When from its borders once her foot had passed. 

Then she began to murmur, as she cast 
From changed eyes glances on her wrinkled hands : 
" Jason ! surely not for many lands, 



OF JASON. 227 

Rich and gold-bearing lands, would I do this ; 
But yet with thee to gain good peace and bliss 
Far greater things would I have done to-day." 

So saying, she made haste upon her way, 
Until at last, when it was well-nigh night, 
She reached the city crowned with towers white, 
And passing by the brazen gates of it, 
Fore wearied, by a fountain did she sit; 
Where, as she waited, came an ancient crone, 
Who, groaning, set her pitcher on the stone, 
And, seeing the Colchian, asked her what she was. 

11 Mother," Medea said, " I strive to pass 
Unto fair Athens, where dwelt long ago 
My fathers, if perchance folk yet may know 
Where they lie buried, that on that same stone 
I may lie down and die ; a hapless one, 
Whom folk once called Aglaia, once called fair ; 
For years, long years agone, my golden hair 
Went down the wind, as carelessly I strayed 
Along the wet sea-beach, of nought afraid, 
And there my joy was ended suddenly, 
For on me fell the rovers of the sea, 
And bore me bound into the land of Thrace, 
And thence to some unnamed, far northern place, 
Where I, a rich man's daughter, learned to bear 
Fetters and toil and scourging year by year ; 
Till it has happed unto me at the last, 
Now that my strength for toil is overpast, 
That I am free once more, if that is aught, 
Whom in all wretched places death has sought, 
And surely now will find but wilt thou give 
Some resting-place to me, that I may live 
Until I come to Athens and my grave ? 
And certainly, though nought of gold I have, 
In the far northland did I gather lore 
Of this and that amid my labour sore ; 



228 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And chiefly of this Goddess, rites I know, 
Whose image round my neck thou seest now, 
Well-shod Diana and a whispered word 
Within her inmost temple once I heard 
Concerning this : how men may grow to be 
E'en as the Gods, and gain eternity, 
And how the work of years may be undone." 

When she had finished, the Thessalian crone, 
Filling her jar with water, turned and said : 

" Surely, Athenian, I am sore afraid, 
Ere thou hast learned thy lesson utterly, 
And gained that new life, thou thyself wilt die ; 
Nor will it profit me, who am a slave 
Wishing for death, a wretched life to save : 
But hearken now, if thou art wise and bold, 
Then will I show thee how thou mayst earn gold 
And thanks enow, by telling this thy tale 
Unto rich folk, for them will it avail 
To know thy secret ; rise, and come with me, 
And the king's daughters surely shalt thou see ; 
For on my road from nothing unto hell 
His palace is the last lodge where I dwell, 
And I am well aweary of it now, 
And of my toil, thanked with hard word and blow." 

" I thank thee, mother," said the Colchian maid, 
" Nor of king's daughters shall I be afraid, 
Whose ears Latona's daughter erst have heard, 
Nor trembled at the heavy dreadful word." 

Then on they passed, and, as they went, the crone 
Told her how iEson unto death was done, 
And of the news that thither had been brought 
Of those that o'er the sea that glory sought. 
Namely, that when iEetes had been fain 
To trap the Argo, all had been in vain, 
Yet had he gone back well-nigh satisfied ; 



OF JASON. 229 

For in the night to him a voice had cried 
Londer and clearer than a mortal can : 
" Go back to JEa, sun-begotten man, 
And there forget thy daughter and thy fleece, 
But yet be merry, for the thieves of Greece 
Shall live no longer than a poor wretch may 
Who lies unholpen on a lonely way 
Wounded, possessing nought but many woes, 
Lo, thus it happeneth now unto thy foes ! " 

This, said the crone, a Colchian had told 
To Pelias, dweller in the house of gold, 
And had large gifts from him ; who when he knew 
The certainty of this, old iEson slew 
With all his house who at Iolchos were. 

"So," said she, " if, for quieting his fear 
Of the sea-rover, such things he did give, 
What would his gifts be if thou mad'st him live 
His life again, with none of all his name 
Alive, to give him fear of death or shame ? " 
With that they came unto the royal house 
Where Pelias dwelt, grown old and timorous, 
Oppressed with blood of those that he had slain, 
Desiring wealth and longer life in vain. 

So there a court low-built the old crone sought, 
And to her lodging the tired Colchian brought, 
Where she might sleep, and gave her food and drink. 
Then into sleep did wise Medea sink, 
And dreamed that she herself, made ever young, 
Gold-robed within some peaceful garden sung, 
Like that where sung the wise Hesperides. 
But as she walked between the smooth-stemmed trees 
She saw the sea rise o'er the marble wall, 
And, rolling o'er, drown grass and flowers and all, 
And draw on towards her, who no whit could move, 
Though from the high land Jason, her own love, 
Was shouting out to her ; so then, at last, 



230 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

She dreamed the waters over all had passed 
And reached her feet, and o'er her coldly swept, 
And still undrowned, beneath the waves she wept, 
And still was Jason shouting to her there. 

Therewith she woke, and felt the morning air 
Cold on her face, because the ancient crone 
Over her couch the casement had undone. 
And as she oped her eyes, she heard her say : 
" Awake, guest, for yet another day 
We twain must bear before we gain our rest. 
But now indeed I think it to be best 
That to my ladies I alone should show 
That prayers, and rites, and wonders thou dost know, 
Which thou wilt tell for gold ; for sure I deem 
That to us dying folk nought good doth seem, 
But hoarding for the years we shall not see. 
So bide thou there, and I will come to thee 
And bring thee word of what the queens may say." 

Then with these words she went upon her way, 
While in her place alone Medea sat, 
With eager heart, thinking of this or that, 
And wishing that the glorious day were come, 
When she should set her love within his home, 
A king once more. So, 'mid these thoughts, there came 
Back to the place the wise Thessalian dame, 
Who bade her rise and after her to go, 
That she those marvels to the queens might show. 

Therewith she brought her to a chamber where 
Abode the royal maidens slim and fair, 
All doing well-remembered works ; of whom 
White-armed Alcestis sat before the loom, 
Casting the shuttle swift from hand to hand. 
The while Eradne's part it was to stand 
Amongst the maids who carded out the wool 
And filled the gleaming ivory shuttles full. 



OF JASON. 231 

Amphinome, meantime, her golden head 
Bent o'er the spinners of the milk-white thread, 
And by the growing web still set aside 
The many-coloured bundles newly dyed, 
Blood-red, and heavenly blue, and grassy green, 
Yea, and more colours than man yet has seen 
In flowery meadows midmost of the May. 

Then to the royal maids the crone 'gan say : 
" Behold the woman, my mistresses, 
Who 'midst the close-set gloomy northern trees 
Has late learned that I told you of j and ye 
Who in this royal house live happily, 
May well desire life for evermore, 
Which unto me were but a burden sore." 

Therewith she left them, but folk say, indeed, 
That she who spoke was nought but Saturn's seed, 
In very likeness of that woman old, 
Whose body soon folk came on, dead and cold 
Within the place where she was wont to dwell. 
Now how these things may be, I cannot tell, 
But certainly Queen Juno's will was good 
To finish that which, in the oaken wood 
Anigh the Centaur's cave, she first began, 
Giving good heart to the strange-nurtured man. 

But, she being gone, fair-limbed Amphinome 
Said : " Reverend mother, welcome here ye be, 
And in return for thy so hard-earned lore 
That thou wilt teach us, surely nevermore 
Shalt thou do labour whilst thou dwellest here, 
But unto us shalt thou be lief and dear 
As though thou wert the best of all our blood." 

But, pondering awhile, Medea stood, 
Then answered : " Lady, I am now grown old, 
And but small gifts to me were heaps of gold, 
Or rest itself, for that the tomb shall give ; 



232 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

I say, all things are nought, unless I live 

So long henceforward, that I need not think 

When into nothing I at last must sink ; 

But take me now unto the mighty king 

That rules this land, and there, by everything 

That he holds sacred, let him swear to me 

That I shall live in peace and liberty 

Till quiet death upon my head is brought ; 

But this great oath being made, things shall be wrought 

By me, that never can be paid with gold ; 

For I will make that young which has grown old, 

And that alive that ye have seen lie dead." 

Then much they wondered at the words she said, 
And from the loom did fair Alcestis rise, 
And tall Amphinome withdrew her eyes 
From the fair spinners, and Eradne left 
The carding of the fine wool for the weft. 
Then said Eradne : " Mother, fear not thou, 
Surely our father is good man enow, 
And will not harm thee : natheless, he will swear 
By whatsoever thing he holdeth dear, 
Nor needst thou have a doubt of him at all. 
Come, for he sitteth now within the hall." 

With that, she took her shoes from off the ground, 
And round her feet the golden strings she bound, 
As did her sisters, and fair cloaks they threw 
About them, and their royal raiment drew 
Through golden girdles, gemmed and richly wrought, 
And forth with them the Colchian maid they brought. 
But as unto the royal hall they turned, 
Within their hearts such hot desire burned 
For lengthening out the life they knew so sweet, 
That scarce they felt the ground beneath their feet, 
And through the marble court long seemed the way. 

But when they reached the place, glittering and gay 
With all the slain man's goods, and saw the king 



OF JASON. 233 

Wearing his royal crown and mystic ring, 

And clad in purple, and his wearied face, 

Anxious and cruel, gaze from iEson's place, 

A little thing it seemed to slay him there, 

As one might slay the lion in his lair, 

Bestrewn with bones of beast, and man, and maid. 

Then as he turned to them, Alcestis said : 
" lord and father, here we bring to thee 
A wise old woman, come from over sea, 
Who 'mid the gloomy, close-set northern trees 
Has heard the words of reverend Goddesses 
I dare not name aloud ; therefore she knows 
Why this thing perishes, and that thing grows, 
And what to unborn creatures must befall, 
And this, the very chiefest thing of all, 
To make the old man live his life again, 
And all the lapse of years but nought and vain ; 
But we, when these strange things of her we heard, 
Trembled before her, and were sore afeard, 
In 'midst of all our measureless desire 
Within thy veins and ours to set new fire, 
And with thee live for many a happy day, 
Whilst all about us passes soon away." 

Now paler grew the king's face at this word, 
And 'mid strange hopes he, too, grew sore afeard, 
As, sighing, he began to think of days, 
Now long gone by, when he was winning praise, 
And thought : " If so be I should never die, 
Then would I lay aside all treachery, 
And here should all folk live without alarm, 
For to no man would I do any harm, 
Whatso might hap, but I would bring again 
The golden age, free from all fear and pain." 

But through his heart there shot a pang of fear, 
As to the queen he said : " Why art thou here, 
Since thou hast mastered this all-saving art, 
21 



234 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Keeping but vagrant life for thine own part, 
Of what thou boastest with the Gods to share, 
Thou, but a dying woman, nowise fair? " 

" Pelias," she said, " far from the north I come, 
But in Erectheus' city was my home, 
Where being alone, upon a luckless day, 
By the sea-rovers was I snatched away, 
And in their long-ship, with bound, helpless hands, 
Was brought to Thrace, and thence to northern lands, 
Of one of which I scarcely know the name, 
Nor could your tongue the uncouth letters frame. 
There had I savage masters, and must learn 
With aching back to bend above the quern ; 
There must I learn how the poor craftsman weaves, 
Nor earn his wages ; and the barley-sheaves 
Must bind in August ; and across the snow, 
Unto the frozen river must I go, 
When the white winter lay upon the land, 
And therewithal must I dread many a hand, 
And writhe beneath the whistle of the whip. 

" 'Mid toils like these my youth from me did slip, 
Uncomforted, through lapse of wretched years, 
Till I forgot the use of sobs and tears, 
And like a corpse about my labour went, 
Grown old before my time, and worn and bent. 
And then at last this good to me betid, 
That my wise mistress strove to know things hid 
From mortal men, and doubted all the rest, 
Babblers and young, who in our fox's nest 
Dwelt through the hideous changes of the year ; 
Then me she used to help her, and so dear 
I grew, that when upon her tasks she went, 
Into all dangerous service was I sent ; 
And many a time, within the woods alone, 
Have I sat watching o'er the heaps of stone 
Where dwell the giants dead ; and many a time 



OF JASON. 235 

Have my pale lips uttered the impious rhyme 
That calls the dead from their unchanged abode ; 
Till on my soul there lay a heavy load 
Of knowledge, not without reward, for I 
No longer went in rags and misery, 
But in such bravery as there they had 
My toil-worn body now was fairly clad, 
And feared by man and maid did I become, 
And mistress of my mistress' dreary home. 

" Moreover, whether that, being dead to fear, 
All things I noted, or that somewhat dear 
I now was grown to those dread Goddesses, 
I know not, yet amidst the haunted trees 
More things I learned than my old mistress did, 
Yea, some things surely from all folk else hid, 
Whose names once spoken would unroof this hall, 
And lay Iolchos underneath a pall 
Of quick destruction ; and when these were learned, 
At last my mistress all her wage had earned, 
And to the world was dead for evermore. 

"But me indeed the whole house hated sore, 
First for my knowledge, next that, sooth to say, 
I, when I well had passed my evil day, 
And came to rule, spared not my fellows aught ; 
Whereby this fate upon my head was brought, 
That flee I must lest worse should hap to me ; 
So on my way unto the Grecian sea 
With weary heart and manifold distress, 
My feet at last thy royal pavement press. 
My lips beseech thy help, mighty King ! 
Help me, that I myself may do the thing 
I most desire, and this great gift give 
To thee and thine, from this time forth to live 
In youth and beauty while the world goes by 
With all its vain desires and misery. 



236 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" And if thou doubtest still, then hear me say 
The words thou spak'st upon a long-past day, 
When thou wert fearful, and the half-shod man 
Had come upon thee through the water wan." 

She ceased awhile, and therewith Pelias, 
With open mouth and eyes as fixed as glass 
Stared at her, wondering. Then again she said : 
" Awhile ago, when he thou knowest dead, 
And he thou thinkest dead, were by thy side, 
A crafty wile thou forgedst; at that tide 
Telling the tale of Theban Athamas, 
And how that Phryxus dead at iEa was. 
Thinking (and not in vain) to light the fire 
Of glorious deeds, and measureless desire 
Of fame within the hearts of men o'erbold. 

11 For thus thou saidst : ' So is the story told 
Of things that happened forty years agone, 
Nor of the Greeks has there been any one 
To set the bones of Phryxus in a tomb, 
Or meet out to the Colchian his due doom.' 

" So saidst thou then, and by such words didst drive 
Thy nephew in a hopeless game to strive, 
Wherefore thou deemest wisely he is dead, 
And all the words that he can say are said." 

* She ceased again, while pale and shuddering, 
Across his eyes the crafty, fearful king 
Drew trembling hands. But yet again she spoke : 
11 What if the Gods by me the strong chain broke 
Of thy past deeds, ill deeds wrought not in vain, 
And thou with new desires lived again ? 
Durst I still trust thee with my new-gained life ? 
Who for the rest am not thy brother's wife, 
Thy nephew, or thy brother. Be it so. 
Yet since the foolish hearts of men I know, 
Swear on this image of great Artemis 
That unto me thy purpose harmless is, 



OF JASON. 237 

Nor wilt thou do me hurt, or more or less ; 
Then while thy lips the ivory image press, 
Will I call down all terrors that I know 
Upon thine head if thou shouldst break thy vow. 

" Yet for thyself dost thou trust what I say, 
Or wilt thou still be dying day by day? " 

" Yea," said the king, " yea, whosoe'er thou art, 
Needs must I trust thee, in such wise my heart 
Desires life again when this is done. 
Give me the image, O thou fearful one, 
Who knowest all my life, who in the breath 
Wherein thou prayest help still threatenest death." 

Then on the image did she swear the king, 
But while he spoke was she still muttering, 
With glittering eyes fixed on him ; but at last, 
When from his lips the dreadful word had passed, 
She said : " King, pray that thou mayst not die 
Before the fifth day's sun has risen high ; 
Yet on to-morrow morn shalt thou behold 
This hair of mine all glittering as gold, 
My tottering feet firm planted on the ground, 
My grey and shrivelled arms grown white and round, 
As once, when by Ilissus' side I trod, 
A snare of beauty to a very God, 
To young men's eyes a fierce consuming fire." 

So saying, did she kindle fresh desire 
In the king's fainting heart, until he thought 
" Nay, if new life hereby to me is brought, 
Withal there may be brought a lovely mate 
To share my happy days and scorn of fate." 
Then did he bid his daughters straight to go 
With that wise woman, nor spare aught to do 
That she might bid them, and they wondering, 
But in their hearts yet fearful of the thing, 
21* 



238 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Unto the women's chamber led her back, 
And bade her say what matters she might lack. 

Then little did she ask unto her need, 
But fair cold water, and some fitting weed, 
And in a close-shut place to be alone, 
Because no eye must see the wonder done. 

And " Oh," she said, "fair women, haste ye now, 
For surely weaker every hour I grow, 
And fear to die ere I can live again." 
Then through the house they hastened, and with pain 
A brazen caldron their fair hands bore up, 
As well wrought over as a king's gold cup. 
Which in a well-hung chamber did they set, 
And filled with clear cold water, adding yet 
New raiment wrought about with ruddy gold, 
And snowy linen wrapped in many a fold. 

Then did Medea turn unto the three. 
And said : " Farewell, for no more shall ye see 
These limbs alive, or hear this feeble voice, 
For either shall my changed lips rejoice 
In my new beauty, or else stark and cold 
This wretched body shall your eyes behold. 
Wait now until six hours are over-past, 
And if ye still shall find the door shut fast, 
Then let the men bring hammers, neither doubt 
That thence my corpse alone shall they bear out. 
But if the door is open or ajar, 
Draw nigh and see how great my helpers are, 
And greet what there ye see with little fear, 
For whatsoever may have touched me here, 
By then, at least, shall no one be with me, 
And nought but this old sorceress shall ye see 
Grown young again ; alas ! grown young again ! 
Would God that I were past the fear and pain ! " 

So said the Colchian ; but their fearful eyes 
Turned hastily from such hid mysteries 
As there might lurk ; and to their bower they gat, 



OF JASON. 239 

And well-nigh silent o'er the weaving sat, 

And did what things they needs must do that day, 

Until that six hours' space had passed away. 

Then had the sun set, and the whitening moon 
Shone o'er the gardens where the brown bird's tune 
Was quivering through the roses red and white, 
And sweeter smelt the flowers with the night ; 
But to the chamber where there lay alone 
The wise Medea, up the faint grey stone 
Two rose-trees climbed, along a trellis led, 
And with their wealth of flowers white and red 
Another garden of the window made. 

So now the royal sisters, sore afraid, 
Each with a taper in her trembling hand, 
Before the fateful chamber-door did stand 
And heard no noise : whereon Amphinome 
Pushed at the door, that yielded, and the three 
Passing with beating hearts the oaken door, 
Pressed noiseless feet upon the polished floor, 
Reddening the moonshine with their tapers' light. 

There they beheld the caldron gleaming bright, 
And on the floor the heap of raiment rent 
That erst had hid the body old and bent ; 
And there a crystal phial they beheld 
Empty, that once some wondrous liquor held ; 
And by the window-side asleep they saw 
The Colchian woman white, without a flaw 
From head to heel ; her round arms by her side, 
Her fair face flushed with sweet thoughts, as a bride 
Who waits the coming of some well-loved man. 
Softly she breathed, the while the moonlight ran 
In silver ripples o'er her hair of gold. 

But when that loveliness they did behold, 
They cried aloud for wonder, though not yet 
Her happy dreaming thoughts would she forget, 



240 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But into spoken words her murmuring grew, 
Though of their purport nought the sisters knew, 
Since in the outland Colchian tongue she spoke ; 
Then, while they waited, slowly she awoke, 
And looking round her, still with half-shut eyes, 
She said : " damsels, fain would I arise, 
I hear the morning murmur of the birds 
And lowing of released and hungry herds 
Across the meadows, sweet with vetch and bean, 
And the faint ripple of the Phasis green." 

But with that last word did she start upright, 
Shading her grey eyes from the tapers' light, 
And said : " queens, and are ye come to me 
This eve, my triumph over time to see ? 
And is my boast for nought ? behold me made 
Like the fair casket-bearer who betrayed 
The luckless man while yet the world was young." 
So saying did she speak as one who sung, 
So sweet her voice was ; then she stept adown 
From off the silken couch, and rough and brown 
They seemed beside her, fair maids though they were. 

But silently they stood, and wondered there, 
And from their hearts had flown all thoughts at last 
But that of living while the world went past. 

Then at her feet Alcestis knelt and prayed : 
u 0, who can see thee, Goddess, unafraid ? 
Yet thou thyself hast promised life to us, 
More than man's feeble life, and perilous, 
And if thy promise now thou makest vain, 
How can we live our thoughtless life again ? 
Then, would thou ne'er hadst left thine heavenly home, 
And o'er the green Thessalian meadows come ! " 

Then spoke Medea : " Young as ye see me 
The king, your father, in few days shall be, 
And when that he has gained his just reward, 
Your lives from death and danger will I guard ; 



OF JASON. 241 

Natheless no Goddess am I, but no more 
Than a poor wanderer from shore to shore, 
Though loved by her the swift of Goddesses, 
Who now is glancing 'twixt the dark grey trees, 
E'en while we speak. Now leave me to my rest, 
For this new-changed body is oppressed 
By all the thoughts that round my heart will throng 
Of ancient days, and hopes forgotten long ; 
Go, therefore, but come hither with the sun 
To do my bidding ; then shall there be done 
Another marvel ere the morn comes round, 
If yet ye three are dwelling above ground." 

Then, trembling, they unto their chamber passed, 
But, they being gone, she made the strong door fast, 
And soon in deep sleep on the couch she lay 
Until the golden sun brought back the day ; 
Nor could she fail arising to be glad 
That once again her own fair form she had, 
And as the fresh air met her pleasantly, 
She smiled, her image in the bath to see 
That had been lost since at the noon she stood 
Beside the still pool in the lonely wood, 
And she rejoiced her combed-out hair to bind, 
And feel the linen in the morning wind 
Fluttering about, in kissing side and limb, 
And it was sweet about her ankles slim 
To make the gemmed thongs of the sandals meet, 
With rosy fingers touching her soft feet. 

But she being clad, there came the ladies three, 
Who seemed by her but handmaidens to be ; 
And such indeed they were, as dumb with awe 
In the fresh morn that loveliness they saw. 

Then said Medea : " Fair queens well be ye ! 
Surely in happy hour ye come to me, 
Who, if I might, would do the whole world good. 



242 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But now take heed ; is there some close dark wood 

Anigh the town ? thither will we to-night, 

And in that place, hidden from all men's sight, 

Shall ye see wonders passing human thought. 

But thither by your hands there must be brought 

Some ancient beast at very point to die, 

That ye may see how loved an one am I 

By dreadful Gods ; there, too, must ye convey 

A brazen caldron ere the end of day, 

And nigh the place there must not fail to be 

Some running stream to help our mystery. 

Yet more ; take heed that She who helpeth me, 

Whose name I name not, willeth not to see 

The robes of kings and queens upon her slaves ; 

Therefore, if ye would please the one who saves, 

This night must ye be clad in smocks of black, 

And all adornment must your bodies lack, 

Nor must there be a fillet on your hair, 

And the hard road must feel your feet all bare." 

" Lady," Eradne said, " all shall be done, 
Nor wilt thou yet have had beneath the sun 
More faithful servants than we are to thee ; 
But wilt thou not the king my father see, 
And gladden him, that he may give thee things 
Such as the heart desires the spoil of kings ? ' ' 

" Nay," said Medea, " much have I to think 
Ere the hot sun beneath the sea shall sink, 
And much to call to mind, and for your sake 
Unto my Helper many a prayer to make." 

With that they went, and she, being left alone, 
Took up the image of the swift-foot one, 
Which for a hidden casket served her well, 
And wherein things were laid right strange to tell. 
So this and that she looked at, and the while 
She muttered charms learned in the river isle. 

But at the noontide did they bring her food, 



OF JASON. 243 

Saying that all was ready in the wood, 
And that the night alone they waited now, 
Ere unto them those marvels she might show. 
Therefore Medea bade them come again 
When all the house of peaceful sleep was fain, 
And nought was stirring : so at dead of night 
They came to her in black apparel dight, 
Bearing like raiment for the Colchian, 
Who did it on before their faces wan 
And troubled eyes ; then out of gates they stole, 
Setting their faces to the wished-for goal. 

Now nigh Anaurus a blind pathway leads 
Betwixt the yellow corn and whispering reeds, 
The home of many a shy, quick-diving bird ; 
Thereby they passed, and as they went they heard 
Splashing of fish, and ripple of the stream ; 
And once they saw across the water's gleam 
The black boat of some fisher of the night, 
And from the stream had drawn back in affright, 
But that the Colchian whispered : " Wise be ye, 
Thessalian sisters, yet with certainty 
Make onward to the wood, for who indeed, 
Beholding our pale faces and black weed, 
Would come the nigher to us ? Would not he 
Think that some dread things we must surely be, 
And tremble till we passed V Haste, for the night 
Is waning now, and danger comes with light." 
Then on they passed, and soon they reached the wood, 
And straight made for the midst of it, where stood 
An old horned ram bound fast unto a tree, 
Which the torch-bearer, tall Amphinorae, 
Showed to Medea, and not far therefrom 
Unto a brazen caldron did they come, 
Hidden with green boughs ; then Medea bade 
That by their hands a high pile should be made 
Of fallen wood, and all else fit to burn ; 



244 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Which done, unto the caldron did they turn, 

And bore it to the river, and did strain 

Their fair round arms to bear it back again 

When it was filled, and raised it on the pile. 

And then with hands unused to service vile 

Lit up the fire, while Medea took 

Dried herbs from out her wallet, which she shook 

Into the caldron ; till at last a cloud 

Rose up therefrom and the dark trees did shroud. 

Then did she bid them the old ram to lead 
Up to the caldron's side, and with good heed 
To quench his just departing feeble life ; 
So in his throat Eradne thrust the knife, 
While in the white arms of Amphinome 
And fair Alcestis, bleating piteously, 
Feebly he struggled ; so being slain at last, 
Piecemeal his members did the sisters cast 
Into the seething water : then drew back 
And hid their faces in their raiment black, 
The while Medea midst the flickering light 
Still sprinkled herbs from out her fingers white, 
And in a steady voice at last did say : 

" thou that turnest night into the day, 

though the quencher of unhallowed fire, 
The scourge of hot, inordinate desire, 
Hast thou a mind to help me on this night, 

That wrong may still be wrong, and right be right 
In all men's eyes ? A little thing I ask 
Before I put an ending to my task." 

Scarce had she finished, ere a low black cloud 
Seemed closing o'er the forest, and aloud 
Medea cried : " Oh, strong and terrible ! 

1 fear thee not, do what may please thee well." 
Then as the pale Thessalians with affright 
Crouched on the earth, forth leapt the lightning white 
Over their shrinking heads, and therewithal 

The thunder crashed, and down the rain did fall. 



OF JASON. 245 

As though some angry deity were fain 
To make a pool of the Thessalian plain. 

Till in a while it ceased, and all was stilled 
Except the murmur of some brook new-filled, 
And dripping of the thick-leaved forest trees 
As they moved gently in the following breeze. 
Yet still King Pelias' daughters feared to rise, 
And with wet raiment still they hid their eyes, 
And trembled, and white-armed Arnphinome 
Had dropped the long torch of the resin-tree, 
That lay half-charred among the tall wet grass. 
But unto them did wise Medea pass, 
And said : " daughters of the sea-born man, 
Rise up, for now the stars are growing wan, 
And the grey dawn is drawing near apace ; 
Nor need ye fear to see another face 
Than this of mine, and all our work is done 
We came to do." 

Then slowly, one by one, 
The sisters rose, and, fearful, drew anigh 
The place where they had seen the old ram die ; 
And there beheld, by glimmering twilight grey, 
Where on its side the brazen caldron lay, 
And on the grass and flowers that hid the ground, 
Half-charred, extinguished brands lay all around, 
But yet no token of the beast was there ; 
But 'mid the brands a lamb lay, white and fair, 
That now would raise his new-born head and bleat, 
And now would lick the Colchian's naked feet, 
As close he nestled to her : then the three 
Drew nigh unto that marvel timidly, 
And gazed at him with wide eyes wondering. 

Thereat Medea raised the new-changed thing 
In her white arms, and smiled triumphantly, 
And said : " What things the Gods will do for me 
Ye now behold ; take, then, this new-born beast, 
22 



246 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And hope to sit long ages at the feast, 
And this your youth and loveliness to keep 
When all that ye have known are laid asleep. 
Yet steel your hearts to do a fearful thing, 
Ere this can happen, for unto the king 
Must your hands do what they have done to-night 
To this same beast. And now, to work aright 
What yet is needful to this mystery, 
Will be four days' full bitter toil for me. 
Take heed that silence, too, on this ye keep, 
Or else a bitter harvest shall ye reap." 

So said she, willing well indeed to know, 
Before the promised sign she dared to show, 
What honour Pelias in Iolcbos bad, 
And if his death would make folk glad or sad. 

But now they turned back on their homeward way, 
Fleeing before the coming of the day ; 
Nor yet the flinty way their feet did feel, 
Nor their wet limbs the wind, that 'gan to steal 
From out the north-west ere the sun did rise. 
And swiftly though they went, yet did their eyes 
Behold no more than eyes of those that dream 
The crumbling edges of the swirling stream 
Or fallen tree-trunks or the fallow rough. 
But Juno sent them feeling just enough 
By the lone ways to come unto the town 
And fair-walled palace, and to lay them down 
Upon their fragrant beds, that stood forlorn 
Of their white bodies, waiting for the morn 
In chambers close-shut from the dying night. 

But since Medea fain would know aright 
What the folk willed to Pelias in the town, 
Early next day she did on her the brown 
And ragged raiment, and the sisters told 
That she must find the place where herbs were sold, 



OF JASON. 247 

And there buy this or that ; therewith she went 
About the town, seeming crook-backed and bent ; 
And, hidden in her mantle and great hood, 
Within the crowded market-place she stood, 
And marked the talk of all the busy folk, 
And ever found that under Pelias' yoke 
All people groaned : and therefore with good heart 
She set herself to work out all her part. 

For, going back, till the fifth day was gone 
She dwelt within her chamber all alone, 
Except that now and then the sisters came 
To bring her food ; and whiles they saw a flame, 
Strange-coloured, burning on the hearth, while she 
Was bending o'er it, muttering wearily, 
And whiles they saw her bent o'er parchment strange, 
And letters that they knew not ; but no change 
They ever saw upon her lovely face. 

But at the last, she, mindful of the place 
Where lay fair Argo's glorious battered keel, 
And that dread hidden forest of bright steel,. 
Said to Eradne, when her food she brought 
Upon the sixth morn : " Sister, I have thought 
How best to carry out the mystery 
That is so dear at heart to thee and me, 
And find that this night must the thing be done ; 
So seek a place where we may be alone, 
High up, and looking southward o'er the bay ; 
Thither ere midnight must ye steal away, 
And under a huge caldron set dry brands. 
And that being done, take sharp swords in your hands, 
And while I watch the sea, and earth, and air, 
Go ye to Pelias' well-hung chamber fair ; 
There what ye will ye may most surely do, 
If ye will work the way I counsel you. 
Therewith a phial in her hand she set, 
And said : " Who tasteth this will soon forget 



248 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Both life and death, and for no noise will wake 
In two days' space ; therefore this phial take, 
And with the king's drink see ye mingle it, 
As well ye may, and let his servants sit 
O'er wine so honeyed at the feast to-night. 
Then certes shall their sleep not be so light, 
That bare feet pattering across the floor, 
Or unused creaking of an open door, 
Shall rouse them ; though no deadly drug it is, 
But bringer of kind sleep and dreamy bliss. 

' ' But now, what think'st thou ? Are your hearts so good, 
That ye will dare to shed your father's blood 
That he may live for ever ? then is he 
The luckiest of all men. But if ye 
Draw back now, after all my prayers and tears, 
Then were it best that ye should end your fears 
By burning me with quick fire ere to-night. 
And yet not thus should ye lead lives aright, 
And free from fear ; because the sandalled queen 
Doth ever keep a memory fresh and green 
For all her faithful servants : ye did see 
Late in the green-wood how she lovetb me. 

" Therefore be wise, and when to-night ye draw 
The sharp-edged steel, glittering without a flaw, 
Cast fear and pity from you. Pity him 
I bid you rather, who, with shrunken limb 
And sunken eyes, remembers well the days 
When in the ranks of war he garnered praise, 
Which unarmed, feeble, as his last year ends, 
Babbling amongst the elders now he spends. 
Such shall not Pelias be, but rather now 
The breath of new life past misdeeds shall blow 
Adown the wind, and, taught by his old life, 
Shall he live honoured, free from fear or strife. " 

" Fear not," Eradne said, " our will to-night, 
For all thy bidding will we do outright, 



OF JASON. 249 

Since still a G-oddess thou dost seem to be 

To us poor strugglers with mortality. 

And for the secret spot this night we need, 

Close to the sea a place I know, indeed, 

Upon the outskirts of this palace fair ; 

And on this night of all nights, close by there 

My father sleeps, as oft his custom is, 

When he is fain a Mysian girl to kiss, 

Sea-rovers sold to him three months agone. 

There after midnight we shall be alone 

Beyond all doubt, since this place by the sea 

A temple is of some divinity, 

Whose very name men now have clean forgot, 

And, as folk think, ill spirits haunt the spot : 

So all men fear it sore, but soothly we 

Fear nought of all these things, being led by thee." 

She ceased, and from the Colchian won much praise, 
And promises of many happy days. 

Then as upon the door she laid her hand, 
Medea said : " When midnight hides the land, 
Come here to me, and bring me to that place ; 
Then look the last upon your father's face 
As ye have known it for these eighteen years, 
Furrowed by eld and drawn by many fears ; 
But when ye come, in such guise be ye clad 
As in the wood that other night ye had." 
Then did Bradne leave her, and the day 
Through sunshine and through shadow passed away. 

But with the midnight came the sisters three 
To lead her to that temple by the sea, 
And in black raiment had they hurried there 
With naked feet, and unadorned loose hair, 
E'en as the other night Medea bade, 
Except that each one had a trenchant blade 
Slung round her neck, wherewith to do the deed. 

22* 



250 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Of these Aleestis trembled like the reed 
Set midmost of some quickly running stream, 
But with strange fire Eradne's eyes did gleam, 
And a bright flush was burning on her cheek, 
As still her fingers the sharp steel did seek ; 
While tall Amphinome, grown pale and white 
Beyond all measure, gazed into the night 
With steady eyes, as with the queen they went 
To that lone place to work out their intent. 

So when all courts and corridors were passed, 
Unto the ancient fane they came at last, 
And found it twofold ; for below there stood 
Square marble pillars, huge, and red as blood, 
And wrought all o'er with fretting varying much ; 
Heavy they were, and nowise like to such 
As men built in the lands Medea knew, 
Or in the countries fate had led her through : 
But they, set close and thick, aloft did hold 
A well-wrought roof, where still gleamed scraps of gold, 
That once told tales of Gods none living praise ; 
And on this roof some king of later days 
Had built another temple long before 
The Minyae came adown unto that shore 
From fair Orchomenus, of whose rites indeed, 
And to what Gods the victim then did bleed, 
Men knew but little ; but therein there rose 
Fair slim white pillars set in goodly rows, 
And garlanded with brazen fruit and flowers, 
That gleaming once, through lapse of many hours, 
Now with black spirals wrapt the pillars white. 
But this fair fane was open to the night 
On one side only, toward the restless sea ; 
And there a terrace, wrought full cunningly, 
Clear of the pillars hung above the sand. 

Now went those maids, groping with outstretched hand 
Betwixt the pillars of the undercroft, 



OF JASON. 2 Si 

Until they reached a stair that led aloft 
Into the windy, long-deserted fane 
Of younger days ; but when their feet did gain 
The open space above the murmuring sea, 
In whispers did the queens of Thessaly 
Show to the Colchian where the great pile was, 
Built 'neath a vessel of bright polished brass, 
And many water-jars there stood around ; 
And, as they spoke, to them the faint low sound 
Of their own whispered voices seemed as loud 
As shouts that break from out the armed crowd 
Of warriors ready for the fight. 

But she 
Spoke with no lowered voice, and said : " ye ! 
Be brave to-night, and thenceforth have no fear 
Of God or man since ye to me are dear. 
Light up the torches, because certainly 
Those that may see them gleaming o'er the sea 
Will think they light but spirits of the air." 
Then presently the torches out did flare, 
And lighted up the smile upon her face 
And the tall pillars of the holy place, 
And the three sisters gazing at her there, 
Wild-looking, with the sea-wind in their hair, 
And scant black raiment driven from their feet. 

But when her eyes their fearful eyes did meet, 
With wild appealing glances as for aid, 
Some little pity touched the Colchian maid, 
Some vague regret for their sad destiny. 
But to herself she said : " So must it be, 
And to such misery shall such a king 
Lead wife and child, and every living thing 
That trusts him." Then she said : " Leave me alone, 
And go and do that which were better done 
Ere any streak of dawn makes grey the sky. 
And come to me when ye have seen him lie 
Dead to his old life of misdeeds and woe." 



252 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then voiceless from the torchlight did they go 
Into the darkness, and she, left alone, 
Set by the torches till the deed was done 
Within the pillars, and turned back again 
With eager eyes to gaze across the main ; 
But nothing she beheld by that starlight 
But on the beach the line of breakers white, 
And here and there, above the unlit grey, 
Some white-topped billow dotting the dark bay. 

Then, sighing, did she turn herself around, 
And looked down toward the plot of unused ground, 
Whereby they passed into that fateful place, 
And gazed thereon with steadfast wary face, 
And there the pavement, whitened by the wind, 
Betwixt the turf she saw, and nigh it, twined 
About a marble image carelessly, 
A white wild-rose, and the grey boundary 
Of wind-beat stone, through whose unhinged door 
Their stealthy feet had passed a while before. 

Nought else she saw for a long dreary hour, 
For all things lay asleep in bed or bower, 
Or in the little -lighted mountain caves, 
Or 'neath the swirling streams and toppliug waves. 

She trembled then, for in the eastern sky 
A change came, telling of the dawning nigh, 
And with swift footsteps she began to pace 
Betwixt the narrow limits of the place ; 
But as she turned round toward the close once more, 
Her eyes beheld the pavement by the door 
Hid by some moving mass ; then joyfully 
She waved her white arms toward the murmuring sea, 
And listened trembling, and although the sound 
Of breakers that the sandy sea-beach ground 
Was loud in the still night, yet could she hear 
Sounds like the shuffling steps of those that bear 
Some heavy thing, and, as she gazed, could see 



OF JASON. 253 

The thin black raiment of the sisters three 
Blown out, and falling backward as they bent 
Over some burden, and right slowly went; 
And 'twixt their arms could she behold the gleam 
Of gold or gems, or silver-broidered seam, 
Till all was hidden by the undercroft. 
And then she heard them struggling bear aloft 
That dreadful burden, and then went to meet, 
With beating heart, their slow ascending feet, 
Taking a half-burnt torch within her hand. 

There by its light did she behold them stand 
Breathless upon the first stone of that fane, 
And with no word she beckoned them again 
To move on toward the terrace o'er the sea, 
And, turning, went before them silently. 

And so at last the body down they laid 
Close by the caldron, and Eradne said : 

" thou, our life and saviour ! linger not, 
We pray thee now ! because our hearts are hot 
To see our father look with other eyes 
Upon the sea, the green earth, and the skies, 
And praise us for this seeming impious deed." 

Not heeding her, Medea saw the weed 
She erst beheld all glittering in the hall, 
And that same mantle as a funeral pall 
Which she had seen laid over either knee, 
The wonder of King iEson's treasury, 
Which wise Phoenicians for much coined gold, 
And many oxen, years agone had sold 
To iEson, when folk called him king and lord. 

Then to the head she went, and with no word 
The white embroidered linen drew away 
Over the face of the dead man, that lay 
As though she doubted yet what thing it was, 
And saw indeed the face of Pelias. 



254 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then o'er her pale face a bright flush there came, 
And, turning, did she set the torches' flame 
Unto the dry brands of the well-built pyre, 
And, standing back, and waving from the fire 
The shuddering girls, somewhat thereon she cast, 
Like unto incense : then with furious blast 
Shot up a smokeless flame into the air, 
Quivering and red, nor then did she forbear 
To cry aloud, in her old Colchian tongue, 
Proud words, and passionate, that strangely rung 
Within the poor bewildered sisters' ears, 
Filling their hearts with vague and horrid fears. 

" love ! " she said, " love ! sweet delight ! 
Hast thou begun to weep for me this night, 
Dost thou stretch out for me thy mighty hands 
The feared of all, the graspers of the lands ? 
Come then, love, across the dark seas come, 
And triumph as a king in thine own home, 
While I, the doer of this happy deed, 
Shall sit beside thee in this wretched weed ; 
That folk may know me by thine eyes alone 
Still blessing him for all that I have done. 
Come, king, and sit upon thy father's seat, 
Come, conquering king, thy conqueror love to meet." 

But as she said these words the luckless three 
Stared at her glowing face all helplessly, 
Nor to their father's corpse durst turn their eyes, 
While in their hearts did fearful thoughts arise. 
But now Medea, ceasing, fed the fire 
With that same incense, and the flame rose higher, 
A portent to the dwellers in the town, 
Unto the shepherd waking on the down, 
A terror telling of ill things to be. 

But from the God-built tower of Thessaly, 
Grey Pelion, did the centaur Cheiron gaze, 



OF JASON. 255 

And when he saw that ruddy flame outblaze, 

He smiled, and said : " So comes to pass the word 

That in the forests of the north I heard, 

And in such wise shall love be foiled, and hate, 

And hope of gain, opposing steadfast fate." 

So to the flowery eastern slopes he gat, 
Waiting the dawn, nor hoped for this or that. 



BOOK XVI. 

BUT other watchers were there on that night, 
Who saw the birth of that desired light 
From nigh green Cicynethus' woody shore. 

For in mid-channel there, with every oar 
Run out, and cable ready for the slip, 
Did Jason hold his glorious storm-tossed ship, 
While in the top did keen-eyed Lynceus stand, 
And every man had ready to his hand 
Sharp spear, and painted shield, and grinded sword. 
Thus as they waited, suddenly the word 
Rang out from Jason's mouth, and in the sea 
The cable splashed, and straight the Minyse 
Unto their breasts the shaven ash-trees brought, 
And, as the quivering blades the water caught, 
Shouted for joy, and quickly passed the edge 
Of Cicynethus, green with reed and sedge. 
And whitening the dark waters of the bay, 
Unto Iolchos did they take their way. 

Meanwhile the Colchian queen triumphantly 
Watched the grey dawn steal forth above the sea, 
Still murmuring softly in the Colchian tongue, 
While o'er her head the flickering fire hung, 
And in the brazen caldron's lips did gleam j 



256 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Wherefrom went up a great white cloud of steam, 
To die above their heads in that fresh air. 
But Pelias' daughters, writhing in despair, 
Silent for dread of her, she noted nought, 
Nor of the dead man laid thereby she thought. 

At last came forward tall Amphinome, 
And said : " Queen, look o'er the whitening sea, 
And tell us now what thing it is we lack 
To bring our father's vanished breathing back 
With that new life, whereof thou spak'st to us." 
So in a broken voice and piteous 
She spoke ; but when no answer came at all, 
Nor did Medea's grey eyes on her fall, 
She cried again : " 0, art thou pitiless? 
Wilt thou not note our measureless distress ? 
Wilt thou not finish that thou hast begun ? 
Lo, in a little while the piercing sun 
Shall find us slayers of our father here. 
Then if thou hast no pity, hast thou fear ? 
We are king's daughters still, and with us still 
Are men who heed nought but to do our will ; 
And if thou fall'st into the hands of these, 
Thou shalt lament the gloomy northern trees 
And painless death of threescore years and ten, 
And little shall thy beauty help thee then." 

So cried she shrilly in her gathering ire ; 
B ut when Medea answered not, the fire 
Burnt out within her heart, and on her knees 
She fell, and cried : " crown of Goddesses, 
Forgive these impious words, and answer me, 
Else shall I try if the green heaving sea 
Will hide from all these impious blood-stained hand? 
Or bear them far away to savage lands, 
That know no good or evil ; speak, speak ! 
How can I pray thee when all words are weak ? 
What gifts, what worship, shall we give to thee ? " 



OF JASON. 257 

E'en as she spoke, Medea seemed to see 
A twinkling light far off amidst the bay, 
Then from the suppliant hand she drew away, 
Nor turned to her ; but looking seaward still, 
She cried : " love ! yet shalt thou have thy fill 
Of wealth, and power, and much desired fame, 
Nor shall the Grecian folk forget my name 
Who dearly bought these for thee j therefore come, 
And with the sun behold thy wished-for home." 

So spoke she, and no less the wretched three 
Beheld that light grow greater o'er the sea, 
And therewithal the grey dawn coming fast, 
And from them now well-nigh all hope had passed. 
But fair Alcestis, grovelling on the ground, 
And crying out, cast both her arms around 
Medea's knees, and panting, and half-dead, 
Poured forth wild words, nor knew the words she said. 
While the two others, mad with their despair, 
Ran wailing through the pillars here and there, 
Nor knew indeed what thing had come on them, 
For now, at last, fair Argo's plunging stem 
Medea saw in the still gathering light, 
And round about her the sea beaten white 
With steady oars; then she looked down, and said : 
" What ! art thou praying for the newly dead, 
For him who yesterday beheld the sun 1 
And dost thou think that I am such an one 
That what the Gods have unmade I can make ? 
Lo ! with the dead shall Pelias awake, 
And see such things as dead men's eyes may see." 

Then as Alcestis, moaning wretchedly, 
Fell back upon the pavement, thus she said : 
" Take comfort yet, and lift again thine head, 
foolish woman ! Dost thou think that fate 
Has yet been stopped by any love or hate, 
Or fear of death, or man's far-shouted fame ? 

23 



258 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And still doubt not that I, who have to name 
The wise Medea, in such ways as this 
Have long been struggling for a life of bliss 
I shall not gain ; and thus do all men do, 
And win such wages as have happed to you. 

" Rise up and gaze at what the fates have wrought, 
And all the counsels they have brought to nought 
On this same morn. Hearken the dash of oars 
That never more ye thought would brush these shores ; 
Behold the man stand on the high-raised prow 
That this dead man so surely dead did know ! 
See how he raises in his conquering hand 
The guarded marvel of the Colchian land, 
This dead king deemed hid death and unknown woe ! 
See how his folk ashore the grapnels throw ! 
And see, and see ! beneath the risen sun, 
How fair a day for this land is begun ! 
And let king Pelias rise if now he can, 
And stop the coming of the half-shod man." 

E'en as she spoke, the keel had touched the sand, 
And catching up her raiment in her hand, 
She ran with speed, and gained the temple close, 
Made fragrant with that many-flowered rose, 
And o'er its daisied grass sped toward the beach ; 
But when her feet the wrinkled sand did reach, 
There, nigh the ship, alone did Jason stand, 
Holding two spears within his ready .hand ; 
And right and left he peered forth warily, 
As though he thought some looked-for thing to see. 

But when he saw her hurrying him to meet, 
With wild wind-tangled hair, and naked feet, 
And outstretched hands, and scanty raiment black, 
But for one moment did he start aback, 
As if some guardian spirit of the land 
Had come upon him ; but the next, his hand 
Had caught her slim wrist, and he shouted out : 



OF JASON. 259 

11 Ashore, O heroes ! and no more have doubt 
That all is well done we have wished were done ; 
By this my love, by this the glorious one, 
The saviour of my life, the Queen of Love, 
To whom alone of all who are above, 
Or on the earth, will I pour wine, or give 
The life of anything that once did live." 

Then all men shouting, leapt forth on the sand, 
And stood about them, shield and spear in hand, 
Kejoicing that their mighty task was done ; 
But as he saw the newly-risen sun 
Shine on the town, upon their left that lay, 
Then, smiling joyously, did Jason say : 

" heroes, tell me, is not the day won ? 
Look how the sun's rays now are stealing on, 
And soon will touch that temple's marble feet 
Where stood the king our parting keel to greet, 
But the great golden image of the Grod 
Holds up, unlighted yet, his crystal rod, 
And surely ere the noon shall gleam on it 
Upon my father's throne his son shall sit, 
Hedged round with spears of loyal men and true, 
And all be done that we went forth to do." 

But, 'midst their shouting, spoke the queen again : 
" Jason, behold hereby this ancient fane 
Amidst its pillars let the heroes go 
Until a marble stair they come unto, 
And thereby mount into a pillared place, 
At end whereof, upon an open space 
Hung o'er the beach, that fire shall they see 
That lighted you to finish gloriously 
Your glorious journey ; and beside the fire 
There shall they find the slayer of thy sire, 
Who, soothly, shall not flee from them to-day, 
Nor curse the men who carry him away." 



260 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then forth Menoetius and Nauphius stood, 
Lynceus the keen, and Apheus of the wood, 
To do the thing that she would have them do, 
While unto Argo did Medea go, 
And for the last time scaled the sea-beat side ; 
There 'midst her silken curtains did she hide, 
And taking forth the fairest weed she had, 
In many a fragrant fold her body clad, 
And on her feet bound golden sandals fair, 
And set a golden garland on her hair. 

But when again she reached the shell-strewn sand, 
She saw the shielded heroes wondering stand 
About the new-slain body of the king, 
Not knowing yet whose hands had wrought the thing. 
For, scared amid their woe and misery, 
By clash of arms, the wretched sisters three 
Were lurking yet within the undercroft, 
Amongst the close-set pillars, thinking oft 
That now the whole round world should be undone. 

But while they trembled, iEson's glorious son 
Bade men make onward toward the market-place, 
That there he might the wondering townsfolk face 
For war or peace whichever it might be ; 
But first upon a great oar carefully 
They bound a spar crosswise, and hung thereon 
That guarded marvel that their arms had won, 
And as a banner bore it well aloft. 
And fair Medea, upon cushions soft, 
Laid upon spear-staves did they bear along, 
Hedged round with glittering spears and bucklers strong, 
And unarmed, fearless, mighty Jason led 
Their joyous march ; next whom, the man just dead, 
The strong-armed heroes upon spear-shafts bore, 
With dark blue sea-cloaks deftly covered o'er. 

So, following up the poor unkingly bier 
Of him who erst, for love of gain and fear, 



OF JASON. 261 

Had sent them forth to what he deemed their end, 
They through the palace courts began to wend, 
Not stayed of any, since the guards indeed 
Still slept, made heavy by the drowsy weed 
Eradne in their wine ere while did steep. 
And other folk, just risen from their sleep, 
Looked from the windows 'mazed ; and like a dream 
The queen, enthroned on golden cloths did seem, 
And like a dream the high-raised, glittering Fleece, 
And that new-slain long-hated pest of Greece. 
And some indeed there were who saw full well 
What wondrous tale there would be now to tell ; 
Who the glad setting forth did not forget, 
Unto whose eyes more fair, more glorious yet, 
The heroes showed, than when the sunny bay 
First felt their keel upon a happy day. 
They, crying out for joy, beheld the Fleece, 
And that fair Helper who had saved for Greece 
The godlike heroes, and amidst of these 
Seemed not the least of heavenly Goddesses. 

Withal they reached at last the brazen gate 
Of JEson's house, outside of which did wait 
Men armed and shouting, for that dawn a man 
None knew, a fisher on the water wan, 
From house to house among the folk had gone, 
Who said, that being in his boat alone, 
Casting his nets a little time before 
The dawn, he heard the sound of many an oar, 
And looking round, beheld a glittering prow 
That he for Argo's armed beak did know ; 
And as he gazed, her many-coloured side 
Dashed past him like a dream, with flood of tide, 
As for the far-off ancient fane she made ; 
And that thereon his anchor straight he weighed, 
And made good haste the landing-place to gain. 
" For certes," said he, " Pelias is slain, 

23* 



262 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And we are free once more." So saying, he passed 
From house to house, and reached the gates at last ; 
Nor any saw him more on land or sea, 
And, certes, none but clear-voiced Mercury 
Spoke in that man by helpful Juno made, 
No body, sooth ly, but a hollow shade. 

Now, therefore, when the gates were open wide, 
Shouting, the folk drew back on either side, 
All wild with joy ; but when they did behold 
The high-raised Fleece of curling ruddy gold, 
And the glad heroes' mighty heads beneath, 
And throned Medea, with her golden wreath, 
And folded hands, and chiefest thing of all, 
The godlike man who went beside the pall, 
Whereon the body of their tyrant lay, 
Then did their voices fail them on that day, 
And many a man of weeping there was fain. 

At last did Jason set his foot again 
Upon the steps of that same ivory throne 
Where once he fronted Pelias all alone, 
And bare of friends : but now he turned about, 
And, 'mid the thunder of the people's shout, 
Scarce heard his fellows' spears : and by his side 
There stood his gold-adorned Colchian bride, 
With glad tears glistening in her sweet grey eyes : 
And dead, at end of foiled treacheries, 
There lay his foe, the slayer of his kin. 

Then did he clasp the hand that lay within 
His mighty and sword-hardened fingers brown, 
And cried aloud above the shouting town : 

" Tell me, people of my father's land, 
Before whose ivory well-wrought throne I stand, 
And whose fair-towered house mine eyes behold, 
Glittering with brazen pillars, rich with* gold ? 



OF JASON. 263 

"A while ago we sailed across the sea, 
To meet our deaths, if so the thing must be, 
And there .had died, had not the kind Gods been, 
Who sent to us this lovely Colchian queen 
To be our helper : many a land we saw 
That knoweth neither tongue of man, or law 
Of God or man : oft most things did we lack 
That most men have, as still we struggled back 
Unto the soft wind and the Grecian sea, 
Until this morn our keel triumphantly 
Furrowed the green waves of the well-known bay. 
There to yon palace did I take my way, 
As one who thought his father's face to see ; 
Yet landing on the green shore warily, 
(Since times may change, and friendship come to nought,) 
To this dead man straightway my feet were brought, 
Whose face I knew, the face of Pelias. 

" Then still more warily thence did we pass, 
Till we met folk who told us everything, 
Both of the slaying of the godlike king, 
iEson, my father, and of other folk, 
And how the whole land groaned beneath the yoke 
Of this dead man, whom sure the Gods have slain 
That all our labour might not be in vain, 
Nor we, safe passing through the deadly land, 
Lie slain in our own country at his hand. 
So have the Gods wrought, therefore am I here, 
No shield upon mine arm, no glittering spear 
In my right hand, but by my unarmed side 
This Colchian Queen, by many sorrows tried. 
Therefore, no fear of you is in my heart ; 
And if ye will, henceforth will I depart, 
Nor take mine own ; or if it please this town 
To slay me, let them lay my dead corpse down, 
As on his tomb my father's image lies, 
Like what he was before these miseries 



01 THM 



264 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Fell on his head. But in no wise will I 
Take seat beneath this golden canopy, 
Before ye tell me, people of this land, 
Whose throne this is before the which I stand, 
Whose towered house this is mine eyes behold, 
Girt round with brazen pillars, bright with gold." 

Then, ere he ceased, the people's shouts broke in 
Upon his speech : " Most glorious of thy kin ! 
Be thou our king be thou our king alone, 
That we may think the age of iron gone, 
And Saturn come with every peaceful thing : 
Jason for king ! the Conqueror for king ! " 

Therewith the heroes clashed their spears and shields, 
And as within the many-flowered fields 
This way and that the slim-stalked flowers bend, 
When sweeping gusts the soft west wind doth send 
Among their hosts, so moved the people then, 
When ceased the shouting of the armed men. 
For each unto the other 'gan to speak, 
And o'er the tall men's heads some dame would seek 
To raise her child to look upon the king. 
And as with smiles and laughter many a thing 
They chattered through the great square joyously, 
Each careless what his neighbor's words might be ; 
It sounded like some February mead, 
Where thick the lustred starlings creep and feed, 
And each his own song sings unto his mate, 
Chiding the fickle spring so cold and late. 

But through the happy clamour of the folk, 
At Jason's bidding, the great trumpet broke, 
And great Echion's voice rang clear and strong, 
As he cried silence ; then across the throng 
Did Jason cry : " people, thanked be ye, 
That in such wise ye give yourselves to me. 



OF JASON. ' 265 

And now, friends, what more is there to say 
But this ? Be glad, and feast this happy day, 
Nor spend one coin of your store for this ; 
Nor shall the altars of the high Gods miss 
Their due thank-offering : and She chief of all, 
Who caused that this same happy time should fall, 
Shall have a tithe of all that 'longs to me. 

" And ye, loved companions o'er the sea, 
Come to my golden house, and let us feast, 
Nor let time weary us this night at least ; 
! be so glad that this our happy day 
For all times past, all times to come may pay." 

He ceased, and one more shout the people sent 
Up to the heavens, as he descending went 
With the fair Colchian through the joyous folk, 
From whose well-ordered lane at times there broke 
Some little child, thrust forward well to see 
The godlike leader of the Minyae ; 
Or here and there forth would some young man lean 
To gaze upon the beauty of the queen 
A little nearer, as they passed him by. 

Then, in such guise, they went triumphantly 
To all the temples of that city fair, 
And royal gifts they gave the great Gods there, 
But chiefest from the Queen of Heaven's close 
The clouds of incense in the air uprose, 
And chiefly thither were the white lambs led, 
And there the longest, Jason bowed the head 
Well garlanded with lily flowers white. 
But She, when all these things were done aright, 
And Jason now had turned to go away, 
In midmost of that cloudless sunny day 
Bade Iris build her many-coloured bow, 
That She her favour to the king might show. 

Then still more did the royal man rejoice, 



266 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And o'er the people, lifting up his voice, 

Cried : " See, Tbessalians, who is on my side, 

Nor fear ye now but plenty will abide 

In your fair land, and all folk speak of it, 

From places whence the wavering swallows flit, 

That they may live with us the sweet half year, 

To lands where dwells the sluggish white-felled bear." 

So spake he, glad past words ; and for the rest 
Did Juno love him well since his great quest 
Had brought home bitter death on Pelias, 
And his love's words had brought the thing to pass, 
That o'er his head was hanging, since the day 
When from Sidero dead he turned away, 
And as with Neleus down the steps he trod, 
Thought things that fitted some undying Grod. 

Thence to his father's tomb did Jason go, 
And found the old man's body laid alow, 
Within a lone, unkingly grave, and bade 
That straightway should a royal tomb be made 
To lay him in, anigh the murmuring sea, 
Wf ere, celebrating their great victory, 
They might do honour to his head recrowned, 
And 'mid their shouts all mourning might be drowned, 
Nor gladden the slain Pelias' lonely shade 
By weeping o'er the slaughter he had made. 

Therefrom unto his own house Jason came, 
He had not entered since the night his name 
Jiang 'twixt the marble walls triumphantly, 
And all folk set their hearts upon the sea. 
So now again, when shadows 'gan to fall 
Still longer from the west, within that hall 
Once more the heroes sat above their wine, 
Once more they hearkened music nigh divine, 
Once more the maidens' flower-scattering hands 
Seemed better prizes than well-peopled lands. 



OF JASON. 267 

Glorious and royal, now the deed was done, 
Seemed in that hall the face of every one, 
Who, 'twixt the thin plank and the bubbling sea, 
Had pulled the smooth oar-handle past his knee. 
Tuneful each voice seemed as the heroes told 
The marvels that their eyes did erst behold, 
Unto some merchant of the goodly town, 
Or some rich man who on the thymy down 
Fed store of sheep, and in whose lush green mead 
The heavy-uddered cows were wont to feed. 

And she who all this world of joy had made, 
And dared so many things all unafraid, 
Now sat a Queen beside her crowned King. 
And as his love increased with every thing 
She did or said, forgot her happy state 
In iEa of old times, ere mighty fate 
Brought Argo's side from out the dashers twain, 
Betwixt the rainbow and the briny rain. 
Yet in the midst of her felicity 
She trembled lest another day should see 
Another fate, and other deeds for these, 
Who hailed her not the least of Goddesses. 

Yet surely now, if never more again, 
Had she and all these folk forgotten pain, 
And idle words to them were death and fear ; 
For in the gathering evening could they hear 
The carols of the glad folk through the town, 
The song of birds within the garden drown ; 
And when the golden sun had gone away, 
Still little darker was the night than day 
Without the windows of the goodly hall. 

But many an hour after night did fall, 
Though outside silence fell on man and beast, 
There still they sat, nor wearied of the feast ; 



268 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Yea, ere they parted, glimmering light had come 
From the far mountains, nigh the Colchian's home, 
And in the twilight birds began to wake. 

But the next morn, for slaughtered iEson's sake, 
The games began, with many a sacrifice, 
And, these being all accomplished, gifts of price 
The heroes took at Jason's open hands, 
And, going homewards, unto many lands 
They bore the story of their wandering. 

And now is Jason mighty lord and king, 
And wedded to the fairest queen on earth, 
And with no trouble now to break his mirth ; 
And, loved by all, lives happy, free from blame, 
Nor less has won the promised meed of fame. 
So, having everything he once desired 
Within the wild, ere yet his heart was fired 
By Juno's word, he lives an envied man, 
Having these things that scarce another can ; 
Ease, love, and fame, and youth that knows no dread 
Of any horrors lurking far ahead 
Across the sunny, flowered fields of life : 
Youth seeing no end unto the joyous strife. 

And thus in happy days, and rest, and peace, 
Here ends the winning of the Golden Fleece. 



BOOK XVII. 

SO ends the winning of the Golden Fleece, 
So ends the tale of that sweet rest and peace 
That unto Jason and his love befell ; 
Another story now my tongue must tell, 
And tremble in the telling. Would that I 



OF JASON. 269 

Had but some portion of that mastery 

That from the rose-hung lanes of woody Kent 

Through these five hundred years such songs have sent 

To us, who, meshed within this smoky net 

Of unrejoicing labour, love them yet. 

And thou, Master ! Yea, my Master still, 

Whatever feet have scaled Parnassus' hill, 

Since like thy measures, clear, and sweet, and strong, 

Thames' stream scarce fettered bore the bream along 

Unto the bastioned bridge, his only chain. 

Master, pardon me, if yet in vain 

Thou art my Master, and I fail to bring 

Before men's eyes the image of the thing 

My heart is filled with : thou whose dreamy eyes 

Beheld the flush to Cressid's cheeks arise, 

As Troilus rode up the praising street, 

As clearly as they saw thy townsmen meet 

Those who in vineyards of Poictou withstood 

The glittering horror of the steel-topped wood. 

Ten years have passed, since in the market-place 
The hero stood with flushed and conquering face, 
And life before him like one happy day ; 
But many an hour thereof has passed away 
In mingled trouble and felicity. 
And now at Corinth, kissed by either sea, 
He dwells, not governed now or governing, 
Since there his kinsman Creon is a king. 

And with him still abides the Colchian, 
But little changed, since o'er the waters wan 
She gazed upon the mountains that she knew, 
Still lessening as the plunging Argo flew 
Over the billows on the way to Greece. 
But in these ten sweet years of rest and peace 
Two fair man-children has she borne to him, 
Who, joyous, fair of face, and strong of limb, 

24^ 



270 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Full oft shall hear the glorious story told 
Of Argo and the well-won Fleece of Gold, 
By some old mariner ; and oft shall go 
Where nigh the sea the wind-swept beech-trees grow, 
And, with a grey old woman tending them, 
Shall make an Ma, of some beech-tree's stem, 
About whose roots there stands the water black. 
Nor of the fleece shall they have any lack, 
For in the bushes hangs much tangled wool 
From wandering sheep who seek the shadow cool ; 
And for the dragon shall there be thereby 
A many-coloured snake, with glazed dull eye, 
Slain by the shepherd ; so shall pass their days, 
Whom folk look soon to gather wealth and praise. 

And 'midst these living things has Argo found 
A home here also ; on the spot of ground 
'Twixt Neptune's temple and the eastern sea, 
She looks across the waves unceasingly ; 
And as their ridges draw on toward the land, 
The wind tells stories of the kingly band. 
There, with the fixed and unused oars spread out 
She lies, amidst the ghosts of song and shout, 
And merry laughter, that were wont to fill 
Her well-built hollow, slowly dying still, 
Like all that glorious company of kings 
Who in her did such well-remembered things. 

But as the day comes round when o'er the seas 
She darted 'twixt the blue Symplegades, 
And when again she rushed across the bar, 
With King JEetes following her afar, 
And when at length the heroes laid adown 
The well-worn oars at old King iEson's town, 
When, year by year, these glorious days came round, 
Bright with gay garments was that spot of ground, 
And the grey rocks that o'ertop Cenchreae, 
Sent echoes of sweet singing o'er the sea. 



OF JASON. 271 

For then the keel the maidens went about 
Singing the songs of Orpheus, and the shout 
Of rough-voiced sea-folk ended every song ; 
And then from stem to stern they hung along 
Garlands of flowers, and all the oars did twine 
With garlands too, and cups of royal wine 
Cast o'er her stem ; and at the stern a maid, 
Clad like to Juno, on the tiller laid 
Her slender fingers, while anigh the stem 
Stood one with wings and many-coloured hem 
About her raiment, like the messenger 
Who bears the high Gods' dreadful words with her, 
And through the sea of old that ste n did lead. 

Lo, in such wise they honoured that great deed, 
But Jason did they reverence as a God ; 
And though his kinsman bore the ivory rod 
And golden circlet, little could he do 
Unless the great Thessalian willed it too. 

Yet therefore Creon nowise bore him hate, 
But reverencing the wise decrees of fate, 
Still honoured him the more ; and therewith thought, 
" Would that this man by some means might be brought 
To wed my daughter, since, when I am dead, 
By none but him the people shall be led ! " 
And on this thought he brooded more and more, 
And 'gaii to hate the Colchian very sore, 
And through the place, as lightly he might do, 
He spread ill tales of false things and of true, 
And unto Jason's self such words did say 
As well he thought might turn his heart away 
From faith and truth ; and as such oft will come, 
When wise men speak them, to a ready home, 
So here they did ; though soothly for his part, 
He knew it not, nor yet his restless heart. 



272 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But on a day it fell that as they sat 
In Creon's porch, and talked of this or that, 
The king said unto Jason : " Brave thou art, 
But hast thou never fear within thine heart 
Of what the Gods may do for Pelias ? " 
" Nay," Jason said, " let what will come to pass, 
His day is past, and mine is flourishing j 
But doubtless is an end to everything, 
And soon or late each man shall have his day." 

Then said the king: " Neither did thine hand slay 
The man thyself, or bring his death about ; 
Let each man bear his own sin without doubt. 
Yet do I bid thee watch and take good heed 
Of what the Colchian's treacheries may breed." 

Then quickly Jason turned his head around 
And said : " What is there dwelling above ground 
That loveth me as this one loveth me ? 
Creon ! I am honoured here as thee ; 
All do my will as if a God I were ; 
Scarce cr.n the young men see me without fear, 
The elders without tears of vain regret. 
And, certes, had this worshipped head been set 
Upon some spike of King iEetes' house, 
But for her tender love and piteous, 
For me she gave up country, kin, and name, 
For me she risked tormenting and the flame, 
The anger of the Gods and curse of man ; 
For me she came across the waters wan 
Through many woes, and for my sake did go 
Alone, unarmed, to my most cruel foe, 
Whom there she slew by his own daughters' hands, 
Making me king of all my father's lands : 
Note all these things, and tell me then to flee 
From that which threateneth her who loveth me." 

"Yea," said the king, " to make and to unmake 
Is her delight ; and certes for thy sake 
She did all this thou sayest, yea, and more ; 



OF JASOX. 273 

Seeing thee death-doomed on a foreign shore, 

With hardy heart, but helpless ; a king's son, 

But with thy thread of life well-nigh outrun ; 

Therefore, I say, she did all this for thee, 

Aud ever on the way to Thessaly 

Bade thee do this or that, since still ye were 

As void of helpful knowledge as of fear. 

All this she did, and so was more than queen 

Of thee and thine : but thou thine age is green, 

Nor wilt thou always dwell in this fair town, 

Nor through the wild wood hunt the quarry down 

Bethink thee of the world thou mayst be king, 

Holding the life and death of everything, 

Nor will she love thee more, upon that day 

When all her part will be but to obey ; 

Nor will it then be fitting unto thee 

To have a rival in thy sovereignty 

Laid in thy bed, and sitting at thy board." 

Now somewhat Jason reddened at that word, 
But said : " Creon, let the thing be so ! 
She shall be high the while that I am low, 
And as the Gods in heaven rule over me, 
Since they are greater, in such wise shall she, 
Who as they gave me life, has given me life, 
And glorious end to seeming hopeless strife." 

Then Creon said : " Yea, somewhat good it were 
If thou couldst lead that life, and have no fear." 
Laughing he spoke ; but quickly changed his face, 
And with knit brows he rose up from his place, 
And with his hand on Jason's shoulder, said : 
" careless man, too full of hardihead ! 
thou ease-loving, little-thinking man, 
Whate'er thou doest, dread the Colchian ! 
She will unmake thee yet, as she has made. 
And in a bloody grave shalt thou be laid.'' 

Then turning, to his palace went the king, 

24* 



274 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But Jason, left alone and pondering, 
Felt in his heart a vague and gnawing fear, 
Of unknown troubles slowly drawing near, 
And, spite of words, the thing that Creon said 
Touched in his heart that still increasing dread, 
And he was moved by that grave elder's face, 
For love was dying in that ten years' space. 

But Creon, sitting in his chamber, thought, 
" Surely I think my hero may be brought 
To change his mate, for in his heart I see 
He wearies of his great felicity, 
Like fools, for whom fair heaven is not enough, 
And long to stumble over forests rough 
With chance of death : yet no more will I say, 
But let the bright sun bring about the day." 

Now such an one for daughter Creon had 
As maketh wise men fools, and young men mad, 
Who yet in Corinth at this time was not, 
But dwelt afar upon a woody spot 
Anigh Cleonae ; whither oft before 
Had Jason gone for chasing of the boar 
With Creon and his folk ; and on a day 
With the old king again he took his way 
To that dark wood, whereto, about the noon, 
They came, well harbingered by thrushes' tune, 
And there straight fell to hunting of the boar ; 
But, either through default of woodland lore, 
Or bidden by the king, huntsmen and all, 
The king's stout servants from the chase did fall, 
And Jason with him soon was left alone. 
With that both saw that nigh the day was done, 
For 'midst the thick trees was it nigh twilight : 
Then Jason said : " Surely our bed to-night 
Will be beneath these creaking boughs and black." 



OF JASON. 275 

" Nay," said the king, " surely we shall not lack 
Soft golden beds such as old men desire, 
Nor on the hearth the crackling of the fire, 
For hereby is a little house of mine 
Where dwells my daughter Glauce, near the shrine 
Of round-armed Juno ; there, with two or three, 
Matrons or maids, she guardeth reverently 
The altar of the Goddess." 

With that word 
Forward his jaded horse old Creon spurred, 
And Jason followed him ; and when the sun 
His burning course that day had well-nigh done, 
The king and Jason came anigh the place 
Where stood the house upon a swarded space 
Amidst thick trees, that hedged it like a wall, 
Whose shadows now o'er half the place did fall, 
While 'twixt their stems the low sun showed like fire, 
And in the east the still white moon rose higher. 

But midmost there a glittering roof of gold 
Slim shafts of pale blue marble did uphold, 
And under it, wrought by the art divine, 
Of some dead man, before a well-wrought shrine, 
The Goddess stood, carved out of purest gold, 
That her fair altar thence she might behold ; 
And round that temple was a little close 
Shut by a gilded trellis of red rose 
From off the forest green-sward ; and from thence 
Carried by winds about the beech wood dense, 
The scent of lilies rose up in the air, 
And store of pea-fowl was there roosting there, 
Or moving lazily across the grass. 

But from the temple did the two kings pass 
Unto a marble house that was thereby, 
Not great indeed, but builded cunningly, 
And set about with carve n images, 
Built in a close of slim young apple-trees ; 



276 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

A marble fountain was there nigh the door, 

And there the restless water trickled o'er 

A smooth-hewn basin coloured like a shell, 

And from the wet pink lip thereof it fell 

By many a thin streak into a square pool, 

From whence it ran again, the grass to cool, 

In a small stream o'er sand, and earth, and flint, 

Edged all about with fragrant blue-flowered mint, 

Or hidden by the flat-leaved quivering sedge. 

But from the pool's smooth-wrought and outmost edge 

There went a marble step the fount to meet, 

Well worn by many a water-drawer's feet. 

And thereon now they saw a damsel stand, 
Holding the basin's lip with either hand, 
While at her feet a brazen ewer stood j 
But when she heard them coming from the wood, 
She turned about, and, seeing men near by, 
Caught up the brazen vessel hastily, 
And swiftly ran towards the marble house ; 
But Creon, in his voice imperious, 
Cried : " Hither, Glauce ! am I grown so old, 
That without fear thou canst no more behold 
Thy father, Creon ? Nay, come near, child, 
And bid us welcome to the forest wild." 

Then straight she stopped, and, setting down the urn, 
Unto her father and his guest did turn, 
While o'er his saddle-bow old Creon bent, 
Rejoicing in her beauty as she went ; 
And for one moment every scheme forgot, 
For raising this thing and abasing that ; 
As well he might, for as in poor array 
She drew towards them at that end of day, 
With raiment fluttering in the evening breeze, 
She seemed like Her, the crown of Goddesses, 
Who, o'er the dark sea, at the sunset came 
To be in heaven a joy, on earth a flame. 



OF JASON. 277 

Blushing, she came to Creon's saddle-bow, 
And kissed him, who said, smiling : " Fearest thou 
Thy father, grown the oldest of old men ? 
How wilt thou look upon this stranger then, 
Who is no God, though such he seems to be, 
But Jason, leader of the Minyae ? " 
Somewhat she started at the glorious name, 
And o'er her face deeper the red flush came, 
As she, with upraised face and shamefast eyes, 
Said : " Welcome, winner of the guarded prize ! 
Good hap it is indeed that thou art come 
Unto my little-peopled woodland home. 
Come then, my lords, to what awaits you here ; 
Not spiced Maeotic wine or dainty cheer 
Your lips shall taste, but of fair simple flowers 
Your drink shall savour, and your meat shall be 
Red-coated squirrels from the beechen tree." 

Then fain to hide her eyes and blushing face, 
She turned from them, and at a gentle pace 
Unto the pillared porch she led the twain. 
There they, alighting, the dark house did gain, 
And there they ate and drank, making such cheer 
As fasting men will do ; and still anear 
Was Glauce to them, telling every maid 
How such and such a thing should be arrayed ; 
And ever the Thessalian's eager eyes 
Did follow her, and to his heart did rise 
Vague feelings of a new-found happiness. 

But now as the round moon was growing less, 
And waxing brighter, and of fitting food 
The kings had eaten as they thought it good, 
Then Creon said : "0 daughter, straightly take 
This full cup to the hero for my sake, 
And bid him drink thereof, and tell thee all 
That unto him at iEa did befall, 
And what fate did as still he journeyed home " 



278 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Then unto Jason did the maiden come, 
Bearing the cup ; and when he saw her thus, 
The lapse of time seemed strange and piteous ; 
For he bethought him of that other tide, 
When certain-seeming death he did abide 
In King iEetes' hall ; and when she drew 
Anigh unto him, back the past years flew, 
And he became that man entrapped again, 
And newly felt, as then, that joyous pain, 
And in his hand as then the cup he took, 
With the warm fingers, and as then her look 
Sent fire through his veins ; yea, and as then 
He had no heed of any Gods or men. 

Therewith her musical sweet voice he heard , 
Speaking again the king her father's word : 
" Jason, if it please thee, tell me all 
That unto thee at iEa did befall, 
And what thou sawedst as thou journeyedst home, 
And how it happed thee to thy land to come." 

Bat ever as she spake she gazed at him, 
And with new thoughts her simple eyes did swim, 
Thinking her happy that this man had wed ; 
And therewithal she turned from pale to red, 
And red to pale. Then said he : " Thou shalt know, 
fair king's daughter, all I have to show." 
And so the story of the Fleece began, 
And how fair Argo crossed the water wan ; 
While from his glittering eyes, deep sunk with eld, 
The wily king those beauteous folk beheld, 
As still from Jason's lips poured forth the tale, 
And she sat listening, whiles with cheeks grown pale 
And parted lips, and whiles with downcast eyes 
And blushing for the thoughts that would arise 
Uncalled for; and thus passed that eve away 
Till time of rest came. Then, until the day, 
In his fair silken bed did Jason dream 
Of Argo struggling with the unknown stream, 



OF JASON. 279 

And all the wonders of their long-past quest, 
And well-known faces long-time laid to rest. 

But when the night was passed, and the great sun 
Another day for all things had begun, 
The kings, arising, unto Corinth rode. 
But, ere they left the woodland fair abode, 
Unto the Goddess did they sacrifice, 
And on her altar, in such woodland wise 
As huntsmen use, their offerings did they lay. 
With them was Glauce on that dawn of day, 
Upon the left hand of the ancient king, 
Unto the reverend Goddess ministring. 
But when they turned once more unto the town, 
The half-quenched censer did she lay adown, 
And holding still the fresh-plucked flower-wreath, 
Bade them farewell. 

Then by thick wood and heath 
They rode, and on their journey Jason said 
Few words and wandering ; for still that maid 
Did he behold before his waking eyes, 
And with the oft-recurring memories 
Of days and things a long-time passed away 
Her image mixed, and words that she did say. 

But when upon the threshold of his house 
He met Medea, who, with amorous 
And humble words, spoke to him greetings kind, 
He felt as he whose eyes the fire doth blind, 
That presently about his limbs shall twine, 
And in her face and calm grey eyes divine 
He read his own destruction ; none the less 
In his false heart fair Glauce's loveliness 
Seemed that which he had loved his whole life long, 
And little did he feel his old love's wrong. 

Alas for truth ! each day, yea, hour by hour, 
He longed once more to see the beechen bower, 



280 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And her who dwelt thereby. Alas, alas ! 

Oft from his lips the hated words would pass : 

' ' wavering traitor, still unsatisfied ! 
false betrayer of the love so tried, 
Fool ! to cast off the beauty that thou know'st, 
Clear-seeing wisdom, better than a host 
Against thy foes, and truth and constancy 
Thou wilt not know again whate'er shall be ! " 

So oft he spoke words that were words indeed, 
And had no sting, nor would his changed heart heed 
The very bitterest of them all, as he 
Thought of his woodland fair divinity, 
And of her upturned face, so wondering 
At this or that oft-told unheeded thing. 

Yet whiles, indeed, old memories had some power 
Over his heart, in such an awful hour 
As that, when darksome night is well-nigh done, 
And earth is waiting silent for the sun ; 
Then would he turn about his mate to see, 
From lips half open, breathing peacefully, 
And open, listless, the fair fingers laid, 
That unto him had brought such mighty aid. 
Then, groaning, from her would he turn away, 
And wish he might not see another day, 
For certainly his wretched soul he knew, 
And of the cruel God his heart that drew. 
But when the bright day had come round again, 
With noise of men, came foolish thoughts and vain, 
And, feeding fond desire, would he burn 
Unto Cleonre his swift steps to turn. 

Nor to these matters was the Colchian blind ; 
And though as yet his speech to her was kind, 
Good heed she took of all his moody ways, 
And how he loved her not as in past days ; 
And how he shrunk from her, yet knew it not, 
She noted, and the stammering words and hot, 



OF JASON. 281 

Wherewith, as she grew kinder, still he strove 
To hide from her the changing of his love. 

Long time she tried to shut her eyes to this, 
Striving to save that fair abode of bliss ; 
But so it might not be ; and day by day 
She saw the happy time fade fast away j 
And as she fell from out that happiness, 
Again she grew to be the sorceress, 
Worker of fearful things, as once she was, 
When what my tale has told she brought to pass. 

So, on a weary, hopeless day, she said : 
" Ah ! poor Medea, art thou then betrayed 
By that thou trustedst ? Art thou brought to nought 
By that which erst, with wonders strangely wrought, 
Thou madest live through happy days and long ? 
Lo, now shall be avenged those poor maid's wrong, 
Who, in that temple o'er the murmuring sea, 
Ran maddening here and there ; and now shall be 
That word accomplished that I uttered then, 
Nor yet believed that to all earthly men, 
In spite of right and wrong, and love and hate, 
One day shall come the turn of luckless fate. 
Alas ! then I believed it not, when I 
Saw Argo's painted prow triumphantly 
Cleave the grey seas, and knew that I it was, 
My very self, who brought those things to pass, 
And lit those eyes unseen. How could I know 
Unto what cruel folly men will grow? " 

She wept therewith and once more on that night 
She stole abroad about the mirk midnight ; 
Once more upon a wood's edge from her feet 
She stripped her shoes and bared her shoulder sweet ; 
Once more that night over the lingering fire 
She hung with sick heart famished with desire ; 
Once more she turned back when her work was done ; 

25 



282 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Once more she fled the coming of the sun j 

Once more she reached her dusky, glimmering room ; 

Once more she lighted up the dying gloom j 

Once more she lay adown, and in sad sleep 

Her weary body and sick heart did steep. 

Alas ! no more did tender Love come down 

And smooth her troubled face of fear and frown ; 

No more with hope half-opened lips did smile. 

Not long she slept, but in a little while, 
Sighing, she rose, when now the sun was high, 
And, going to her wallet wearily, 
Took forth a phial thence, which she unstopped, 
And a small driblet therefrom slowly dropped 
Upon a shred of linen, which straightway 
In the sun's gleaming pathway did she lay ; 
But when across it the first sunbeam came, 
Therefrom there burst a colourless bright flame, 
Which still burnt on when every shred was gone 
Of that which seemed to feed the flame alone ; 
Nor burnt it less for water, that she threw 
Across it and across. Thereon she drew 
A linen tunic from a brazen chest, 
Wherein lay hid the fairest and the best 
Of all her raiment ; this she held, and said : 
" Jason, thy love is fair by likelihead, 
Pity it were to hide her over-much, 
And when this garment her fair limbs shall touch, 
So will it hide them as the water green 
Hid Citheraea, when she first was seen." 

Soothly she spoke, because the web was fair 
And thin, and delicate beyond compare, 
And had been woven in no common loom, 
For she herself within her fair-hung room 
Had set the warp and watched the fine weft glide 
Up from the roller, while from side to side, 
Scarce seen, the shuttle flew from fingers thin 



OF JASON. 283 

Of a dark Indian maid, whom gold did win 

From some Phoenician, that loved nought but gold. 

But sighing now the raiment to behold, 
She poured into a well- wrought bowl of brass 
The thing that in the phial hidden was, 
And therein, fold by fold, the linen laid, 
Then for a little while her hands she stayed, 
Till it had drunk the moisture thoroughly ; 
Whereon she took it forth and laid it by, 
Far from the sunlight, on her royal bed, 
Saying : " thou who hast the hardihead, 
Whoe'er thou art, to take from me mine own, 
It had been good for thee that of smooth stone 
Thy limbs were wrought, nor made to suffer pain , 
If this morn's deed has not been quite in vain." 

So saying, did she mutter moodily, 
Watching the spread-out linen slowly dry ; 
At last she took it, and within a bright 
Fair silver casket hid it from the sight. 

This done, about the noble house she went, 
And bitterly full oft her eyes she bent 
On man and maid, and things grown old and dear , 
'Midst hope of rest, no longer hoped for there. 

And, meantime, Jason, by the wily king 
Still watched, had little joy in anything, 
For while with fierce desire his heart still burned, 
Yet now again for rest and peace he yearned ; 
Nor praise of other men yet counted nought, 
And somewhat of the coming days he thought, 
And helpless eld with many memories 
Beset, and pictures of reproachful eyes ; 
Yet thinking of the chain of days and nights 
Stretched out all barren of once-hoped delights, 
A sorry thing life seemed to him to be, 



284 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And one path only from that misery 

Seemed open to him where the fair girl stood, 

Within the shadow of the becchen wood. 

But while he wavered thus 'twixt love and fear, 
And something of the old time grown too dear 
To cast off lightly, Creon noted all. 
And surely now had hope that should befall 
He long had wished for, and in such wise wrought 
That all unto an ending soon be brought. 

Therefore it happed that on a July morn, 
Jason at last, by many troubles torn, 
Mounted his horse, and toward Cleonae turned. 
But as with pale face, and a heart that burned 
To end all things in sweet love at the last, 
He by the palace of King Creon passed, 
There Creon stood before the door, and said : 
" Where goest thou, Jason ? By my head, 
Wilt thou not sit at our high feast to-day ? 
What do'st thou then upon the stony way 
That leads to Argolis?" 

" King," said he, 
"lam not meet for your solemnity, 
Because the Gods to-day have made me sad ; 
Nor knew I yet what feast here should be had, 
But thought to-day to see my arrows fly 
Within the green glades of the woods hereby." 

" Nay," said the king; " full surely many a day 
Of summer will there be to play this play, 
But on this day to Cithersea's house 
Folk go, both maids and young men amorous ; 
Yea, elders like to me will hold this feast, 
Who in their foolish hearts can mourn at least 
For days and things that never come again. 
Yet, for myself, I shall not feast in vain , 
For on this day my daughter comes to me, 
That nigh Cleonse ere while thou didst see, 



OF JASOX. 285 

And she too goes with flower-bearing hands 
To kiss the foot that on the tortoise stands." 

So saying, did his ancient wily eyes 
Behold the blood to Jason's brow arise, 
And inwardly he laughed ; but Jason said : 
" Yea, then, king, to chase my drearihead, 
This were a fair sight for mine eyes to see ; 
And since thou wiliest, I will go with thee." 

Then 'lighting from his horse, beside the king 
He stood, and talked of this or that light thing, 
And saw meanwhile full many a broad- wheeled wain, 
Filled with fair flowers from the unshorn plain, 
Go toward the temple of the Cyprian queen, 
And youths and maidens, wreathed about with green, 
Pass, singing carols through the listening street. 

At last the king said : " Come, and let us meet 
This joyous band within the very fane." 
So forth they went, and soon the place did gain, 
Where the fair temple of the Goddess rose 
From 'midst a grassy apple-planted close. 
But each side of the door a maid there stood, 
Clad in thin silken raiment red as blood, 
Who had by her a gilded basket light, 
Filled full of flowers woven for delight, 
Wherefrom unto the passing kings they gave 
Wreaths bound with gold, that somewhat they might have 
To offer to the dread divinity, 
Whose image, wrought of silver cunningly, 
Stood 'neath a canopy of gleaming gold 
Midmost the place, where damsels fair did hold 
Baskets of flowers, or swung censers high ; 
Then to the precious shrine they drew anigh, 
And forth stood Creon, and the fragrant wreath 
Laid on the altar, and beneath his breath 
Some prayer he muttered ; and next Jason laid 
His gift by Creon's, but of much afraid, 

25* 



286 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

And hoping much, he made not any prayer 
Unto the Goddess ; then amid the fair 
Slim pillars did he stand beside the king, 
Confused as in a dream, and wondering 
How all would end. But as they waited thus, 
Within that fragrant place and amorous, 
Languid grew Jason with the flowers' scent, 
And with the incense-cloud that ever went 
Unto the half-seen golden roof above, 
Amongst whose glimmering the grey-winged dove 
Hung crooning o'er his wrongs ; moreover there 
The temple-damsels passed them, shy and fair, 
With white limbs shining through their thin attire, 
And amorous eyes, the hearts of men to fire, 
Beneath their heavy crowns of roses red ; 
And veiled sweet voices through the place did shed 
Strange fitful music, telling more than words, 
Confused by twitter of the restless birds 
Within the temple-eaves, and by the doves, 
Who 'mid the pillars murmured of their loves. 

But when the pleasure of that temple fair 
Had sunk into his soul, upon the air 
Was borne the sound of flutes from folk outside, 
And soon the greatest doors were opened wide, 
And all the rout of worshippers poured in, 
Clad in fair raiment, summer-like and thin, 
And holding wreaths, part twined of fragrant flowers - 
The children of the soft, sweet April showers 
And part of blossoms wrought in ruddy gold. 
Now back the incense from the water rolled 
At their incoming, driven by the wind, 
And round the pillars of the place it twined, 
Enwrapping Jason, so that faint and dim 
The fair show of the maidens was to him, 
As each upon the altar laid adown 
The flowers mingled with the golden crown, 
And prayed her prayer, then passed behind the shrine. 



OF JASON. 287 

At last from 'midst that cloud did Venus shine 
Before the eyes of the Thessalian, 
Who, with fixed eyes, and lips grown thin and wan, 
Stared at the image, little though he saw, 
But at her feet a sweet face, grave with awe, 
Just bending over toward the silver feet, 
Which Grlauce with a timid kiss did greet, 
And this being done, drew backward, murmuring 
Her prayer to Venus : " Goddess, a small thing 
Before this altar do I ask of thee, 
That I my hero and my love may see, 
That I " but therewithal her face she raised, 
And met his hungry eyes that on her gazed, 
And stopped all trembling, letting fall adown 
The hand that held the gold-enwoven crown. 

Yet little anger Venus had therefor, 
But rather smiled to see her learn her lore 
Within her house upon her festal day. 

But now upon the altar did she 'lay 
Her offering, and yet she finished not 
Her prayer begun, though in her poor heart, hot 
With thoughts of love, full many a prayer she prayed. 

And now was all that pageant well arrayed 
To pass about the temple, and her place 
Did Glauce take with flushed and eager face ; 
But on her finger did she loose a ring, 
Which that same day the wise Corinthian king 
Had given her ; therewith she went along, 
Murmuring faint words amidst her fellows' song. 

Then past the kings the long procession swept, 
And somewhat from the pillars Jason stepped, 
Seeking a sign from that desired face ; 
And as the damsels at a gentle pace 
Went by him, and for fear of him and awe 
Shrunk back, and with their slender hands did draw 
Closer about them the thin fragrant weed, 



288 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Still nought of all their beauty did he heed, 

But into Glauce's eyes appealingly 

Still gazed, who, trembling like some snow-trapped dove, 

From her soft eyes sent forth one look of love, 

Then dropped the lids, as, blind with love and shame, 

Unto the place where stood the kings she came. 

And there her hand that down beside her hung . 

She raised a little, and her faltering tongue 

Just framed the words : " love, for thee, for thee ! " 

And with that word she trembled piteously, 

In terror at the sound of her own voice. 

And much did wily Creon then rejoice, 

Looking askance, and feigning to see nought, 

When he beheld those hands together brought. 

But Jason, when those fingers touched his own, 
Forgat all joys that he had ever known ; 
And when her hand left his hand with the ring, 
Still in the palm, like some lost, stricken thing, 
He stood and stared, as from his eyes she passed. 
And from that hour all fear away was cast, 
All memory of the past time, all regret 
For days that did those changed days beget, 
And therewithal adown the wind he flung 
The love whereon his yearning heart once hung. 

Ah ! let me turn the page, nor chronicle 
In many words the death of faith, or tell 
Of meetings by the newly-risen moon, 
Of passionate silence 'midst the brown birds' tune, 
Of wild tears wept within the noontide shade, 
Of wild vows spoken, that of old were made 
For other ears, when, amidst other flowers, 
He wandered through the love-begetting hours. 
Suffice it, that unhappy was each day 
Which without speech from Grlauce passed away ; 
And troublous dreams would visit him at night, 



OF JASON. 289 

When day had passed all barren of her sight. 
And at the last, that Creon, the old king, 
Being prayed with gifts, and joyful of the thing, 
Had given a day when these twain should be wed. 

Meanwhile, the once-loved sharer of his bed 
Knew all at last, and fierce tormenting fire 
Consumed her as the dreadful day drew nigher, 
And much from other lips than his she heard, 
Till, on a day, this dreadful, blighting word, 
Her eyes beheld within a fair scroll writ, 
And 'twixt her closed teeth still she muttered it : 

" Depart in peace ! and take great heaps of gold, 
For nevermore thy body will I fold 
Within these arms. Let Gods wed Goddesses, 
And sea-folk wed the women of the seas, 
And men wed women ; but thee, who can wed 
And dwell with thee without consuming dread, 

wise kin of the dreadful sorceress ! 

And yet, perchance thy beauty still may bless 
Some man to whom the world seems small and poor, 
And who already stands beside his door, 
Armed for the conquest of all earthly things. 

" Lo, such an one, the vanquisher of kings, 
And equal to the Gods, should be thy mate, 
But me, who for a peaceful end but wait, 
Desiring nought but love canst thou love me ? 
Or can I give my whole heart up to thee ? 

" I hear thee talk of old days thou didst know 
Are they not gone ? wilt thou not let them go, 
Nor to their shadows still cling desperately, 
Longing for things that never more can be ? 

" What ! wilt thou blame me still that the times change ? 
Once through the oak-wood happy did I range, 
And thought no ill ; but then came over me 
Madness, I know not why, and o'er the sea 

1 needs must go in strife to win me fame, 



290 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

# 
And certes won it, and my envied name 
Was borne with shouts about the towns of Greece. 

" All that has vanished now, and my old peace, 
Through lapse of changing years, has come to me. 
Once more I seem the woodland paths to see, 
Tunes of old songs are ringing in mine ears, 
Heard long ago in that place free from fears, 
Where no one wept above his fellow dead, 
And looked at death himself with little dread. 
The times are changed, with them is changed my heart, 
Nor in my life canst thou have any part, 
Nor can I live in joy and peace with thee, 
Nor yet, for all thy words, canst thou love me. 

" Yet, is the world so narrow for us twain 
That all our life henceforth must be but vain ? 
Nay, for departing shalt thou be a queen 
Of some great world, fairer than I have seen, 
And wheresoe'er thou goest shalt thou fare 
As one for whom the Gods have utmost care." 

Yea, she knew all, yet when these words she read, 
She felt as though upon her bowed-down head 
Had fallen a misery not known before, 
And all seemed light that erst her crushed heart bore, 
For she was wrapped in uttermost despair, 
And motionless within the chamber fair 
She stood, as one struck dead and past all thought. 

But as she stood, a sound to her was brought 
Of children's voices, and she 'gan to wail 
With tearless eyes, and, from writhed lips and pale, 
Faint words of woe she muttered, meaningless, 
But such as such lips utter none the less. 
Then all at once thoughts of some dreadful thing 
Back to her mind some memory seemed to bring, 
As she beheld the casket gleaming fair, 
Wherein was laid that she was wont to wear, 



OF JASON. 291 

That in the philter lay that other morn, 
And therewithal unto her heart was borne 
The image of two lovers, side by side. 

Then with a groan the fingers that did hide 
Her tortured face slowly she drew away, 
And going up to where her tablets lay, 
Fit for the white hands of the Goddesses, 
Therein she wrote such piteous words as these : 

" Would God that Argo's brazen-banded mast 
'Twixt the blue clashing rocks had never passed 
Unto the Colchian land ! Or would that I 
Had had such happy fortune as to die 
Then, when I saw thee standing by the Fleece, 
Safe on the long-desired shore of Greece ! 
Alas, Jason ! for thy cruel praise ! 
Alas, for all the kindness of past days ! 
That to thy heart seems but a story told 
Which happed to other folk in times of old. 
But unto me, indeed, its memory 
Was bliss in happy hours, and now shall be 
Such misery as never tongue can tell. 

" Jason, I heed thy cruel message well, 
Nor will I stay to vex thee, nor will stay 
Until thy slaves thrust me, thy love, away. 
Be happy ! think that I have never been 
Forget these eyes, that none the less have seen 
Thy hands take life at my hands, and thy heart 
O'erflow in tears, when needs was we should part 
But for a little ; though, upon the day 
When I for evermore must go away, 
I think, indeed, thou wilt not weep for this ; 
Yea, if thou weepest then, some honeyed kiss 
From other lips shall make thy grey eyes wet, 
Betwixt the words that bid thee to forget 
Thou ever hast loved aught but her alone. 



292 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" Yet of all times mayst thou remember one, 
The second time that ever thou and I 
Had met alone together mournfully 
The soft wind murmured on that happy night, 
The round moon, growing low, was large and bright, 
As on my father's marble house it gleamed, 
While from the fane a baneful light outstreamed, 
Lighting the horror of that prodigy, 
The only fence betwixt whose wrath and thee 
Was this poor body. Ah ! thou knowest then 
How thou beheld'st the shadows of thy men 
Steal silently towards Argo's painted head. 
Thou knowest yet the whispered words I said 
Upon that night thou never canst forget 
That happy night of all nights. Ah ! and yet 
Why make I these long words, that thou the more 
Mayst hate me, who already hat'st me sore, 
Since 'midst thy pleasure I am grown a pain. 

" Be happy ! for thou shalt not hear again 
My voice, and with one word this scroll is done 
Jason, I love thee, yea, love thee alone 
G-od help me, therefore ! and would God that I. 
Such as thou sayst I am, were verily, 
Then what a sea of troubles shouldst thou feel 
Rise up against thy life ! how shouldst thou steel 
Thy heart to bear all, failing at the last ! 
Then wouldst thou raise thine head, o'erwhelmed, down- 
cast, 
And round about once more shouldst look for me, 
Who led thee o'er strange land and unknown sea. 

" And not in vain, dearest ! not in vain ! 
Would I not come and weep at all thy pain, 
That I myself had wrought ? would I not raise 
Thy burdened head with hopes of happy days ? 
Would I not draw thee forth from all thy woe ? 
And fearless by thy side would T not go, 



OF JASON. 293 

As once I went, through many unknown lands, 
When I had saved thee from my father's hands ? 

" All would I do, that I have done erewhile, 
To have thy love once more, and feel thy smile, 
As freed from snow about the first spring days 
The meadows feel the young sun's fickle rays. 

" But I am weak, and past all, nor will I 
Pray any more for kindly memory ; 
Yet shalt thou have one last gift more from me, 
To give thy new love, since men say that she 
Is fairer than all things man can behold. 

" Within this casket lies in many a fold 
Raiment that my forgotten limbs did press, 
When thou wert wont to praise their loveliness. 
Fear not to take it from the sorceress' hands, 
Though certainly with balms from many lands 
Is it made fragrant, wondrous with a charm 
To guard the wearer's body from all harm. 

" Upon the morn that she shall make thee glad, 
With this fair tunic let her limbs be clad, 
But see that no sun falls upon its folds 
Until her hand the king, her father, holds, 
To greet thine eyes : then, when in godlike light 
She shines, with all her beauty grown so bright, 
That eyes of men can scarcely gaze thereon 
Then, when thy new desire at last is won 
Then, wilt thou not a little think of me, 
Who saved thy life for this felicity ? " 

She ceased, and moaning to herself she said : 
" Ah ! when will all be ended 'I If the dead 
Have unto them some little memory left 
Of things that while they lived Fate from them reft, 
Ere life itself was reft from them at last, 
Yet would to God these days at least were past, 
And all be done that here must needs be done ! 

26 



294 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" Ah ! shall I, living underneath the sun, 
I wonder, wish for anything again, 
Or ever know what pleasure means, and pain ? 
And for these deeds I do ; and thou the first, 
O woman, whose young beauty has so cursed 
My hapless life, at least I save thee this 
The slow descent to misery from bliss, 
With bitter torment growing day by day, 
And faint hope lessening till it fades away 
Into dull waiting for the coming blow. 
But thou, who nought of coming fate dost know 
One overwhelming fear, one agony, 
And in a little minute shalt thou be 
Where thou wouldst be in threescore years at most, 
And surely but a poor gift thou hast lost. 
The new-made slave, the toiler on the sea, 
The once rich fallen into poverty, 
In one hour knows more grief than thou canst know ; 
And many a one there is who fain would go 
And try their fortune in the unknown life 
If they could win some ending to this strife, 
Unlooked-for, sudden, as thine end shall be. 
Kindly I deal with thee, mine enemy ; 
Since swift forgetfulness to thee I send. 
But thou shalt die his eyes shall see thine end 
Ah ! if thy death alone could end it all ! 

"But ye shall I behold you when leaves fall, 
In some sad evening of the autumn-tide ? 
Or shall I have you sitting by my side 
Amidst the feast, so that folk stare and say, 
" Sure the grey wolf has seen the queen to-day " ? 
What ! when I kneel in temples of the Gods, 
Must I bethink me of the upturned sods, 
And hear a voice say, * Mother, wilt thou come 
And see us resting in our new-made home, 



OF JASON. 295 

Since thou wert used to make us lie full soft, 
Smoothing our pillows many a time and oft ? 
mother, now no dainty food we need, 
Whereof of old thou usedst to have such heed. 

mother, now we need no gown of gold, 
Nor in the winter time do we grow cold ; 

Thy hands would bathe us when we were thine own, 
Now doth the rain wash every shining bone. 
No pedagogue we need, for surely heaven 
Lies spread above us, with the planets seven, 
To teach us all its lore.' 

Ah ! day by day 
Would I have hearkened all the folk would say. 
Ah ! in the sweet beginning of your days 
Would I have garnered every word of praise : 

1 What fearless backers of the untamed steed, 
What matchless spears, what loyal friends at need, 
What noble hearts, how bountiful and free, 

How like their father on the troublous sea ! ' 

" sons, with what sweet counsels and what tears 

Would I have hearkened to the hopes and fears 

Of your first loves ! what rapture had it been 

Your dear returning footsteps to have seen 

Amidst the happy warriors of the land ! 

But now but now this is a little hand 

Too often kissed since love did first begin 

To win such curses as it yet shall win, 

When after all bad deeds there comes a worse ; 

Praise to the Gods ! ye know not how to curse. 
11 But when in some dim land we meet again, 

Will ye remember all the loss and pain ? 

Will ye the form of children keep for aye 

With thoughts of men? and * Mother,' will ye say, 

1 Why didst thou slay us ere we came to know 

That men die ? hadst thou waited until now, 

An easy thing it had been then to die, 



296 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

For in the thought of immortality 

Do children play about the flowery meads, 

And -win their heaven with a crown of weeds.' 

" children ! that I would have died to save, 
How fair a life of pleasure might ye have, 
But for your mother ! nay, for thee, for thee, 
For thee, traitor ! who didst bring them here 
Into this cruel world, this lovely bier 
Of youth and love, and joy and happiness, 
That unforeseeing happy fools still bless." 

Amid these wild words had the evening come 
Of the last day in that once happy home ; 
So, rising, did she take the casket fair, 
And gave it to a faithful slave to bear, 
With all those wailing words that she had writ 
To Jason, her love once ; then did she sit 
Within that chamber, with her heavy head 
Laid on her arms, and scarce more than the dead 
She moved, for many hours, till at last 
A stupor over her some kind God cast, 
So that she slept, and had forgetfulness 
A little while from fury and distress. 

But Jason, when he read that bitter word, 
Was sore ashamed, and in his ears he heard 
Words than men durst not speak before his face ; 
Therewith, for very shame, that silver case 
And what it held he sent unto his bride, 
And therewithal this word : " Whatso betide, 
Let not the sun shine on it till the hour 
When thou hast left for aye thy maiden bower, 
And with the king thou standest in the hall, 
Then unto thee shall all good things befall." 

So to his rest he went, but, sooth to say, 
He slept but little till the dawn of day, 
So troubled was his mind with many a thing, 



OF JASON. 297 

And in his ears long-spoken words did ring : 
" Good speed, traitor ! who shall think to wed 
Soft limbs and white, and find thy royal bed 
Dripping with blood and burning up with fire." 

So there, 'twixt fear and shame and strong desire, 
Sleepless he lay until the day began 
The conqueror, the king, the envied man. 

But on the chamber where sweet Grlauce lay, 
Fair broke the dawning of that dreadful day, 
And fairer from her bed did she arise, 
And looking down with shamefast timid eyes, 
Beheld the bosom that no man had seen, 
And round limbs worthy of the Sea-born Queen. 
With that she murmured words of joy and love, 
No louder than the grey, pink-footed dove, 
When at the dawn he first begins his tale, 
Not knowing if he means a song or wail. 

Then soon her maidens came, and every rite 
That was the due of that slim body white, 
They wrought with careful hands ; and last they took 
Medea's gift, and all the folds outshook, 
And, in a cool room looking toward the north, 
They clad the queen therewith, nor brought her forth 
Till over all a gold cloak they had laid. 
Then to King Creon did they bring the maid, 
Rejoicing in the greatness of her love, 
Which well she thought no lapse of time could move, 
And on the dais of the royal hall 
They waited till the hour should befall 
When Jason and his friends would bear her thence 
With gentle rape and tender violence, 
As then the manner was, and the old king 
Sat there beside her, glad at every thing. 

Meanwhile the people thronged in every way, 
Clad in gay weed, rejoicing for that day, 

26* 



298 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

Since that their lords had bidden them rejoice, 
And in the streets was many a jocund voice, 
That carolled to the honour of the twain 
Who on that day such blissful life should gain. 

But Jason set out from his pillared house, 
Clad in rich raiment, fair and amorous, 
Forgetful of the troubles of the night, 
Nor thinking more of that impending blight, 
Nor those ill words the harpies spoke of old, 
As with his fellows, glittering with gold, 
Towards Creon's palace did he take his way 
To meet the bride that he should wed that day. 

But in the hall the pillars one by one 
Had barred the pathway of the travelling sun, 
As toward the west he turned, and now at last 
Upon the dais were his hot rays cast, 
As they within heard the glad minstrelsy 
Of Jason to his loved one drawing nigh. 

Then Creon took fair Glauce by the hand, 
And round about her did her damsels stand, 
Making a ring 'gainst that sweet violence, 
That soon should bear their lovely mistress thence. 
While Grlauce, trembling with her shamefast joy, 
With the gold mantle's clasp began to toy, 
Eager to cast that covering off, and feel 
The hero's mighty arms about her steal. 

Meanwhile, her lover through the court had passed, 
And at the open door he stood at last, 
Amidst his friends, and, looking thence, he saw 
The white arms of the damsels round her draw 
A wall soon to be broken ; but her face 
Over their flower-crowned heads made glad the place : 
Giddy with joy one moment did he gaze 
And saw his love her slender fingers raise 
Unto the mantle's clasp the next the hall 
Was filled with darting flames from wall to wall, 



OF JASON. 299 

And bitter screams rang out, as here and there, 
Scorched, and with outspread arms, the damsels fair 
Rushed through the hall ; but swiftly Jason ran, 
Grown in one moment like an old worn man, 
Up to the dais, whence one bitter cry- 
He heard, of one in utmost agony, 
Calling upon his once so helpful name ; 
But when unto the fiery place he came, 
Nought saw he but the nickering tongues of fire 
That up the wall were climbing high and higher ; 
And on the floor a heap of ashes white, 
The remnant of his once beloved delight, 
For whom his ancient love he cast away, 
And of her sire who brought about that day. 
Then he began to know what he had done, 
And madly through the palace did he run, 
Calling on Glauce, mingling with her name 
The name of her that brought him unto fame, 
Colchian Medea, who, for her reward, 
Had lonely life made terrible and hard, 
By love cast back, within her heart to grow 
To madness and the vengeance wrought out now ; 
But as about the burning place he ran, 
Full many a maid he met and pale-faced man, 
Wild with their terror, knowing not what end 
That which their eyes had seen might yet portend : 
But these shrunk backward from his brandished sword, 
And open-shouting mouth, and frenzied word, 
As still from chamber unto chamber fair 
He rushed, scarce knowing what he sought for there, 
Nor where he went, till his unresting feet 
Had borne him out at last into the street, 
Where armed and unarmed people stood to gaze 
On Creon's palace that began to blaze 
From every window out into the air, 
With strange light making pale that noontide fair. 



300 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But they, bewildered sore, and timorous, 
Grazed helplessly upon the burning house, 
And dreaded yet some hidden enemy, 
Thinking indeed a dreadful Glod to see, 
Bearing a fresh destruction in his hand. 

But now, when Jason with his glittering brand 
Broke in upon them from the growing fire, 
With wild pale face, and half-burnt rich attire, 
They fell back shuddering as his face they knew, 
Changed though it was, and soon a murmur grew : 
" Death to the sorceress, the Colchian ! " 
But he, unheeding still, from 'midst them ran, 
Until unto his own fair house he came, 
Where gazed his folk upon the far-off flame, 
And muttered low for fear and wofulness. 

Then he knew not his own, but none the less 
Into the court he passed, and his bright sword 
Cast down and said : " What feeble, timid lord 
Hides here when all the world is on a blaze, 
And laughing, from their heaven the high Grods gaze 
At foolish men shut in the burning place ? " 
With that he turned about his haggard face, 
And stared upon his own fair-sculptured frieze, 
Carved into likeness of the tumbling seas, 
And Argo, and the heroes he had led, 
And fair Medea. Then he cried, and said : 
" Lo, how the Grods are mocking me with this, 
And show me pictures of my vanished bliss, 
As though on earth I were, and not in hell ; 
And images of things I know full well 
Have set about me. Can I die again, 
And in some lower hell forget the pain 
My life is passed in now? " 

And with that word 
He cast his eyes upon his glittering sword, 
And caught it up and set it to his breast, 



OF JASON. 301 

And in one moment had lie been at rest 
From all his troubles, when a woman old, 
His nurse in past times, did the deed behold, 
And ran and caught the hero's mighty hand, 
And hanging round about him did she stand, 
And cried : "Ah, Jason ! ah, my lord, let be ! 
For who can give another life to thee ? 
And though to-day the yery sun looks black, 
And wholesome air the whole world seems to lack, 
Yet shalt thou yet have wealth of happy days, 
And well-fulfilled desires, and all men's praise, 
Unless the Gods have quite forgotten thee. 
Jason ! my child ! come now with me, 
That I may give thee sweet forgetfulness 
A little while of sorrow and distress." 

Then with the crone did Jason go along, 
And let her thin hand hold his fingers strong, 
As though a child he were in that old day, 
Ere in the Centaur's woodland cave he lay. 
But through the house unto a distant room, 
Dark-hung, she brought him, where, amidst the gloom, 
Speechless he lay, when she had made him drink 
Some potion pressed from herbs plucked by the brink 
Of scarce-known lakes of Pontus ; then she said, 
As she beheld at last his weary head 
Sink on the pillow : ' Jason, rest thee now, 
And may some kind God smooth thy wrinkled brow. 
Behold to-morrow comes, and thou art young, 
Nor on one string are all life's jewels strung ; 
Thou shalt be great, and many a land shalt save, 
And of thy coming life more joy shalt have 
Than thou hast thought of yet." 

He heard her words, 
But as the far-off murmur of the birds 
The townsman hears ere yet the morn is late, 
While streets are void and shut is every gate ; 



302 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

But still they soothed him, and he fell asleep, 
While at his feet good watch the crone did keep. 

But what a waking unto him shall be ! 
And what a load of shameful misery 
His life shall bear ! His old love cast away, 
His new love dead upon that fearful day, 
Childless, dishonoured, must his days go by. 
For in another chamber did there lie 
Two little helpless bodies side by side, 
Smiling as though in sweet sleep they had died, 
And feared no ill. And she who thus had slain 
Those fruits of love, the folk saw not again, 
Nor knew where she was gone ; yet she died not, 
But fleeing, somehow, from that fatal spot, 
She came to Athens, and there long did dwell, 
Whose after-life I list not here to tell. 

But as for Jason, Creon now being slain, 
And Corinth kingless, every man was fain, 
Remembering Jason's wisdom and sharp sword, 
To have the hero for their king and lord. 
So on his weary brows they set the crown, 
And he began to rule that noble town. 
And 'midst all things, somewhat his misery 
Was dulled unto him, as the days went by, 
And he began again to cast his eyes 
On lovely things, and hope began to rise 
Once more within his heart. 

But on a day 
From out the goodly town- he took his way, 
To where, beneath the cliffs of Cenchreae, 
Lay Argo, looking o'er the ridgy sea, 
Being fain once more to ponder o'er past days, 
Ere he should set his face to winning praise 
Among the shouts of men and clash of steel. 






OF JASON. 303 

But when he reached the well-remembered keel, 
The sun was far upon his downward way, 
At afternoon of a bright summer day. 
Hot was it, and still o'er the long rank grass, 
Beneath the hull, a widening shade did pass ; 
And farther off, the sunny daisied sward, 
The raised oars with their creeping shadows barred ; 
And grey shade from the hills of Cenchrese 
Began to move toward the heaving sea. 

So Jason, lying in the shadow dark 
Cast by the stem, the warble of the lark, 
The chirrup of the cricket, well could hear ; 
And now and then the sound would come anear 
Of some hind shouting o'er his laden wain. 
But looking o'er the blue and heaving plain, 
Sailless it was, and beaten by no oar, 
And on the yellow edges of the shore 
The ripple fell in murmur soft and low, 
As with wide-sweeping wings the gulls did go 
About the breakers crying plaintively. 

But Jason, looking out across the sea, 
Beheld the signs of wind a-drawing nigh, 
Gathering about the clear cold eastern sky, 
And many an evening then he thought upon 
Ere yet the quays of iEa they had won, 
And longings that had long been gathering 
Stirred in his heart, and now he felt the sting 
Of life within him, and at last he said : 
" Why should I move about as move the dead, 
And take no heed of what all men desire ? 
Once more I feel within my heart the fire 
That drave me forth unto the white-walled town, 
Leaving the sunny slopes, and thick-leaved crown 
Of grey old Pelion, that alone I knew, 
Great deeds and wild, and desperate things to do. 



304 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

" Ah the strange life of happiness and woe 
That I have led, since my young feet did go 
From that grey, peaceful, much-beloved abode ! 
But now, indeed, will I cast off the load 
Of memory of vain hopes that came to nought, 
Of rapturous joys with biting sorrows bought. 
The past is past, though I cannot forget 
Those days, with long life laid before me yet. 

" Ah, but one moment, ere I turn the page, 
And leave regret to white hairs and to age. 

" Once did I win a noble victory, 
I won a kingdom, and I cast it by 
For rest and peace, and rest and peace are gone. 
I had a fair love, that loved me alone, 
And made me that I am in all men's eyes ; 
And like my hard-earned kingdom, my fair prize, 
I cast my tender heart, my Love, away ; 
Yet failed I not to love, until a day, 
A day I nigh forget, took all from me 
That once I had yet is that as a dream, 
And still my life a happy life I deem ; 
But ah ! so short, so short ! for I am left 
Of love, of honour, and of joy bereft 
And yet not dead ah ! if I could but see 
But once again her who delivered me 
From death and many troubles, then no more 
Would I turn backward from the shadowy shore, 
And all my life would seem but perfect gain. 

" Alas ! what hope is this ? is it in vain 
I long to see her ? Lo, am I not young ? 
In many a song my past deeds have been sung, 
And these my hands, that guided Argo through 
The blue Symplegades, still deeds may do. 
For now the world has swerved from truth and right, 
Cumbered with monsters, empty of delight, 
And, 'midst all this, what honour I may win, 



OF JASON. 35 

That she may know of and rejoice therein, 

And come to seek me, and upon my throne 

May find me sitting, worshipped, and alone. 

Ah ! if it should be, how should I rejoice 

To hear once more that once-beloved voice 

Rise through the burden of dull words, well-known ! 

How should I clasp again my love, mine own, 

And set the crown upon her golden head, 

And with the eyes of lovers newly wed, 

How should we gaze each upon each again ! 

" hope not vain ! surely not quite vain ! 
For with the next returning light will I 
Cast off my moody sorrow utterly, 
And once more live my life as in times past, 
And 'mid the chance of war the die will cast. 

" And surely, whatso great deeds have been done, 
Since with my fellows the Gold Fleece I won, 
Still, here, some wild bull clears the frightened fields, 
There a great lion cleaves the sevenfold shields, 
There dwells some giant robber of the land, 
There whirls some woman-slayer's red right hand. 
Yea, what is this they speak of even now, 
That Theseus, having brought his conquering prow 
From lying Crete, unto the fair-walled town, 
Now gathers folk, since there are coming down 
The shielded women of the Asian plain, 
Myriads past counting, in the hope to gain 
The mastery of this lovely land of Greece ? 
So be it, surely shall I snatch fair peace 
From out the hand of war, and calm delight 
From the tumultuous horror of the fight." 

/ So saying, gazing still across the sea, \ 

Heavy with days and nights of misery, * 

His eyes waxed dim, and calmer still he grew, 
Still pondering over times and things he knew, 

27 



306 THE LIFE AND DEATH 

While now the sun had sunk behind the hill, 
And from a white-thorn nigh a thrush did fill 
The balmy air with echoing minstrelsy, 
And cool the night-wind blew across the sea, 
And round about the soft-winged bats did sweep. 

So 'midst all this at last he fell asleep, 
Nor did his eyes behold another day, 
For Argo, slowly rotting all away, 
Had dropped a timber here, and there an oar, 
All through that year, but people of the shore 
Set all again in order as it fell. 
But now the stem-post, that had carried well 
The second rafter in King Pelias' hall, 
Began at last to quiver towards its fall, 
And whether loosed by some divinity, 
Or that the rising wind from off the sea 
Blew full upon it, surely I know not 
But, when the day dawned, still on the same spot, 
Beneath the ruined stem, did Jason lie 
Crushed, and all dead of him that here can die. 

What more? Some shepherd of the lone grey slope, 
Drawn to the sandy sea-beach by the hope 
Of trapping quick-eared rabbits, found him there, 
And, running back, called, from the vineyards fair, 
Vine-dressers and their mates, who through the town 
Ere then had borne their well-filled baskets brown ; 
These, looking on his dead face, straightway knew 
This was the king that all men kneeled unto, 
Who dwelt between the seas ; therefore they made 
A bier of white-thorn boughs, and thereon laid 
The dead man, straightening every drawn-up limb ; 
And, casting flowers and green leaves over him, 
They bore him unto Corinth, where the folk, 



OF JASON. 307 

When they knew all, into loud wailing broke, 
Calling him mighty hero, crown of kings. 

But him ere long to where the sea-wind sings 
O'er the grey hill-side did they bear again. 
And there, where he had hoped that hope in vain, 
They laid him in a marble tomb carved fair 
With histories of his mighty deeds ; and there 
Such games as once he loved, yet being alive, 
They held for ten days, and withal did give 
Gifts to the Gods with many a sacrifice ; 
But chiefest, among all the things of price, 
Argo they offered to the Deity 
Who shakes the hard earth with the rolling sea^_ 

* And now is all that ancient story told 
Of him who won the guarded Fleece of Gold. 

4^* Of THS ^^ 

UIIVIR.SITY 

THE END. 



/deu 



Hb I UHN l(J the circulation desk ot any 

University of California Library 

or to the 

NORTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
Bldg. 400, Richmond Field Station 
University of California 
Richmond, CA 94804-4698 

ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS 
2-month loans may be renewed by calling 

(510)642-6753 
1-year loans may be recharged by bringing books 

to NRLF 
Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days 

prior to due date 

DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 



OCT? 1996 

Pec (p \^% 



<f ^ 



% * 



*\ne ? 



#S^^ 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 



m 



