
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized 



by Google 






Digitized 



by Google 



/•'■-■ o 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE COLLECTED WORKS 



DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI 






BDITBO 

WITH PREFACE AND NOTES 

BT 

WILLIAM M ROSSETTI 



IN TWO VOLUMES 



VOLUME I 

POEMS 

PROSB-TALES AND LITERARY PAPERS 



ROBERTS BROTHERS 

3 SOMERSET STREET 

BOSTON 

1887 



Digitized 



by Google 



^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



,t<|^_l-f.'r- Vc,,' L 



l-r^.-i. i\ 



DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI 

DIED 9 APRIL 1882 AGED 53 

FRANCES MART LAVINIA ROSSETTI 

DIED 8 APRIL 1886 AGED 85 

TO 

THE MOTHER'S SACRED MEMORY 

THIS FIRST COLLECTED EDITION OF 

THE SON'S WORKS 

IS DEDICATED BY 

THE SURVIVING SON AND BROTHER 

W M R 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 









CONTENTS, 



PAGE 

Preface by Wuxiam M. Rossetti xv 

POEMS. 
I.— Principal Poems : — 

^ Dante at Verona . . i 

A Last Confession i8 

The Bride's Prelude ....... 35 

Sister Helen . 66 

The Staff and Scrip 75 

Jenny 83 

The Stream's Secret 95 

Rose Mary 103 

The "White Ship , , 137 

The King's Tragedy 148 

The HoHS€ ofUfif A Sonrnt^Siquence — 

Introductory Sonnet 176 

Part L— Youth and Change :— 

1. Love Enthroned 177 

2. Bridal Birth 177 

3. Love's Testament 178 

4. Lovesight 178 

5. Heart's Hope 179 

6. The Kiss 179 

7. Supreme Surrender 180 

8. Love's Lovers 180 



Digitized 



by Google 



CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

9. Passion and Worship 181 

la The Portrait 181 

11. The Love-letter 182 

12. The Lovers* Walk 182 

13. Youth's Antiphony 183 

14. Youth's Spring-tribute 183 

15. The Birth-bond .184 

16. A Day of Love 184 

17. Beauty's Pageant 185 

18. Genius in Beauty 185 

19. Silent Noon 186 

20. Gracious Moonlight 186 

21. Love-sweetness 187 

22. Heart's Haven 187 

23. Love's Baubles 188 

24. Pride of Youth 188 

25. Winged Hours 189 

26. Mid-rapture. 189 

27. Heart's Compass 190 

38. Soul-light 190 

29. The Moori^tar 191 

30. Last Fire 19* 

31. Her Gifts 192 

32. Equal Troth 192 

33. Venus 'Snctrix 193 

34. The Dark Glass I93 

35. -The Lamp's Shrine 194 

36. Life-in-love I94 

37. The Love-moon I95 

38. The Morrow's Message . . . . .195 

39. Sleepless Dreams 196 

40. Severed Selves 196 

41. Through Death to Love , . . .197 

42. Hope Overtaken 197 

43. Love and Hope ...... 198 

44. Qoud and Wind 198 

45. Secret Parting I99 

46. Parted Love 199 

47. Broken Music .... . 200 



Digitized 



by Google 



C0NTS17TS, ix 

PAGE 

48. Death-in-love 200 

49f 5o» 5^ 52. Willow-wood . . .201 

53. Without Her 203 

54. Love's Fatality 203 

5$. Stillborn Love 204 

56, 57, 58, True Woman (Hersdf— Her Love— 

Her Heaven) 204 

59. Love's Last Gift 206 

Part n.— Change and Fate : — 

60. Transfigured Life 207 

61. The Song-Throe 207 

62. The Soul's Sphere 208 

63. Inclusiveness • 208 

64. Ardour and Memory 209 

65. Known in Vain 209 

66. The Heart of the Night .... 210 

67. The Landmark 210 

68. A Dark Day 21 1 

69. Autumn Idleness . . . . . .211 

70. The Hill Summit 212 

71. 72, 73. The Choice 212 

74. 75i 7^- Old and New Art (St Luke the Painter 

— ^Not as These— The Husbandmen) 2 1 4 

77. Soul's Beauty 21$ 

78. Body's Beauty 216 

79. The Monochord . . . ... .216 

8a From Dawn to Noon 217 

81. Memorial Thresholds 217 

82. Hoarded Joy 218 

83. Barren Spring 218 

84. Farewell to the Glen 219 

85. Vain Virtues 219 

86. Lost Days 220 

87. Death's Songsters 220 

88. Hero's Lamp .221 

89. The Trees of the Garden . . . .221 

90. Retro me, Sathana 222 

91. Lost on Both Sides 222 



Digitized 



by Google 



X C0N7EN7S. 

92, 93* The Sun's Shame 223 

94« Michelangelo's Kiss . . . ... 224 

95. The Vase of Life 224 

96. Life the Beloved 225 

97. A Superscription 225 

98. He and I 22^ 

99. 100. Newborn Death 22^6 

loi. The One Hope 227 

II. — Miscellaneous Poems : — 

My Sister's Sleep 229 

y The Blessed Damozel 232 

At the Sun-rise in 1848 237 

Autumn Song 237 

The Lady's Lament 238 

The Portrait 240 

Ave 244 

The Card-Dealer 248 

World's Worth 250 

On Refusal of Aid between Nations . . • . 252 

■ On the Vite Nuova of Dante 252 

V Song and Music 253 

\ The Sea-Limits 254 

A Trip to Paris and Belgium (London to Folkestone — 
Boulogne to Amiens and Paris — ^The Paris Railway- 
station — Reaching Brussels — ^Antwerp to Ghent) . 255 
The Staircase of Notre Dame, Paris . . . .261 

Place de la Bastille, Paris 261 

Near Brussels — ^A Halfway Pause 262 

Antwerp and Bruges 263 

On Leaving Bruges 264 

Vox Ecclesiae, Vox Christi 265 

/The Burden of Nineveh 266 

The Church-Porch 272 

The Mirror 272 

A Young Fir- Wood 273 

During Music 273 

Stratton Water 274 

Wellington's Funeral 280 



Digitized 



by Google 



CONTENTS. xi 

PAGB 

Penumbra 283 

On the Site of a Mulberry-Tree, planted by William 

Shakspeare, etc 285 

On certain Elizabetban Revivals ...... 285 

English May 286 

Beauty and the Bird 286 

A Match with the Moon 287 

Love's Noctum . . .^ 288 

First Love Remembered 293 

Plighted Promise 294 

Sudden Light 295 

A New Year's Burden 296 

^ Even so 297 

The Woodspurge 298 

The Honeysuckle 298 

Dantis Tenebre 299 

Words on the Window-pane 299 

An Old Song Ended 300 

The Song of the Bower . ■ 301 

Dawn on the Night Journey 303 

A Little While 304 

Troy Town 305 

Eden Bower 308 

Love4ily 315 

Sunset A^ngs 316 

The Cloud Confines 317 

Down Stream 319 

Three Shadows 321 

A Death-parting 322 

Spring 323 

Untimely Lost — Oliver Madox Brown .... 323 

Parted Presence 324 

Spheral Change 326 

AJaSySoLongl .327 

Insomnia 328 

Possession 329 

Chimes 330 

Adieu 333 

Soothsay 334 



Digitized 



by Google 



xii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Five English Poets :— 

1. Thomas Chatterton 337 

2. WiUiam Blake 338 

3. Samuel Taylor Coleridge 338 

4. John Keats 339 

5. Percy Bysshe Shelley 339 

To Philip Bourke Marston 340 

Tiber, Nile, and Thames 340 

Raleigh's Cellin the Tower 341 

Winter 341 

The Last Three from Trafalgar 342 

Czar Alexander the Second 342 



III.— Sonnets on Pictures : — 

For an Annunciation, Early German 

For our Lady of the Rocks, by Leonardo da Vind • 

For a Venetian Pastoral, by Giorgione . 

For an Allegorical Dance of Women, by Andrea 

Mantegna 

For Ruggiero and Angelica, by Ingres . 
For a Virgin and Child, by Hans Memmelinck 
For a Marriage of St Catherine^ by the same . 
For the Wine of Circe, by Edward Bume Jones . 
For the Holy Family, by Bfichelangelo . • . 
For Spring, by Sandro Botticelli • . . • 



343 
344 
345 

346 
347 
348 
349 
350 
351 
352 



IV. — Sonnets and Verses for Rossetti's own Works of 
Art: — 

Mary's Girlhood 353 

The Passover in the Holy Family 355 

Maiy Magdalene at the Door of Simon the Pharisee . 356 

Michael Scott's Wooing 357 

\j Aspecta Medusa 357 

Cassandra 358 

Venus Verticordia 360 

Pandora 360 

A Sea-spell 361 

Astarte Syriaca 361 

Mnemosyne 362 



Digitized 



by Google 



CONTENTS. xUi 

PAGE 

nammetta 362 

Found 3^3 

The Day-dream 364 

V.~POKIIS nf iTALIAXf (OR ItAUAN AMD EnGLZSH), FkZMCH, 

AND Latin : — 

Gioventft e Signoi^ 366 

Youth and Lordship 367 

Proaerpina 370 

LaRicordanza 370 

Proserpina 371 

Memory 371 

La Bella Mano 372 

Con Manto d'Oro, etc. 372 

Robe d'Or, etc 37» 

La Bella Mano 373 

With Golden Mantle, etc 373 

A Golden Robe, etc 373 

Barcarola 374 

Barcarola 375 

Bambino Fasdato 375 

Thomm Fides . . * 376 

VL— VrasTCT.ra and FkAGMENTS :— 

The Orchard-pit 377 

To Art 378 

On Bums 378 

FindiMaggio 378 

I saw the Sibyl at Cum« 378 

As bahny as the breath, etc 378 

Was it a friend, etc 379 

At her step, etc 379 

Would God I knew, etc 379 

I shut myself in with my soul 379 

If I could die, etc 379 

She bound her green sleeve, etc 379 

Where is the man, etc . • 380 

As much as in a hundred years she's dead . 380 

Who Shan aay, etc 380 



Digitized 



by Google 



xiv CONTENTS, 

PROSE. 

PAGB 

I. — Stories and Schemes op Poems : — 

• Hand and Soul 383 

Saint Agnes of Intercession 399 

• The Orchard-pit 427 

The Doom of the Sirens 43' 

The Cup of Water 437 

Michael Scott's Wooing 439 

The Palimpsest 441 

The Philtre 442 

II. — LriBRARY Papers : — 

•William Blake 443 

V Ebcnezer Jones 478 

♦The Stealthy School of Criticism 480 

Hake's Madeline, and other Poems . ^ . . . 489 

Hake's Parables and Tales 500 

'III. — Sentences and Notes 510 

Notes by William M. Rossetti 515 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. 

THE most adequate mode of prefacing the Collected 
Works of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, as of most 
authors, would probably be to ofifer a broad general 
view of his writings, and to analyse with some critical 
predion his relation to other writers, contemporary or 
otherwise, and the merits and defects of his performances. 
In this case, as in how few others, one would also have 
to consider in. what d^ree his mind worked con- 
sentaneously 6r diversely in two several arts — the art 
of poetry and the art of painting. But the hand of a 
brother is not the fittest to imdertake any work of this 
scope. My preface will not therefore deal with themes 
sudi as these, but will be confined to minor matters, 
which may nevertheless be relevant also within their 
limits. And first may come a very brief outline of the 
few events of an outwardly uneventful life. 

Gabriel Charles Dante Rossetd, who, at an early stage 
c^ his professional career, modified his name into Dante 
Gabriel Rossetti, was bom on 12th May 1828, at No. 
38 Charlotte Stileet, Portland Place, London. In blood 
he was three-fourths Italian, and only one-fourth Eng- 
lish ; being on the father's side wholly Italian ( Abruzzese), 
and on the mother's side half Italian (Tuscan) and half 
English. His father was Gabriele Rossetti, bom in 
1783 at Vasto, in the Abruzzi, Adriatic coast, in the then 
kingdom of Naples. Gabriele Rossetti (died 1854) was 



Digitized 



by Google 



xvi PREFACE, 

a man of letters, a custodian of ancient bronzes in the 
Museo Borbonico of Naples, and a poet ; he distinguished 
himself by patriotic lays which fostered the popular 
movement resulting in the grant of a constitution by 
Ferdinand I. of Naples in 1S20. The King, after the 
fashion of Bourbons and tyrants, revoked the constitution 
in 182 1, and persecuted the abettors of it, and Rossetti 
had to escape for his freedom, or perhaps even for his 
life. He settled in London towards 1824, married, and 
became Professor of Italian in King^s College, London, 
publishing also various works of bold speculation in 
the way of Dantesque commentary and exposition. His 
wife was Frances Mary Lavinia Polidori (died 1886), 
daughter of Gaetano Polidori (died 1853), a teacher of 
Italian and literary man who had in early youth been 
secretary to the poet Alfieri, and who published various 
books, including a complete translation of Milton's 
poems. Frances Polidori was English on the side of 
her mother, whose maiden name was Pierce, The 
family of Rossetti and his wife consisted of four 
children, bom in four successive years — Maria Fran- 
cesca (died 1876), Dante Gabriel, William Michael, and 
Christina Georgina, the two last-named being now the only 
survivors. Few more affectionate husbands and fathers 
have livedo and no better wife and mother, than Gabriele 
and Frances Rossetti. The means of the femily were 
always strictly moderate, and became scanty towards 
1843, when the father's health began to foil. In or about 
that year Dante Gabriel left King^s College School, where 
he had learned Latin, French, and a beginning of Greek ; 
and he entered upon the study of the art of painting, to 
which he had from earliest childhood exhibited a very 
marked bent. After a while he was admitted to the 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. xvu 

school of the Royal Academy, but never proceeded be- 
yond its antique section. In 1848 Rossetti co-operated 
with two of his fellow-students in painting, John Everett 
Bifillais and William Holman Hunt, and with the sculptor 
Thomas Woolner, in forming the so-called Prseraphaelite 
Brotherhood. There were three other members of the 
Brotherhood — ^James Collinson (succeeded after two or 
three years by Walter Howell Deverell), Frederic 
Geoi^ Stephens, and the present writer. Ford Madox 
Brown, the historical painter, was known to Rossetti 
mndi about the same time when the Prseraphaelite 
scheme was started, and bore an important part both in 
directing his studies and in upholding the movement, 
but he did not think fit to join the Brotherhood in any 
direct or complete sense. Through Deverell, Rossetti 
came to know Elizabeth Eleanor Siddal, daughter of a 
ShefiBeld cutler, herself a milliner's assistant, gifled with 
some artistic and some poetic fiEu:ulty ; in the Spring of 
iSSo, after a long engagement, they married. Their 
wedded life was of short duration, as she died in 
February 1862, having meanwhile given birth to a still- 
bom child. For several years up to this date Rossetti, 
designing and painting many works, in oil-colour or as 
yet more frequently in water-colour, had resided at 
No. 14 Chatham Place, Blackfriars Bridge, a line of 
street now demolished^ In the autumn of 1862 he re- 
moved to No. 16 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea At first 
certain apartments in the house were occupied by Mr. 
Geoiige Meredith the novelist, Mr. Swinburne the poet, 
and myself. This arrangement did not last long, 
although I myself remained a partial inmate of the house 
up to 1873. My brother continued domiciled in Cheyne 
Walk undl his death; but from about 1869 ^^ ^^^ 

b 



Digitized 



by Google 



xviii PREFACE, 

frequently away at Kelmscot manorhouse, in Oxford- 
shire, not far from Lechlade, occupied jointly by himself, 
and by the poet Mr. William Morris with his family. 
From the autumn of 1872 till the summer of 1874 he 
was wholly settled at Kelmscot, scarcely visiting London 
at all He then returned to London, and Kelmscot 
passed out of his ken. 

In the early months of 1850 the members of the 
Praeraphaelite Brotherhood, with the co-operation of 
some friends, brought out a short-lived magazine named 
The Germ (afterwards Art and Poetry) ; here appeared 
the first verses and the first prose published by Rossetti, 
including The Blessed Damosel and Hand and Soul 
In 1856 he contributed a little to The Oxford and 
Cambridge Magazine^ printing there The Burden of 
Nineveh, In 1861, during his married life, he published 
his volume of translations The Early Italian Poets, now 
entitled Dante and his Circle. By the time therefore of 
the death of his wife he had a certain restricted yet far 
from inconsiderable reputation as a poet, along with his 
recognized position as a painter — a non-exhibiting painter, 
it may here be observed, for, after the first two 
or three years of his professional course, he ad- 
hered with practical uniformity to the plan of abstaining 
from exhibition altogether. He had contemplated bring- 
ing out in or about 1862 a volume of original poems; 
but, in the grief and dismay which overwhelmed 
him in losing his wife, he determined to sacri- 
fice to her memory this long-cherished project, and he 
buried in her cofHn the manuscripts which would have 
furnished forth the volume. With the lapse of years he 
came to see that, as a final settlement of the matter, 
this was neither obligatory nor desirable; so in 1869 the 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. xix 

manuscripts were disinterred, and in 1870 his volume 
named Poems was issued. For some considerable 
while it was hailed with general and lofty praise, 
chequered by only moderate stricture or demur; but 
late in 187 1 Mr. Robert Buchanan published under a 
pseudonym, in the Contemporary Review, a very hostile 
article named The Fleshly School of Poetry, attacking 
the poems on literary and more especially on moral 
grounds. The article, in an enlarged form, was after- 
wards reissued as a pamphlet The assault produced 
on Rossetti an effect altogether disproportionate to its 
intrinsic importance; indeed, it developed in his cha- 
racter an excess of sensitiveness and of distempered 
brooding which his nearest relatives and friends had 
never before surmised, — for hitherto he had on the whole 
had an ample sufficiency of high spirits, combined with 
a certain underlying gloominess or abrupt moodiness of 
nature and outlook. Unfortunately there was in him 
already only too much of morbid material on which this 
venom of detraction was to work. For some years the 
state of his eyesight had given very grave cause for appre- 
hension, he himself keying from time to time that the 
evil might end in absolute blindness, a fate with which 
our father had been formidably threatened in his closing 
years. From this or other causes insomnia had ensued, 
coped with by far too free a use of chloral, which may 
have begun towards .the end of 1869. In the summer of 
1872 he had a dangerous crisis of illness ; and from that 
time forward, but more especially from the middle of 
1874, he became secluded in his habits of life, and oflen 
depressed, fanciful, and gloomy. Not indeed that there 
were no intervals of serenity, even of brightness ; for in 
fact he was often genial and pleasant, and a most agreeable 



Digitized 



by Google 



XX PREFACE. 

companion, with as much bonhomie as acuteness for wiling 
an evening away. He continued also to prosecute his 
pictorial work with ardour and diligence, and at times he 
added to his product as a poet The second of his original 
volumes, Ballads and Sonnets, was published in the 
autumn of 1881. About the same time he sought diange 
of air and scene in the Vale of St. John, near Keswick, 
Cumberland ; but he returned to town more shattered in 
health and in mental tone than he had ever been before. 
In December a shock of a quasi-paralytic character struck 
him down. He rallied sufficientiy to remove to Birching- 
ton-on-Sea, near Margate. The hand of death was then 
upon him, and was to be relaxed no more. The last 
stage of his maladies was uraemia. Tended by his 
mother and his sister Christina, with the constant com- 
panionship at Birchington of Mr. Hall Caine, and in the 
presence likewise of Mr. Theodore Watts, Mr. Frederick 
Shields, and myself, he died on Easter Simday, April 9th 
1882. His sister-in-law, the daughter of Madox Brown, 
arrived immediately after his latest breath had been 
drawn. He lies buried in the churchyard of Birchington. 
Few brothers were more constantly tc^ther, or shared 
one another's feelings and thoughts more intimately, in 
childhood, boyhood, and well on into mature manhood, 
than Dante Gabriel and myself. I have no idea of 
limning his character here at any length, but will de- 
fine a few of its leading traits. He was always and 
essentially of a dominant turn, in intellect and in 
temperament a leader. He was impetuous and vehe- 
ment, and necessarily therefore impatient; easily 
angered, easily appeased, although the embittered 
feelings of his later years obscured this amiable quality 
to some extent ; constant and helpful as a friend where 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE, XX 

he perceived constancy to be reciprocated ; free-handed 
and heedless of expenditure, whether for himself or for 
others; in family affection warm and equable, and (except 
in relation to our mother, for whom he had a fondling 
love) not demonstrative. Never on stilts in matters of 
the intellect or of aspiration, but steeped ^ iii^ the sense 
^ bea^ts^ and loving, if not always practising, the good ; 
keenly alive also (though many people seem to discredit 
this now) to the laughable as well as the grave or solemn 
side of things ; superstitious in grain, and anti-scientific 
to the marrow. Throughout his youth and early man- 
hood I considered him to be markedly free from vanity, 
though certainly well equipped in pride ; the distinction 
between these two tendencies was less definite in his 
closing years. Extremely natural and therefore totally 
unafifected in tone and manner, with the naturalism^ 
chaiactgisdc^f Italian b lood ; good-natured and hearty, 
without being complaisant or accommodating ; reserved 
at times, yet not haughty; desultory 'enough in youth, 
diligent and persistent in maturity ; self-centred always, 
and brushing aside whatever traversed his purpose or 
his bent He was very generally and very greatly liked 
by persons of extremely diverse character ; indeed, I 
think it can be no exaggeration to say that no one ever 
disliked him. Of course I do not here confound the 
question of liking a man's personality with that of 
approving his conduct out-and-out. 

Of his manner I can perhaps convey but a vague 
impression. I have said that it was natural ; it was 
likewise eminently easy, and even of the free-and-easy 
kind. There was a certain British bluffnes^^ streaking^ 
the findj £oised Jtalian suppleness and facility. As he 
was thoroughly unconventional^ caring not at all to 



Digitized 



by Google 



xxii PREFACE. 

fall in with the humours or prepossessions of any 
particular class of society, or to conciliate or approxi- 
mate the socially distinguished, there was little in him 
of any veneer or varnish of elegance ; none the less he 
was courteous and well-bred, meeting all sorts of persons 
upon equal terms — f.^., upon his own terms ; and I am 
satisfied that those who are most exacting in such 
matters found in Rossetti nothing to derogate from the 
standard of their requirements. In habit of body he was 
indolen t and lounging disinclined to aay pre scribed 
or trying exertion of any sort, and very difficult to stir 
out of his "ordinary groove, yet not wanting in active 
promptitude whenever it suited his liking. He often 
seemed totally unoccupied, especially of an evening; 
no doubt the brain was busy enough. 

The appearance of my brother was to my eye rather 
Italian than English, though I have more than once 
heard it said thalt "ihere was nothing observable to 
bespeak foreign blood. He was of rather low middle 
stature, say five feet seven and a half, like our father ; 
and, as the years advanced, he resembled our father 
not a little in a characteristic way, yet with highly 
obvious divergences. Meagre in youth, he was at 
times decidedly fat in mature age. The complexion, 
clear and warm, was also dark, but not dusky or sombre. 
The hair was dark and somewhat silky ; the brow grandly 
spacious and solid ; the full-sized eyes blueish-grey ; 
the nose shapely, decided, and rather projecting, with an 
aquiline tendency and large nostrils, and perhaps no 
detail in the face was more noticeable at a first glance 
than the very strong indentation at the spring of the 
nose below the forehead ; the mouth moderately well- 
shaped, but with a rather thick and unmoulded under- 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. xxiU 

Up; the chin unremarkable; the line of the jaw, after 
youth was passed, full, rounded, and sweeping ; the ears 
well-formed and rather small than lai*ge. His hips were 
wide, his hands and feet small ; the hands very much 
those of the artist or author type, white, delicate, 
plump, and soft as a woman's. His gait was resolute 
and rapid, his general aspect compact and deter- 
mined, the prevailing expression of the face that 
of a fiery and dictatorial mind concentrated into re- 
pose. Some people regarded Rossetti as eminently 
handsome; few, I think, would have refused him the 
epithet of well-looking. It rather surprises me to 
find from Mr. Caine's book of Recollections that that 
gentleman, when he first saw Rossetti in 1880, con- 
sidered him to look full ten years older than he really 
was, — ^namely, to look as if sixty-two years old. To my 
own eye nothing of the sort was apparent. He wore 
moustaches from early youth, shaving his cheeks ; from 
1870 or thereabouts he grew whiskers and beard, mode- 
rately full and auburn-tinted, as well as moustaches. His 
voice was deep and harmonious ; in the reading of poetry, 
remarkably rich, with rolling swell and musical cadence. 
My brother was very little of a traveller ; he disliked 
the interruption of his ordinary habits of life, and the 
flurry or discomfort, involved in locomotion. In boy- 
hood he knew Boulogne : he was in Paris three or four 
times, and twice visited some principal cities of Belgium. 
This was the whole extent of his foreign travelling. 
He crossed the Scottish border more than once, and 
knew various parts of England pretty well — Hastings, 
Bath, Oxford, Matlock, Stratford-on-Avon, Newcastle- 
on-Tyne, Bognor, Heme Bay; Kelmscot, Keswick, and 
Birchington-on-Sea, have been already mentioned. From 



Digitized 



by Google 



xxiT PREFACE, 

1878 or thereabouts he became, until he went to the 
neighbourhood of Keswick, an absolute home-keeping 
recluse, never even straying outside the large garden of 
his own house, except to visit from time to time our 
mother in the central part of London. 

From an early period of life he had a large circle of 
friends, and could always have commanded any amount 
of intercourse with any number of ardent or kindly 
well-wishers, had he but felt elasticity or cheerfulness 
of mind enough for the purpose. I should do injustice 
to my own feelings if I were not to mention here some 
of his leading friends. First and foremost I name Mr. 
Madox Brown, his chief intimate throughout life, on 
the unexhausted resources of whose afifection and con- 
verse he drew incessantly for long years ; . they were at 
last separated by the removal of Mr. Brown to Man- 
chester, for the purpose of painting the Town Hall 
frescoes. The Praeraphaelites — Millais, Hunt, Woolner, 
Stephens, CoUinson, Deverell — ^were on terms of un- 
bounded familiarity with him in youth ; owing to death 
or other causes, he lost sight eventually of all of them 
except Mr. Stephena Mr. William Bell Scott was, like 
Mr. Brown, a close friend from a very early period until 
the last ; Scott being both poet and painter, there was 
a strict bond of affinity between him and Rossetti. 
Mr. Ruskin was extremely intimate with my brother 
from 1854 till about 1865, and was of material help to 
his professional career. As he rose towards celebrity, 
Rossetti knew Bume Jones, and through him Morris 
and Swinburne, all staunch and fervently sympathetic 
friends. Mr. Shields was a rather later acquaintance, 
who soon became an intimate, equally respected and 
cherished. Then Mr. Huefifer the musical critic (now 



Digitized 



by Google 



FREFACB xxT 

a dose &mily connection, editor of the Tauchnitz edition 
of Rossetti's works), and Dr. Hake the poet Through 
the latter my brother came to know Mr. Theodore 
Watts, whose intellectual companionship and incessant 
assiduity of friendship did more than anything else 
towards assuaging the discomforts and depression of his 
closing years. In the latest period the most intimate 
among new acquaintances were Mr. William Sharp and 
Mr. Hall Caine, both of them known to Rossettian readers 
as his biographers. Nor should I omit to speak of the 
extremely friendly relation in which my brother stood to 
some of the principal purchasers of his pictures — Mr. 
Leathart, Mr. Rae, Mr. Leyland, Mr. Graham, Mr. Valpy, 
Mr. Turner, and his early associate Mr. Boyce. Other 
names crowd upon me — ^James Hannay, John Tupper, 
Patmore, Thomas and John Seddon, Mrs. Bodichon, 
Browning, John Marshall, Tebbs, Mrs. Gilchrist, Miss 
Boyd, Sandys, Whistler, Joseph Knight, Fairfax Murray, 
Mr. and Mrs. Stillman, Tref&y Dunn, Lord and Lady 
Mount-Temple, Oliver Madox Brown, the Marstons, 
father and son — but I forbear. 

Belbre proceeding to some brief account of the 
sequence, etc. of my brother's writings, it may be worth 
while to speak of the poets who were particularly 
influential in nurturing his mind and educing its own,.^ y^ 
poetic endowment The first poet with whom he ( 
became partially familiar was Shakespeare. Then fol- 
lowed the usual boyish fancies for Walter Scott and / 
Byron. The Bible was deeply impressive to him, / 
perhaps above all Job, Ecclesiastes, and the Apocalypse. . 
Byron gave place to Shelley when my brother was about ""^ 
sixteen years of age ; and Mrs. Browning and the old y 
English or Scottish ballads rapidly ensued. It may have 



Digitized 



by Google 






xxTi PREFACE. 

been towards this date, say 1845, that he first seriously 
applied himself to Dant^and drank deep of that in- 
exhaustible well-head of poesy and thought; for the 
Florentine, though familiar to him as a name, and in 
some sense as a pervading penetrative influence, from 
earliest childhood, was not really assimilated until boy- 
hood was practically past. ' Bailey's Festus was enor- 
mously relished about the same time — read again and 
yet again ;falso Faust, Victor Hugo, De Musset (and 
along with them a swarm of French novelists), and 
Keats, whom my brother for the most part, though not 
without some compunctious visitings now and then, 
truly preferred to Shelley. The only classical poet 
whom he took to in any degree worth speaking of was 
Homer, the Odyssey considerably more than the Iliad. 
Tennyson reigned along with Keats, and Edgar Poe and 
Coleridge along vnth Tennyson. In the long run he 
perhaps enjoyed and revered Coleridge beyond any other 
modem poet whatsoever; but Coleridge was not so 
distinctly or separately in the ascendant, at any par- 
ticular period of youth, as several of the others. Blake 
likewise had his peculiar meed of homage, land Charles 
Wells, the influence of whose prose style. In the Stories 
after Nature, I trace to some extent in Rossetti's Hand 
and SouLX Lastly came Browning, and for a time, like 
the serpent-rod of Moses, swallowed up all the rest. 
This was still at an early stage of life ; for I think the 
year 1847 cannot certainly have been passed before my 
brother was deep in Browning. The readings or frag- 
mentary recitations of Bells and Pomegranates, Para- 
celsus, and above all Sordello, are something to remember 
from a now distant past My brother lighted upon 
Pauline (published anonymously) in the British Museum, 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. ncvii 

copied it out, recognized that it must be Browning's, and 
wrote to the great poet at a venture to say so, receiving 
a cordial response, followed by genial and friendly inter- 
course for several years. One prose-work of great 
influence upon my brother's mind, and upon his product 
as a painter, must not be left unspecified — Malory's 
Mort d" Arthur f which engrossed him towards 1856. 
The only poet \diom I feel it needful to add to the 
above is Chatterton. In the last two or three years of 
his life my brother entertained an abnormal — I think 
an exaggerated — admiration of Chatterton. It appears 
to me that (to use a very hackneyed phrase) he " evolved 
this from his inner consciousness " at that late period ; 
certainly in youth and early manhood he had no such 
feeling. He then read the poems of Chatterton with 
cursory glance and unexcited spirit, recognizing them 
as very singular performances for their date in English 
literature, and for the author's boyish years, but beyond 
that laying no marked stress upon them. 

The reader may perhaps be surprised to find some 
names unmentioned in this list : I have stated the facts 
as I remember and know them. Chaucer, Spenser, 
the Elizabethan dramatists (other than Shakespeare), 
Milton, Dryden, Pope, Wordsworth, are unnamed. It 
should not be supposed that he read them not at all, or 
cared not for any of them ; but, if we except Chaucer in 
a rather loose way and (at a late period of life) Marlowe 
in some of his non-dramatic poems, they were compara- 
tively neglected. Thomas Hood he valued highly ; also 
very highly Bums in mature years, but he was not 
a constant reader of the Scottish lyrist. Of Italian poets \ 
he earnestly loved none save Dante : Cavalcanti in his I 
d^ree, and also Poliziano and Michelangelo — not • 



Digitized 



by Google 



xxviU PREFACE. 

Petrarca, Boccaccio^ Ariosto, Tasso, or Leopardi, though 
in boyhood he delighted well enough in Ariosto. Of 
French poets, none beyond Hugo and De Musset; 
except Villon, and partially Dumas, whose novels ranked 
among his favourite reading. In German poetry he 
read nothing currently in the original, although (as our 
pages bear witness) he had in earliest youth so far 
mastered the language as to make some translations. 
Calderon, in Fitzgerald's version, he admired deeply; 
but this was only at a late date. He had no liking for 
the specialities of Scandinavian, nor indeed of Teutonic, 
thought and work, and little or no curiosity about 
Oriental — such as Indian, Persian, or Arabic — poetry. 
Any writing about devils, spectres, or the supernatural 
generally, whether in poetry or in prose, had always 
a fascination for him ; at one time, say 1844, his supreme 
delight was the blood-curdling romance of Maturin, 
Milntoth the Wanderer, 

y^^ now pass to a specification of my brother's own 
writings. Of his merely childish or boyish performances 
I need have said nothing, were it not that they have 
been mentioned in other books regarding Rossetti. First 
then there was The Slave^ a "drama" which he 
composed and wrote out in or about the sixth year of his 
age. It is of course simple nonsense. " Slave " and 
"traitor" were two words which he found passim in 
Shakespeare; so he gave to his principal or only 
characters the names of Slave and Traitor. If what 
they do is meaningless, what they say (when they deviate 
from prose) is probably unmetrical; but it is so long 
since I read The Slave that I speak about this with 
uncertainty. Towards his thirteenth year he began 
a romantic prose-tale named Roderick and Rosalba. I 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. xxix 

hardly think that he composed anything else prior to 
the ballad narrative Sir Hugh the Heron, founded on 
a tale by Allan Cunningham. Our grandfather printed it 
in 1843, which is probably the year of its composition. 
It is correctly enough versified, but has no merit, and 
little that could even be called promise. Soon afterwards a 
prose-tale named Sorrenfino, in which the devil played 
a con^icuous part, was begun, and carried to some 
length ; it was of course boyish, but it must, I think, have 
shown some considerable degree of cleverness. In 1844 
or 1845 there was a translation of BQrger's Lenore, 
spirited and I suppose fairly efficient ; and in November 
1845 ^^^'^ begun a translation of the Nibelungenlied, 
almost deserving (if my memory serves me) to be con- 
sidered good. Several hundred lines of it must certainly 
have been written. My brother was by this time a 
practised and competent versifier, at any rate, and his 
mere prentice-work may count as finished. 

Other original verse, not in any large quantity, 
succeeded, along with the version of Der Arme Heinrkh, 
and the beginning of his translations from the early 
Italians. These must, I think, have been in full career 
in the first half of 1847, if not in 1846. They show 
a keen sensitiveness to whatsoever is poetic in the 
originals^ and a sinuous strength and ease in providing 
English equivalents, with the command of a rich and 
romantic vocabulary. In his nineteenth year, or before 
1 2th May 1847, he wrote The Blessed DamozeL* As 
that is universally recognized as one of his typical ' 

* My brother said so, in a letter published by Mr. Caine. He 
most presumably have been correct; otherwise I should have 
thought that his twentieth year, or even his twenty-first, would 
be nearer the mark. 



[/ 



Digitized 



by Google 



XXX PREFACE. 

or consummate productions, marking the high level of 
his faculty whether inventive or executive, I may here 
close this record of preliminaries ; the poems, with such 
slight elucidations as my notes supply, being left to 
speak for themselves. I will only add that for some 
while, more especially in the later part of 1848 and in 
1849, my brother practised his pen to no small extent in 
writing sonnets to bouts-rimes. He and I would sit 
together in our bare little room at the top of No. 50 
Charlotte Street, I giving him the rhymes for a sonnet, 
and he me the rhymes for another ; and we would write 
off our emulous exercises with considerable speed, he 
constantly the more rapid of the two. From five to eight 
minutes may have been the average time for one of his 
sonnets ; not unfrequently more, and sometimes hardly 
so much. In fact, the pen scribbled away at its fastest 
Many of his bouts-rimes sonnets still exist in my posses- 
sion, a little touched up after the first draft Two or 
three seemed to me nearly good enough to appear in the 
present collection, but on the whole I decided against 
them all. Some have 9ifaux air of intensity of meaning, 
as well as of expression ; but their real core of signifi- 
cance is necessarily small, the only wonder being how 
he could spin so deftly with so weak a thread. I may 
be allowed to mention that most of my own sonnets (and 
not sonnets alone) published in The Germ were botUs- 
rimes experiments such as above described. In poetic 
tone they are of course inferior to my brother's work of 
like fashioning ; in point of sequence or self-congruity of 
meaning, the comparison might be less to my disadvantage. 
Dante Rossetti's published works were as follows: 
three volumes, chiefly of poetry. I shall transcribe the 
title-pages verbatim. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. zxxi 

(i*) The Early Italian Poets from Ciullo d'Alcamo to 
Dsuite Alighieri (iioo— 1200— 1300) in the Original 
Metres. Together with Dante's Vita Nuova. Translated 
by D. G. Rossetti Part I. Poets chiefly before Dante. 
Part U. Dante and his Circle. London : Smith, Elder 
and Co., 65, ComhilL 1861. The rights of translation 
and reproduction, as regards all editorial parts of this 
work, are reserved. 

(i**) Dante and his Circle, with the Italian Poets pre- 
ceding him (i 100 — 1200 — 1300). A Collection of Lyrics, 
edited, and translated in the original metres, by Dante 
Gabriel Rossetti. Revised and rearranged edition. 
Vzit L Dante's Vita Nuova, &c. Poets of Dante's 
Grde. Part II. Poets chiefly before Dante. London : 
Ellis and White, 29, New Bond Street 1874. 

(2*) Poems by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. London: 
F. S. Ellis, ^^f King Street, Covent Garden. 1870. 

(2**) Poems by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. A new edition. 
London : ElUs and White, 29, New Bond Street. 1881. 

(3) Ballads and Sonnets by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. 
London : Ellis and White, 29, New Bond Street, W. 1881. 

The reader will understand that i^ is essentially the 
same book as i*, but altered in arrangement, chiefly 
by inverting the order in which the poems of Dante 
and of the Dantesque epoch, and those of an earlier 
period, are printed. In the present collection, I reprint 
I*, taking no further count of i». The volume 2** is to 
m great extent the same as 2*, yet by no means identical 
with it 2* contained a section named Sonnets and 
Songs, towards a work to be caUed '' The House of lAfeP 
In 1 88 1, when 2** and 3 were published simultaneously, 
77k House of Life was completed, was made to consist 
solely of sonnets, and was transferred to 3 ; while the 



Digitized 



by Google 



xxxii PREFACE, 

gap thus left in 2* was filled up by other poems. With 
this essential modification of The House of Life it was 
clearly my duty not to interfere. 

It thus became impossible for me to reproduce 2*: 
but the question had to be considered whether I should 
reprint 2^ and 3 exactly as they stood in 1881, adding 
after them a section of poems not hitherto printed in 
any one of my brother's volumes ; or whether I should 
recast, in point of arrangement, the entire contents of 
2^ and 3, inserting here and there, in their most appro- 
priate sequence, the poems hitherto unprinted. I have 
chosen the latter alternative, as being in my own opinion 
the only arrangement which is thoroughly befitting for 
an edition of Collected Works. I am aware that some 
readers would have preferred to see the old order — 1.«., 
the order of 1881 — retained, so that the two volumes of 
that year could be perused as they then stood. Indeed, 
one of my brother's friends, most worthy, whether as 
friend or as critic, to be consulted on such a subject, 
decidedly advocated that plan. On the other hand, I 
found my own view confirmed by my sister Christina, 
who, both as a member of the fiunily and as a poetess, 
deserved an attentive hearing. The reader who inspects 
my table of contents will be readily able to follow the 
method of arrangement which is here adopted. I have 
divided the materials into Principal Poems, Miscellaneous 
Poems, Translations, and some minor headings; and 
have in each section arranged the poems — and the 
same has been done with the prose-writings — in some 
approximate order of date. This order of date is cer- 
tainly not very far from correct ; but I could not make it 
absolute, having frequently no distinct information to go 
by. The few translations which were printed in 2** (as 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. XExSX 

also in 2*) have been removed to follow on after i^ I 
shall give in a tabular form some particulars which will 
enable the reader to follow out for himself, if he takes 
an interest in such minutiae, the original arrangement of 
2», 2^ and 3. 

There are two poems by my brother, unpublished as 
yet, whieh I am unable to include among his G>llected 
Works. One of these is a grotesque ballad about a 
Dutchman, begun at a very early date, and finished in 
his last illness. The other is a brace of sonnets, in- 
teresting in subject, and as being the very last thing 
tkat he wrote. These works were presented as a gift 
of love and gratitude to a firiend, widi whom it remains 
to publish them at his own discretion. I have also 
advisedly omitted three poems ; two of them sonnets, 
the third a ballad of no great length. One of the 
sonnets is that entitled Nuptial Sleep, It appeared in 
the volume of Poems 1870 (2*), but was objected 
to by Mr. Buchanan, and I suppose by some other 
censors, as being indelicate; and my brother excluded 
it firom The House of Li/e in his third volume. I con- 
sider that there is nothing in the sonnet which need 
imperatively banish it from his Collected Works; but 
his own decision commands mine, and besides it could 
not now be reintroduced into The House of Ufe, 
which he moulded into a complete whole without it^ 
and would be misplaced if isolated by itself — a point 
as to which his opinion is very plainly set forth in 
his prose-paper The Stealthy School of Criticism, The 
second sonnet, named On the French Liberation of Italy ^ 
was put into print by my brother while he was pre- 
paring his volume of 1870, but he resolved to leave 
it unpublished. Its title shows plainly enough that it 



Digitized 



by Google 



xxxiv PREFACE. 

relates to a matter in which sexual morals have no 
part; but the subject is treated under the form of a 
vigorous and perhaps repulsive metaphor, and here 
again I follow his own lead. The ballad above referred 
to, Dennis Shand, is a skilful and really very harmless 
production; it was printed but not published, like the 
sonnet last-mentioned, and no writer other than one 
who took a grave view of questions of moral propriety 
would have preferred to suppress it. My brother's 
opinion is worded thus in a letter to Mr. Caine, which 
that gentleman has published : ** The ballad . . . deals 
trivially with a base amour (it was written very early), 
and is therefore really reprehensible to some extent" 
I will not be less jealously scrupulous for him than he 
was for himselC 

Dante Rossetti was a very fastidious writer, and, I 
might add, a very fastidious painter. He did not indeed 
" cudgel his brains " for the idea of a poem or the 
structure or diction of a stanza. He wrote out of a 
large fund or reserve of thought and consideration, 
which would culminate in a clear impulse or (as we 
say) an inspiration. In the execution he was always 
heedful and reflective from the first, and he spared no 
after-pains in clarifying and perfecting. He abhorred 
anything straggling, slipshod, profuse, or uncondensed. 
He often recurred to his old poems, and was reluctant to 
leave them merely as they were. A natural concomitant 
of this state of mind was a great repugnance to the 
notion of publishing, or of having published after his 
death, whatever he regarded as juvenile, petty, or 
inadequate. As editor of his Collected Works, I have 
had to regulate myself by these feelings of his^ whether 
my own entirely correspond with them or not The 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. XXXV 

amount of unpublished work which he left behind him 
was by no means large; out of the moderate bulk I 
have been careful to select only such examples as I 
suppose that he would himself have approved for the 
purpose, or would, at any rate, not gravely have objected 
to. A list of the new items is given at page zli, and a 
few details r^arding them will be found among my 
notes. Some projects or arguments of poems which he 
never executed are also printed among his prose-writings. 
These particular projects had, I think, been practically 
abandoned by him in all the later years of his life ; but 
there was one subject which he had seriously at heart, 
and for which he had collected some materials, and he 
would perhaps have put it into shape had he lived a 
year or two longer — a ballad on the subject of Joan Dare, 
to match The White Ship and The King's Tragedy. 

I have not unfrequently heard my brother say that 
he considered himself more essentially a poet than a 
painter. To vary the form of expression, he thought that 
be had mastered the means of embodying poetical concep- 
tions in the verbal and rhythmical vehicle more thoroughly 
than in form and design, perhaps more thoroughly than 
in colour. 

I may take this opportunity of observing that I hope 
to publish at an early date a substantial selection from 
the family-letters written by my brother, to be pre- 
ceded by a Memoir drawn up by Mr. Theodore Watts^ 
who will be able to express more freely and more im- 
partially than myself some of the things most apposite 
to be said about Dante Gabriel Rossetti. 

William M. Rossetti. 
Lonwm, Jtme 1886. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. 



LIST OF THE POEMS PUBLISHED BY DANTE 
GABRIEL ROSSETTI DURING HIS LIFETIME. 

2A. — Contents of Poems, 1870. 
Poems i 

Position in 
present edition. 

VOL. PACK 

The Blessed Damozel L . 232 

^ Love's Noctuni i. . 288 

Troy Town i. . 305 

The Burden of Nineveh i. . 266 

Eden Bower i. . 308 

Ave i. . 244 

The Staff and Scrip >• • 75 

A Last Confession i. . 18 

Dante at Verona i. . I 

Jenny . , i. . 83 

The Portrait i. . 240 

Sister Helen i. . 66 

Stratton Water i. . 274 

The Stream's Secret i. . 95 

The Card-dealer i. . 248 

My Sister's Sleep i. • 229 

A New Year's Burden L . 296 

Even So i. . 297 

An Old Song Ended i. . 300 

Aspecta Medusa L . 357 

Three Translations from Villon .... 11461, etc. 

John of Tours ii. . 46$ 

, My Father's Close . . . . . . il . 467 

One Girl (mow nam$d Beauty) . . ii . 469 

Sonmts and Songs towards a Work to be entWea *' The 
House of Life:' 

Ftffy Sonnets L 177, etc 

[For the titles of them tee vol. i., p. 517.] 



Digitized 



by Google 



FREFACSU 



ZXXVB 



Sfmfpt 

Position in 

present edition. 

VOL. PAGE 

Lore-lQj •••••••. i . 315 

First Love Remembered L . 293 

FliSllted Promise i . 294 

Sodden Ui^t i . 295 

AUtdeWhOe L . 304 

The Song of the Bower L . 301 

Penumbim L . 283 

The Woodspurge i . 298 

The Honeysuckle L . 298 

A Young Fir-wood L . 273 

the Seft-Limits L . 254 

[Here ended the " House of Life " Scries.] 

Sonnets Jor Pictures, and other Sonnets : 

For Our Lady of the Rocks, by Leonardo da 

ATmd I. 

For a Venetian Pastoral, by Giorgione . . . i 
For an Allegoiical Dance of Women, by Man- 



tegna 

For Ruggiero and Angelica, by Ingres . • 
For the Wine of Circe, by Bume Jones • , 

Mary's Girlhood 

The Passover in the Holy Family . . . . L 
Maiy Magdalene at the Door of Simon the 

Pharisee 

StLtdtethePadnter ...... 

Laith 

Sibylla Palmifera i 

Venus 

Cassandra • 

Ptuidora 

On Refiisal of Aid between Nations 

On the ViU Nuova of Dante 

Dantis Tenebrm . ...... L 

Beanty and the Bird i. 

A Match with the Moon i 



344 
345 

346 
347 
350 
353 
355 

356 
214 
216 
215 
360 

358 
36a 
252 
252 
299 
286 
28-' 



Digitized 



by Google 



xxxvUr PREFACE. 

Sonnets for Pictuns, and other Sonnets, continued : 

Position in 
luresent edition. 

VOL. PAGE 

Autumn Idleness . • • • • • . i. . 211 

Farewell to the Glen i . 219 

The Monochord .••••«•!.. 216 

2B. — Contents of Poems, 1881. 
Poems : 

[This section contains the same compositions as the section Po^ms 

in the volume of 1870^ but in a different sequence, and also the fol- 
lowing] 

Down Stream L . 319 

Wellington's Funeral • • i . 280 

World's Worth i. . 250 

The Bride's Prelude i« • 35 

[But the following are removed to a section headed] 

lyrics: 

A New Year's Burden i. . 296 

Even So i. . 297 

[Tn other respects the section Lyrics consists of the Softgs which used 
to form port of *' The House of Life.*^ 

Sonnets : 

[Contains the various compositions which appeared in the volume 
of 1870 under the heading Sonntis for Picturts, and oUwr Sonntts, 
except St. Luke the Painter, Lilith, Sibylla Palmifera, Autumn Idleness, 
Farewell to the Glen, and The Monochord ,* these six sonnets were 
transferred to The House of Life in the Ballads and Sonnets (3), 
the Lilith and Sibylla Palmifera being renamed Body's Beauty and 
Soul's Beauty.] 

Translations : 

[Contains the six translations which in the volume of 1870 appeared 
under the heading *' Poems," the title One Girl being now superseded by 
the title Beauty (Sappho) ; also the following] 

Youth and Lordship (Italian Street-song) • • i . 366 

The Leaf (Leopardi) • ii • 409 

Francesca da Rimini (Dante) • . • • IL • 405 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. jocxix 

3. — Contents of Ballads and Sonnets. 
BaXlads: 

Position in 
present edition. 

VOL. PAOB 

Rose Mary i. . 103 

The White Ship i . 137 

The King's Tragedy L . 148 

The House of Life — ^A Sonnet Sequence . • . L . 176 

Lyrics &c: 

Soothsay i . 334 

Chimes . 
Parted Presence 
A Death-parting 



. 330 
. 324 
. 322 

Spheral Change i . 326 

Sonset Wings 

Song and Music 

Three Shadows 



Alas so long ! L . 327 

• 333 
. 328 



316 

253 
321 



Adieu 
Insomnia 

Possession i • 329 

The Qoud Confines L . 317 



Sonnets: 



For the Holy Family, by Michelangelo . . . i. . 351 

For Spring, by Sandro Botticelli . . . . L . 352 

Five English Poets i. . 337 

Tiber, Nile, and Thames i. . 340 

The Last Three from Trafalgar . . . i. . 342 

Czar Alexander IL i. . 342 

Words on the Window-pane . . . . L . 299 

Winter • I . 341 

Spring L . 323 

The Church Porch i. . 272 

Untimely Lost (Oliver Madox Brown) • • • L . 323 



Digitized 



by Google 



ol FIUSFACB. 

Sonnefs, contmued : 

Foiitioaiii 
present edidon. 

VQI. PAOB 

Place de la Bastille, Pftris • • • • • L . 261 

« Found " (for a Picture) L . 363 

A Sea-spell L . 361 

Fiammetta •••....•!. 362 

The Day-dream • i. . 364 

Astarte Syriaca i . 361 

Proserpina (Italian and English) . . . • l . 370 

LaBeUaMano ,, • . • • i . 372 



I add here the dedications to Rossetti's volumes ia, 
2A, 2B, and 3. The dedication to ib appears in its 
proper place. 

lA. — The Early Italian Poets : 

Whatever is mine in this book is inscribed to my Wife. — 

a a R. 1861. 

2A. — Poems, 1870: 

To William Michael Rossetti, these Poems, to so many 
of which, so many years back, he gave the first brotherly 
hearing, are now at last dedicated. 

2a — Poems, 1881 : 

Same dedication, addmg the dates " lS7(>— iSSl.** 

3. — Ballads and Sonnets : 

To Theodore Watts, the Friend whom my verse won for 
me^ these few more pages are afiectionately inscribed. 



Digitized 



by Google 



PREFACE. xU 

In the Poems, 1881, appeared the ensuing "Adver- 
tisement'': 

"'Many poems in this volume were written between 1847 
and 1853. Others are of recent date, and a few belong to 
the intervening period. It has been thought unnecessary 
to specify the earlier work, as nothing is included which 
Uie author believes to be immature/ 

"The above brief note was prefixed to these poems when 
first published in 187a They have now been for some time 
out of print. 

"The fifty sonnets of the House o/Liftf which first appeared 
here, are now embodied with the full series in the volume 
entitled Ballads and Sotmeis, 

''The firagment of The Bride's Prthtde, now first printed, 
was written very early, and is here associated with other 
work of the same date; though its publication in an un- 
finished form needs some indulgence." 



On comparing the list which I have now given of 
the "Poems published by Rossetti during his Lifetime" 
with the contents of the present G>llected Works, 
section PoemSj it will he found that the following 
compositions are new. I put an asterisk against the 
titles of the few which had been printed by my 
brother in some outlying form, but not in his volumes. 
For any further particulars the reader may be referred 
to my notes. 

PAOB 

At the Sun-rise in 1848 237 

*Antumn Song .••••••. 237 

The Lady's Lament 238 

A Trip to Paris and Belgium 255 

The Staircase of Notre Dame, Paris .... 261 

Near Brussels— A Half-way Pause 26a 

^Antwerp and Bruges 263 



Digitized 



by Google 



xlH PREFACE. 

PAGB 

On Leaving Bruges • • 264 

Vox Ecclesise, Vox Christi 265 

The Mirror 27a 

During Music 273 

•On the Site of a Mulberry-tree, etc 28$ 

*0n certain Elizabethan Revivals 285 

English May 286 

Dawn on the Night Journey 303 

To Philip Bourke Marston 340 

♦Raleigh's Cell in the Tower 341 

For an Annunciation 343 

*For a Virgin and Child by Memmelinck . , . 348 
*For a Marriage of St Catherine, by the same . . 349 

♦Mary's Girlhood, No. 2 354 

Michael Scott's Wooing 357 

Mnemosyne 362 

La Ricordanza (Memory) 370-I 

Con manto d'oro, etc. (With golden mantle, etc.) . 372-3 
Robe d'or, etc, (A golden robe, etc.) . . 372-3 

Barcarola 374 

Barcarola 375 

Bambino Fasciato 375 

Thorns Fides 376 

Versicles and Fragments 377-8o 



Digitized 



by Google 



POEMS. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



L— PRINCIPAL POEMS. 



DANTE AT VERONA. 

Yea, thou ahalt learn how salt his food who fares 

Upon another's bread, — ^how steep his path 
Who treadeth up and down another's stairs. 

(XWp. Com, Farad, xvii) 

Behold, even I, even I am Beatrice. 

(Div, Com, Purg, zxx.) 

Of Florence and of Beatrice 
Servant and singer from of old, 
CVer Dante's heart in youth had toll'd 

The knell that gave his Lady peace ; 
And now in manhood flew the dart 
Wherewith his City pierced his heart 

Yet if his Lady's home above 

Was Heaven, on earth she filled his soul ; 

Ancf if his City held control 
To cast the body forth to rove, 

The soul could soar from earth's vain throng. 

And Heaven and Hell fulfil the song. 

Follow his feef s appointed way ; — 
But little light we find that clears 
The darkness of the exiled years. 

Follow his spirif s journey : — nay. 
What fires are blent, what winds are blown 
On paths his feet may tread alone ? 

X 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA 

Yet of the twofold life he led 

In chainless thought and fettered will 
Some glimpses reach us, — somewhat still 

Of the steep stairs and bitter bread, — 
Of the soul's quest whose stem avow 
For years had made him haggard now* 

Alas ! the Sacred Song whereto 

Both heaven and earth had set their hand 
Not only at Fame's gate did stand 

Knocking to claim the passage through, 
But toiled to ope that heavier door 
Which Florence shut for evermore. 

Shall not his birth's baptismal Town 
One last high presage yet fulfil, 
And at that font in Florence still 

His forehead take the laurel-crown ? 
O God I or shall dead souls deny 
The undying soul its prophecy ? 

Aye, 'tis their hour. Not yet forgot 
The bitter words he spoke that day 
When for some great charge far away 

Her rulers his acceptance sought. 
" And if I go, who stays ? " — so rose 
His scorn : — ''and if I stay, who goes ? ^ 

" Lo I thou art gone now, and we stay " 

SThe curled lips mutter) : '* and no star 
s from thy mortal path so far 
As streets where childhood knew the way. 
To Heaven and Hell thy feet may win. 
But thine own house they come not in.** 

Therefore, the loftier rose the song 
To toudi the secret things of God, 
The deeper pierced the hate that trod 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA. 

On base men's track who wrought the wrong ; 
Till the soul's effluence came to be 
Its own exceeding agony. 

Arriving only to depart, 

From court to court, from land to land. 

Like flame within the naked hand 
His body bore his burning heart 

That still on Florence strove to bring 

God's fire for a burnt ofifering. 

Even such was Dante's mood, when now. 

Mocked for long years with Fortune's sport. 

He dwelt at yet another court, 
There where Verona's knee did bow 

And her voice hailed with all acclaim 

Can Grande della Scala's name. 

As that lord's kingly guest awhile 
His life we follow ; through the days 
Which walked in exile's barren ways,— 

The nights which still beneath one smile 
Heard through all spheres one song increase,- 
** Even I, even I am Beatrice." 

At Can La Scala's court, no doubt. 
Due reverence did his steps attend ; 
The ushers on his path would bend 

At ingoing as at going out ; 
The penmen waited on his call 
At council-board, the grooms in halL 

And pages hushed their laughter down, 
And gay squires stilled the merry stir, 
When he passed up the dais-chamber 

With set brows lordlier than a frown ; 
And tire- maids hidden among these 
Diew close their loosened bodices. 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA. 

Perhaps the priests, (exact to span 
All God's circumference,) if at whiles 
They found him wandering in their aisles, 

Grudged ghostly greeting to the man 
By whom, though not of ghostly guild, 
With Heaven and Hell men's hearts were fill'd. 

And the court-poets (he, forsooth, 

A whole world's poet strayed to court !) 
Had for his scorn their hate's retort 

He'd meet them flushed with easy youth. 
Hot on their errands. Like noon-flies 
They vexed him in the ears and eyes. 

But at this court, peace still must wrench 
Her chaplet from the teeth of war : 
By day Uiey held high watch a&r, 

At night they cried across the trench ; 
And still, in Dante's path, the fierce 
Gaunt soldiers wrangled o'er their spears. 

But vain seemed all the strength to him, 
As golden convoys sunk at sea 
Whose wealth might root out penury : 

Because it was not, limh with limb. 

Knit like his heart-strings round the wall 
Of Florence, that ill pride might fall 

Yet in the tiltyard, when the dust 

Cleared from the sundered press of knights 
Ere yet again it swoops and smites, 

He almost deemed his longing must 
Find force to wield that multitude 
And hurl that strength the way he would. 

How should he move them, — ^fame and gain 
On all hands calling them at strife ? 
He still might find but his one life 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA* 

To give, by Florence counted vain : 

One heart the false hearts made her doubt. 
One voice she heard once and cast out 

Oh I if his Florence could but come, 

A lily-sceptred damsel fair, 

As her own Giotto painted her 
On many shields and gates at home, — 

A lady crowned, at a soft pace 

Riding the lists round to the dais : 

Till where Can Grande rules the lists. 
As young as Truth, as calm as Force, 
She draws her rein now, while her horse 

Bows at the turri of the white wrists ; 
And when each knight within his stall 
Gives ear, she speaks and tells them all ! 

All the foul tale, — truth sworn untrue 
And falsehood's triumph. All the tale ? 
Great God I and must she not prevail 

To fire them ere they heard it through, — 
And hand achieve ere heart could rest 
That hi^ adventure of her quest ? 

How would his Florence lead them forth, 
Her bridle ringing as she went ; 
And at the last within her tent, 

'Neath golden lilies worship-worth. 
How queenly would she bend the while 
And thank the victors with her smile I 

Also her lips should turn his way 
And murmur : '' O thou tried and true. 
With whom I wept the long years through I 

What shall it profit if I say. 
Thee I remember ? Nay, through thee 
All ages shall remember me«" 



Digitized 



by Google 



6 DANTE AT VERONA. 

Peace, Dante, peace t The task is long^ 
The time wears short to compass it. 
Within thine heart such hopes may flit 

And find a voice in deathless song : 
But lo I as children of man's earth, 
Those hopes are dead before their birth. 

Fame tells us that Verona's court 

Was a fiair place. The feet might still 
Wander for ever at their will 

In many ways of sweet resort ; 
And still in many a heart around 
The Poet's name due honour found. 

Watch we his steps. He comes upon 
The women at their palm-playing. 
The conduits round the gardens sing 

And meet in scoops of milk-white stone, 
Where wearied damsels rest and hold 
Their hands in the wet spurt of gold. 

One of whom, knowing well that he. 
By some found stem, was mild with them, 
Would run and pluck his garment's hem. 

Saying, " Messer Dante, pardon me," — 
Praying that they might hear the song 
Which first of all he made, when young 

" Donne che avete " * . . • Thereunto 
Thus would he murmur, having first 
Drawn near the fountain, while she nurs'd 

His hand against her side : a few 
Sweet words, and scarcely those, half said : 
Then turned, and changed, and bowed his head. 

* Donne che avete intellettod*amore :— the first canzone of 
the Vita Nuova. 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA. 

For then the voice said in his hear^ 
"Even I, even I am Beatrice ; " 
And his whole life would yearn to cease : 

Till having reached his room, apart 
Beyond vast lengths of palace-floor, 
He drew the arras round his door. 

At such times, Dante, thou hast set 
Thy forehead to the painted pane 
Full oft, I know ; and if the rain 

Smote it outside, her fingers met 
Thy brow ; and if the sun fell there, 
Her breath was on thy face and hair* 

Then, weeping, I think certainly 

Thou hast beheld, past sight of eyne^ — 

Within another room of thine 
Where now thy body may not be 

But where in thought thou still remain'st, — 

A window often wept against : 

The window thou, a youth, hast sought. 
Flushed in the limpid eventime. 
Ending with daylight the day's rhyme 

Of her ; where oflenwhiles her thought 
Held thee — the lamp untrimmed to write — 
In joy through the blue lapse of night 

At Can La Scala's court, no doubt, 
Guests seldom wept. It was brave sport, 
No doubt, at Can La Scala's court, 

Within the palace and without; 
Where music, set to madrigals, 
Loitered all day through groves and halls. 

Because Can Grande of his life 
Had not had six-and-twenty years 
As yet And when the chroniclers 



Digitized 



by Google 



8 DANTE AT VERONA^ 

Tell you of that Vicenia strife 
And of strifes elsewhere, — ^you must not 
Conceive for church-sooth he had got 

Just nothing jn his wits but war : 

Though doubtless 'twas the young man's joy 
(Grown with his growth from a mere boy,) 

To mark his *' Viva Cane 1 " scare 
The foe's shut front, till it would reel 
All blind with shaken points of steel. 

But there were places — ^held too sweet 

For eyes that had not the due veil 

Of lashes and clear lids — ^as well 
In favour as his saddle-seat : 

Breath of low speech he scorned not there 

Nor light cool fingers in his hair. 

Yet if the child whom the sire's plan 
Made free of a deep treasure-chest 
Scoffed it with ill-conditioned jest, — 

We may be sure too that the man 
Was not mere thews, nor all content 
With lewdness swathed in sentiment 

So you may read and marvel not 
That such a man as Dante — one 
Who, while Can Grande's deeds were done. 

Had drawn his robe round him and thought — 
Now at the same guest-table far'd 
Where keen Uguccio wiped his beard.* 

Through leaves and trellis-work the sun 
Left the wine cool within the glass,-^ 
They feasting where no sun could pass : 

* Uguccione della Faggiuola, Dante's former protector, was 
now hb fellow-guest at Verona. 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA, 

And when the women, all as on^ 

Rose up with brightened cheeks to go, 
It was a comely things we Iqiow. 

But Dante recked not of the wine ; 
Whether the women stayed or went. 
His visage held one stem intent : 

And when the music had its sign 

To breathe upon them for more eas^ 
Sometimes he turned and bade it cease. 

And as he spared not to rebuke 
The mirth, so oft in council he 
To bitter truth bore testimony : 

And when the crafty balance shook 
Well poised to make the wrong prevail, 
Then Dante's hand would turn the scale. 

And if some envoy from afar 
Sailed to Verona's sovereign port 
For aid or peace, and all the court 

Fawned on its lord, '* the Mars of war. 
Sole arbiter of life and death," — 
Be sure that Dante saved his breath. 

And Can La Scala marked askance 

These things, accepting them for shame 
And scorn, till Dante's guestship came 

To be a peevish sufferance : 

His host sought ways to make his days 
Hateful ; and such have many ways. 

There was a Jester, a foul lout 

Whom the court loved for graceless arts ; 

Sworn scholiast of the bestial parts 
Of speech ; a ribald mouth to shout 

In Folly's homy tympanum 

Such things as make the wise man dumb. 



Digitized 



by Google 



10 DANTE AT VERONA. 

Much loved, him Dante loathed. And so, 

One day when Dante felt perplex'd 

If any day that could come next 
Were worth the waiting for or no, 

And mute he sat amid their din,— 

Can Grande called the Jester in. 

Rank words, with such, are wit's best wealth. 
Lords mouthed approval ; ladies kept 
Twittering with clustered heads, except 

Some few that took their trains by stealth 
And went. Can Grande shook his hair 
And smote his thighs and laughed i' the air. 

Then, facing on his guest, he cried, — 

^' Say, Messer Dante, how it is 

I get out of a clown like this 
More than your wisdom can provide.** 

And Dante : " Tis man's ancient whim 

That still his like seems good to him." 

Also a tale is told, how once, 

At clearing tables after meat, 

Piled for a jest at Dante's feet 
Were found the dinner's well-picked bones ; 

So laid, to please the banquet's lord. 

By one who crouched beneath the board. 

Then smiled Can Grande to the rest : — 
" Our Dante's tuneful mouth indeed 
Lacks not the gift on flesh to feed ! " 

" Fair host of mine," replied the guest, 
*' So many bones you'd not descry 
Jf so it chanced the dog were L"* 

* " Missere, voi non vidresU tant *ossa se cam to fossi,** The 
point of the reproach is difficult to render, depending as it does on 
the literal meaning of the name Cam, 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA. 

But wherefore should we turn the grout 
In a drained cup, or be at strife 
From the worn garment of a life 

To rip the twisted ravel out ? 

Good needs expounding ; but of ill 
Each hath enough to guess his filL 

They named him Justicer-at-Law : 
Each month to bear the tale in mind 
Of hues a wench might wear unfin'd 

And of the load an ox might draw ; 
To cavil in the weight of bread 
And to see purse-thieves gibbeted* 

And when his spirit wove the spell 

(From under even to over-noon 

In converse with itself alone,) 
As high as Heaven, as low as Hell, — 

He would be summoned and must go : 

For had not Gian stabbed Giacomo ? 

Therefore the bread he had to eat 

Seemed brackish, less like com than tares ; 

And the rush-strown accustomed stairs 
Each day were steeper to his feet ; 

And when the night-vigil was done, 

His brows would ache to feel the sun. 

Nevertheless, when from his kin 
There came the tidings how at last 
In Florence a decree was pass'd 

Whereby all banished folk might win 
Free pardon, so a fine were paid 
And act of public penance made,— - 

This Dante writ in answer thus, 
Words such as these : " That clearly they 
In Florence must not have to say, — 



Digitized 



by Google 



12 DANTE AT VERONA. 

The man abode aloof from us 

Nigh fifteen years, yet lastly skulk'd 
Hither to candleshrift and mulct 

'' That he was one the Heavens forbid 
To traffic in God's justice sold 
By market-weight of earthly gold, 

Or to bow down over the lid 
Of steaming censers, and so be 
Made clean of manhood's obloquy. 

"That since no gate led, by God's will. 
To Florence, but the one whereat 
The priests and money-changers sat, 

He still would wander ; for that still. 
Even through the body's prison-bars, 
His soul possessed the sun and stars." 

Such were his words. It is indeed 
For ever well our singers should 
Utter good words and know them good 

Not through song only ; with close heed 
Lest, having spent for the work's sake 
Six days, the man be left to make. 

Months o'er Verona, till the feast 
Was come for Florence the Free Town : 
And at the shrine of Baptist John 

The exiles, girt with many a priest 
And carrying candles as they went. 
Were held to mercy of the saint 

On the high seats in sober state, — 
Gold neck-chains range o'er range below 
Gold screen-work where the lilies grow,- 

The heads of the Republic sate^ 
Marking the humbled face go by 
Each one of his house-enemy. 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA. 13 

And as each proacript rose and stood 
From kneeling in the ashen dust 
On the shrine-steps, some magnate thrust 

A beard into the velvet hood 

Of his front colleague's gown, to see 
The cinders stuck in his bare knee. 

Tosinghi passed, Manelli passed, 

Rinucci passed, each in his place ; 

But not an Alighieri's &ce 
Went by that day from first to last 

In the Republic's triumph ; nor 

A foot came home to Dante's door. 

(Respubuca — a public thing : 
A shameful shameless prostitute. 
Whose lust with one lord may not suit. 

So takes by turn its revelling 
A night with each, till each at morn 
Is stripped and b^ten forth forlorn. 

And leaves her, cursing her. If she. 

Indeed, have not some spice-draught, hid 

In scent under a silver lid, 
To drench his open throat with — he 

Once hard asleep ; and thrust him not 

At dawn beneath the stairs to rot 

Such Ms Republic I — not the Maid 
He yearned for ; she who yet should stand 
With Heaven's accepted hand in hand. 

Invulnerable and unbetray'd : 
To whom, even as to God, should be 
Obeisance one with Liberty.) 

Years filled out their twelve moons, and ceased 
One in another ; and alway 
There were the whole twelve houis each day, 



Digitized 



by Google 



/ 



14 DANTE AT VERONA. 

And each night as the years increased ; 
And rising moon and setting sun 
Beheld that Dante's work was done. 

What of his work for Florence ? Well 
It was, he knew, and well must be. 
Yet evermore her hate's decree 

Dwelt in his thought intolerable : — 
His body to be burned,* — his soul 
To beat its wings at hope's vain goaL 

What of his work for Beatrice ? 
Now well-nigh was the third song writ, — 
The stars a third time sealing it 

With sudden music of pure peace : 
For echoing thrice the threefold song, 
The imnumbered stars the tone prolong.t 

Each hour, as then the Vision pass'd. 

He heard the utter harmony 

Of the nine trembling spheres, till she 
Bowed her eyes towards him in the last, 

So that all ended with her eyes, 

Hell, Purgatory, Paradise. 

" It is my trust, as the years fall, 
To write more worthily of her 
Who now, being made God's minister. 

Looks on His visage and knows all." 
Such was the hope that love dar'd blend 
With griefs slow fires, to make an end 



* Such was the last sentence passed by Florence against Dante, 
as a recalcitrant exile. 

f E quindi uscimmo a riveder le sUlU, — iNFCRKa 
Puro e disposto a salire alle si^^.— PuRGATORia 
L'amor che muove U sole e X altre «^/&.— PARADisa 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA, 15^ 

Of the "New Life/* his youth's dear book : 
Adding thereunto : *' In such trust 
I labour, and believe I must 

Accomplish this which my soul took 
In charge, if God, my Lord and hers, 
Leave my life with me a few years." 

The trust which he had borne in youth 
Was all at length accomplished. He 
At length had written worthily — 

Yea even of her ; no rhymes uncouth 

Twixt tongue and tongue ; but by God's aid 
The first words Italy had said. 

Ah ! haply now the heavenly guide 
Was not the last form seen by him : 
But there that Beatrice stood slim 

And bowed in passing at his side, 

For whom in youth his heart made moan 
Then when the city sat alone.''' 

Clearly herself: the same whom he 
Met, not past girlhood, in the street. 
Low-bosomed and with hidden feet ; 

And then as woman perfectly. 

In years that followed, many an once,— 
And now at last among the suns 

In that high vision. But indeed 

It may be memory might recall 

Last to him then the first of all, — 
The child his boyhood bore in heed 

Nine years. At length the voice brought peace, — 

" Even I, even I am Beatrice." 

* Quamodo sedtt sola ehntas /—The words quoted by Dante 
. in the ViU Nuova when he speaks of the death of Beatrice. 



Digitized 



by Google 



i6 DANTE AT VERONA. 

All this, being there, we had not seen. 
Seen only was the shadow wrought 
On the strong features bound in thought ; 

The vagueness gaining gait and mien ; 
The white streaks gathering clear to view 
In the burnt beard the women knew. 

For a tale tells that on his track, 

As through Verona's streets he went, 
This saying certain women sent : — 

'' Lo, he that strolls to Hell and back 
At will I Behold him, how Hell's reek 
Has crisped his beard and singed his cheek/ 

'' Whereat " (Boccaccio's words) " he smil'd 
For pride in fame." It might be so : 
Nevertheless we cannot know 

If haply he were not beguil'd 
To bitterer mirth, who scarce could tell 
If he indeed were back from Hell. 

So the day came, after a space, 

When Dante felt assured that there 
The sunshine must lie sicklier 

Even than in any other place, 
Save only Florence. When that day 
Had come, he rose and went his way. 

He went and turned out From his shoes 
It may be that he shook the dust. 
As every righteous dealer must 

Once and again ere life can close : 
And unaccomplished destiny 
Struck cold his forehead, it may be. 

No book keeps record how the Prince 
Sunned himself out of Dante's reach, 
Nor how the Jester stank in speech : 



Digitized 



by Google 



DANTE AT VERONA. 17 

While courtiers, used to cringe and wince 
Poets and harlots, all the throng, 
Let loose their scandal and their song. 

No hook keeps record if the seat 

Which Dante held at his host's hoard 
Were sat in next by clerk or lord, — 

If leman lolled with dainty feet 
At ease, or hostage brooded there, 
Or priest lacked silence for his prayen 

Eat and wash hands, Can Grande ; — scarce 
We know their deeds now : hands which fed 
Our Dante with that bitter bread ; 

And thou the watch-dog <^ those stairs 
Which, of all paths his feet knew well, 
Were steeper found than Heaven or HelL 



Digitized 



by Google 



IS 



A LAST CONFESSION. 

(Regno Lombardo'Veneio, 1848.) 



Our Lombard country-girls along the coast 
Wear daggers in their garters : for they know 
That they might hate another girl to death 
Or meet a German lover. Such a knife 
I bought her, with a hilt of horn and pearL 

Father, you cannot know of all my thoughts 
That day in going to meet her, — that last day 
For the last time, she said ; — of all the love 
And all the hopeless hope that she might change 
And go back with me. Ah I and everywhere^ 
At places we both knew along the road, 
Some fresh shape of herself as once she was 
Grew present at my side ; until it seemed — 
So close they gathered round me — they would all 
Be with me when I reached the spot at last. 
To plead my cause with her against herself 
So changed. O Father, if you knew all this 
You cannot know, then you would know too. Father, 
And only then, if God can pardon me. | 
What can be told Til tell, if you will hean; 

I passed a village-fair upon my road, 
And thought, being empty-handed, I would take 
Some little present : such might prove, I said. 
Either a pledge between us, or (God help me I) 
A parting gift. And there it was I bought 
The knife I spoke of, such as women wear. 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSION. 19 

That day, some three hours afterwards, I found 
For certain, it must be a parting gift. 
And, standing silent now at last, I looked 
Into her scornful face ; and heard the sea 
Still trying hard to din into my ears 
Some speech it knew which still might change her heart, 
If only it could make me understand. 
One moment thus. Another, and her face 
Seemed further off than the last line of sea. 
So that I thought, if now she were to speak • 

I could not hear her. Then again I knew 
All, as we stood together on the sand 
At Iglio, in the first thin shade o' the hills. 

'•Take it," I said, and held it out to her. 
While the hilt glanced within my trembling hold ; 
**Take it and keep it for my sake," I said. 
Her neck unbent not, neither did her eyes 
Move, nor her foot left beating of the sand ; 
Only she put it by from her and laughed. 

Father, you hear my speech and not her laugh ; 
But God heard that. Will God remember all ? 

It was another laugh than the sweet sound 
Which rose from her sweet childish heart, that day 
Eleven years before, when first I found her 
Alone upon the hill-side ; and her curls 
Shook down in the warm grass as she looked up 
Out of her curls in my eyes bent to hers. 
She mig^t have served a painter to pourtray 
That heavenly child which in the latter days 
Shall walk between the lion and the lamb. 
I had been for nights in hiding, worn and sick 
And hardly fed ; and so her words at first 
Seemed fitful like the talking of the trees 
And voices in the air that knew my name* 
And I remember that I sat me down 
Upon the slope with her, and thought the world 



Digitized 



by Google 



20 A LAST CONFESSION. 

Must be all over or had never been, 

We seemed there so alone. And soon she told me 

Her parents both were gone away from her, 

I thought perhaps she meant that they had died ; 

But when I asked her this, she looked again 

Into my face and said that yestereve 

They kissed her long, and wept and made her weep, 

And gave her all the bread they had with them, 

And then had gone together up the hill 

Where we were sitting now, and had walked on 

Into the great red light ; ** and so," she said, 

" I have come up here too ; and when this evening 

They .step out of the light as they stepped in, 

I shall be here to kiss them." And she laughed. 

Then I bethought me suddenly of the famine ; 
And how the church-steps throughout all the town. 
When last I had been there a month ago. 
Swarmed with starved folk; and how the bread was 

weighed 
By Austrians armed ; and women that I knew 
For wive& and mothers walked the public stree^ 
Saying aloud that if their husbands feared 
To snatch the children's food, themselves would stay 
Till they had earned it there. So then this child 
Was piteous to me ; for all told me then 
Her parents must have left her to God's chance, 
To man's or to the Church's charity. 
Because of the great famine, rather than 
To watch her growing thin between their knees. 
With that, God took my mother's voice and spoke. 
And sights and sounds came back and things long since, 
And all my childhood found me on the hills ; 
And so I took her with me. 

I was young. 
Scarce man then, Father : but the cause which gave 
The wounds I die of now had brought me then 
Some wounds already; and I lived alone^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONIfESSIOU. 21 

As any hiding hunted man must live. 
It was no easy thing to keep a child 
In safety ; for herself it was not safe. 
And doubled my own danger : but I knew 
That God would help me. 

Yet a little while 
Pardon me. Father, if I pause. I think 
I have been speaking to you of some matters 
There was no need to speak of, have I not ? 
You do not know how clearly those things stood 
Within my mind| which I have spoken of, 
Nor how they strove for utterance. Life all past 
Is like the sky when the sun sets in it. 
Clearest where furthest o£ 

I told you how 
She scorned my parting gift and laughed. And yet 
A woman's laugh's another thing sometimes : 
I think they laugh in Heaven. I know last night 
I dreamed I saw into the garden of God, 
Where women walked whose painted images 
I have seen with candles round them in the church. 
They bent this way and that, one to another, 
Playing : and over the long golden hair 
Of each there floated like a ring of fire 
Which when she stooped stooped with her, and when she 

rose 
Rose with her. Then a breeze flew in among them. 
As if a window had been opened in heaven 
For God to give His blessing from, before 
This world of ours should set ; (for in my dreai 
I thought our world was setting, and the sun 
Flared, a spent taper ;) and beneath that gust 
The rings of light quivered like forest-leaves. 
Then all the blessed maidens who were there 
Stood up together, as it were a voice 
That called them ; and they threw their tresses back, 
And smote their palms, and all laughed up at once^ 
For the strong heavenly joy they had in them 



Digitized 



by Google 



23 A LAST CONFESSION. 

To hear God bless the world. Wherewith I woke : 
And looking round, I saw as usual 
That she was standing there with her long locks 
Pressed to her side ; and her laugh ended theirs. 

For always when I see her now, she laughs. 
And yet her childish laughter haunts me too, 
The life of this dead terror ; as in days 
When she, a child, dwelt with me. I must tell 
Something of those days yet before the end. 

I brought her from the city — one such day 
When she was still a merry loving child, — 
The earliest gift I mind my giving her ; 
A little image of a flying Love 
Made of our coloured glass-ware, in his hands 
A dart of gilded metal and a torch. 
And him she kissed and me, and fain would know 
Why were his poor eyes blindfold, why the wings 
And why the arrow. What I knew I told 
Of Venus and of Cupid, — strange old tales. 
And when she heard that he could rule the loves 
Of men and women, still she shook her head 
And wondered ; and, *' Nay, nay," she murmured still, 
*' So strong, and he a younger child than 1 1 " 
And then she'd have me fix him on the wall 
Fronting her little bed ; and then again 
She needs must fix him there herself, because 
I gave him to her and she loved him so. 
And he should make her love me better yet, 
If women loved the more, the more they grew. 
But the fit place upon the wall was high 
For her, and so I held her in my arms : 
And each time that the heavy pruning-hook 
I gave her for a hammer slipped away 
As it would often, still she laughed and laughed 
And kissed and kissed me. But amid her mirth^ 
Just as she hung the image on the nail. 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSION. 23 

It slipped and all its fragments strewed the ground : 
And as it fell she screamed, for in her hand 
The dart had entered deeply and drawn blood. 
And so her laughter turned to tears : and " Oh 1 " 
I said, the while I bandaged the small hand, — 
** That I should be the first to make you bleed, 
Who love and love and love you 1 " — kissing still 
The fingers till I got her safe to bed. 
And still she sobbed, — " not for the pain at all," 
She said, " but for the Love, the poor good Love 
You gave me." So she cried herself to sleep. 

Another later thing comes back to me. 
Twas in those hardest foulest days of all. 
When still from his shut palace, sitting clean 
Above the splash of blood, old Mettemich 
(May his soul die, and never-dying worms 
Feast on its pain for ever I) used to thin 
His year's doomed hundreds daintily, each month 
Thirties and fifties. This time, as I think. 
Was when his thrift forbad the poor to take 
That evil brackish salt which the dry rocks 
Keep all through winter when the sea draws in* 
The first I heard of it was a chance shot 
In the street here and there, and on the stones , 
A stumbling clatter as of horse hemmed round. 
Then, when she saw me hurry out of doors. 
My gun slung at my shoulder and my knife 
Stuck in my girdle, she smoothed down my hair 
And laughed to see me look so brave, and leaped 
Up to my neck and kissed me. She was still 
A child ; and yet that kiss was on my lips 
So hot all day where the smoke shut us in. 

For now, being always with her, the first love 
had — the father's, brother's love — ^was changed, 
I think, in somewise ; like a holy thought 
Which is a prayer before one knows of it. 



Digitized 



by Google 



^ A LAST CONFESSION, 

The first time I perceived this, I remember, 

Was once when after hunting I came home 

Weary, and she brought food and fruit for me, 

And sat down at my feet upon the floor 

Leaning against my side. But when I feh 

Her sweet head reach from that low seat of hers 

So high as to be laid upon my heart, 

I turned and lodced upon my darling there 

And marked for the first time how tall she was ; 

And my heart beat with so much violence 

Under her cheek, I thought she could not choose 

But wonder at it soon and ask me why ; 

And so I bade her rise and eat with me. 

And when, remembering all and counting back 

The time, I made out fourteen years for her 

And told her so, she gazed at me with eyes 

As of the sky and sea on a grey day. 

And drew her long hands through her hair, and 

asked me 
If she was not a woman ; and then laughed ; 
And as she stooped in laughing, I could see 
Beneath the growing throat the breasts half-globed 
Like folded lilies deepset in the stream. 

Yes, let me think of her as then ; for so 
Her image, Father, is not like the sights 
Which come when you are gone. She had a mouth 
Made to bring death to life, — the underlip 
Sucked in, as if it strove to kiss itself. 
Her face was pearly pale, as when one stoops 
Over wan water ; and the dark crisped hair 
And the hair's shadow made it paler still : — 
Deep-serried locks, the dimness of the cloud 
Where the moon's gaze is set in eddying gloom. 
Her body bore her neck as the tree's stem 
Bears the top branch ; and as the branch sustains 
The flower of the yeai^s pride, her high neck bore 
That face made wonderful with night and day. 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSION^ 25 

Her voice was swift, yet ever the last words 

Fell lingeringly ; and rounded finger-tips 

She had, that dung a little where they touched 

And then were gone o' the instant. Her great eyes, 

That sometimes turned half dizzily beneadi 

The passionate lids, as faint, when she would speak. 

Had also in them hidden springs of mirth, 

Which under the dark lashes evermore 

Shook to her laugh, as when a bird flies low 

Between the water and the willow-leaves, 

And the shade quivers till he wins the light 

I was a moody comrade to her then, 
For all the love I bore her. Italy, 
The weeping desolate mother, long has claimed 
Her sons' strong arms to lean on, and their hands 
To lop the poisonous thicket from her path. 
Cleaving her way to light And from her need 
Had grown the feshion of my whole poor life 
Which I was proud to yield her, as my father 
Had yielded his. And this had come to be 
A game to play, a love to clasp, a hate 
To wreak, all things together that a man 
Needs for his blood to ripen ; till at times 
All else seemed shadows, and I wondered still 
To see such life pass muster and be deemed 
Time's bodily substance. In those hours, no doubt, 
To the young girl my eyes were like my soul, — 
Dark wells of death-in-life that yearned for day. 
And though she ruled me always, I remember 
That once when I was thus and she still kept 
Leaping about the place and laughing, I 
Did almost chide her ; whereupon she knelt 
And putting her two hands into my breast 
Sang me a song. Are these tears in my eyes ? 
Tis long since I have wept for anything. 
I thought that song forgotten out of mind ; 
And now, just as I spoke of it, it came 



Digitized 



by Google 



26 



A LAST CONFESSION 



All back. It is but a rude thing, ill rhymed, 
Such as a blind man chaunts and his dog hears 
Holding the platter, when the children run 
To merrier sport and leave him. Thus it goes :- 

La bella donna* 
Piangendo disse : 
'* Come son fisse 
Le Stella in cielo ! 
Quel fiato anelo 
Dello stanco sole, 
Quanto m' assonna ! 



♦ She wept, sweet lady, 
And said in weeping : 
" What spell is keeping 
The stars so steady ? 
Why does the power 
Of the sun's noon-hour 
To sleep so move me ? 
And the moon in heaven. 
Stained where she passes 
As a worn-out glass is, — 
Wearily driven, 
Why walks she above me ? 

'' Stars, moon, and sun too, 
Tm tired of either 
And all together ! 
Whom speak they unto 
That I should listen ? 
For very surely. 
Though my arms and shoulders 
Dazzle beholders, 
And my eyes glisten. 
All's nothing purely ! 
What are words said for 
At all about them. 
If he they are made for 
Can do without them ? * 

/ She laughed, sweet lady, 
And said in laughing : 
** His hand clings half in 



My own already I 
Oh ! do you love me? 
Oh I speak of passion 
In no new fashion. 
No loud inveighing^ 
But the old sayings 
You once said of me. 

"You said : 'As summer, 
Through boughs grown brittle, 
Comes back a little 
Ere frosts benumb her, — 
So bring'st thou to me 
All leaves and flowers, 
Though autumn's gloomy 
To-day in the bowers.' 

" Oh I does he love me, 
When my voice teaches 
The veiy speeches 
He then spoke of me ? 
Alas ! what flavour 
StUl with me lingers?" 
(But she laughed as my kisses 
Glowed in her fingers 
With love's old blisses.) 
" Oh f what one favour 
Remains to woo {lim. 
Whose whole poor savou« 
Belongs not to him ? * 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSIO/i. 27 

£ la luna, tnacchiata 
Come lino specchio 
Logoro e vecchio,— 
Faccia affannata, 
Che cosa vuole ? 

^' Ch^ stelle, luna, e sole, 
Ciascun in' annoja 
£ m' annojaDO insieme ; 
Non me ne preme 
N6 ci prendo gioja. 
£ veramente, 
Che le spalle sien firanche 
£ le braccia bianche 
£ il seno caldo e tondo, 
Non mi £a niente. 
Che cosa al mondo 
Posso piA far di questi 
Se non piacciono a te, come dicesti ? ** 

La donna rise 

E riprese ridendo : — 

'' Questa mano che prendo 

£ dunque mia ? 

Tu m* ami dunque ? 

Dimmelo ancora, 

Non in modo qualunque^ 

Ma le parole 

Belle e precise 

Che dicesti pria* 

* Siccome suole 
La state talora 
(Dicesti) un qualche istante 
Tornare innanzi inverno, 
Cosl tufai cK to scerno 
Lefogtie tutie guante, 
Ben c/C to certo tenessi 
Per ^assato V autunno. 

" Eccolo il mio alunno ! 
lo debbo inse^argli 
^uei can detti istessi 
h' ei mi disse una volta I 



% 



Digitized 



by Google 



8 A LAST CONFESSION. 

Oim^l Che co8a dargli/* 
(Ma ridea piano piano 
Dei baci in sulla mano,) 
** Ch' ei non m'abbia da lungo tempo tolta ? " 

That I should sing upon this bed I — ^with you 
To listen, and such words still left to say I 
Yet was it I that sang ? The voice seemed hers, 
As on the very day she sang to me ; 
When, having done, she took out of my hand 
SomeUiing that I had played with all the while 
And laid it down beyond my reach ; and so 
Turning my face roimd till it fronted hers, — 
" Weeping or laughing, which was best ? " she said. 

But these are foolish tales. How should I show 
The heart that glowed then with love's heat, each day 
More and more brightly ? — when for long years now 
The very flame that flew about the heart, 
And gave it fiery wings, has come to be 
The lapping blaze of hell's environment 
Whose tongues all bid the molten heart despair. 

Yet one more thing comes back on me to-night 
Which I may tell you : for it bore my soul 
Dread firstlings of the brood that rend it now. 
It chanced that in our last year's wanderings 
We dwelt at Monza, far away from home. 
If home we had : and in the Duomo there 
I sometimes entered with her when she prayed. 
An image of Our Lady stands there, wrought 
In marble by some great Italian hand 
In the great days when she and Italy 
Sat on one throne together : and to her 
And to none else my loved one told her heart. 
She was a woman then ; and as she knelt, — 
Her sweet brow in the sweet brow's shadow there, — 
They seemed two kindred forms whereby our land 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSION. 29 

(Whose work still serves the world for miracle) 

Made manifest herself in womanhood. 

Father, the day I speak of was the first 

For weeks that I had borne her company 

Into the Duomo ; and those weeks had been 

Much troubled, for then first the glimpse came 

Of some impenetrable restlessness 

Growing in her to make her changed and cold. 

And as we entered there that day, I bent 

My eyes on the fair Image, and I said 

V^thin my heart, " Oh turn her heart to me I " 

And so I left her to her prayers, and went 

To gaze upon the pride of Monza's shrine, 

Where in the sacristy the light still falls 

Upon the Iron Crown of Italy, 

On whose crowned heads the day has closed, nor yet 

The daybreak gilds another head to crown. 

But coming back, I wondered when I saw 

That the sweet Lady of her prayers now stood 

Alone without her ; until further off. 

Before some new Madonna gaily dedced, 

Tinselled and gewgawed, a slight German toy, 

I saw her kneel, still praying. At my step 

She rose, and side by side we lef^ the church. 

I was much moved, and sharply questioned her 

Of her transferred devotion ; but she seemed 

Stubborn and heedless ; till she lightly laughed 

And said : ** The old Madonna ? Aye indeed. 

She had my old thoughts, — this one has my new." 

Then silent to the soul I held my way : 

And from the fountains of the public place 

Unto the pigeon-haunted pinnacles. 

Bright wings and water winnowed the bright air ; 

And stately with her laugh's subsiding smile 

She went, with clear-swayed waist and towering neck 

And hands held light before her ; and the face 

Which long had made a day in my life's nigh 

Was night in d ay to me; as all men's eyes 



Digitized 



by Google 



) A LAST CONFESSION. 

Turned on her beauty, and she seemed to tread 
Beyond my heart to the world made for her. 

Ah, there ! my wounds will snatch my sense again : 
The pain comes billowing on like a full cloud 
Of thunder, and the flash that breaks from it 
Leaves my brain burning. That's the wound he gave. 
The Austrian whose white coat I still made match 
With his white face, only the two grew red 
As suits his trade. The devil makes them wear 
White for a livery, that the blood may show 
Braver that brings them to him. So he looks 
Sheer o'er the field and knows his own at once. 

Give me a draught of water in that cup ; 
My voice feels thick ; perhaps you do not hear ; 
But you must hear. If you mistake my words 
And so absolve me, I am sure the blessing 
Will bum my soul. If you mistake my words 
And so absolve me. Father, the great sin 
Is yours, not mine : mark this : your soul shall bum 
With mine for it. I have seen pictures where 
Souls burned with Latin shriekings in their mouths : 
Shall my end be as theirs ? Nay, but I know 
'Tis you shall shriek in Latin. Some bell rings. 
Rings through my brain : it strikes the hour in helL 

You see I cannot, Father ; I have tried. 
But cannot, as you see. These twenty times 
Beginning, I have come to the same point 
And stopped. Beyond, there are but broken words 
Which will not let you understand my tale. 
It is that then we have her with us here, 
As when she wmng her hair out in my dream 
To-night, till all the darkness reeked of it. 
Her hair is always wet, for she has kept 
Its tresses wrapped about her side for years ; 
And when she wrung them round over the floor. 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSION. 31 

I heard the blood between her fingers hiss ; 
So that I sat up in my bed and screamed 
Once and again ; and once to once, she laughed. 
Look that you turn not now, — she's at your back : 
Gather your robe up. Father, and keep close. 
Or she'll sit down on it and send you mad 

At Iglio in the first thin shade o' the hills 
The sand is black and red. The black was black 
When what was spilt that day sank into it. 
And the red scarcely darkened. There I stood 
This night with her, and saw the sand the same. 
« « « # « « 

What would you have me tell you ? Father, father, 
How shall I make you know ? You have not known 
The dreadful soul of woman, who one day 
Forgets the old and takes the new to heart. 
Forgets what man remembers, and therewith 
Foigets the man. Nor can I clearly tell 
How the change happened between her and me. 
Her eyes looked on me from an emptied heart 
When most my heart was full of her ; and still 
In every comer of myself I sought 
To find what service failed her ; and no less 
Than in the good time past, there all was hers. 
What do you love ? Your Heaven ? Conceive it spread 
For one first year of all eternity 
All round you with all joys and gifls of God ; ^ 
And then when most your soul is blent with it 
And all yields song together, — ^then it stands 
O* the sudden like a pool that once gave back 
Your image, but now drowns it and is clear 
Again, — or like a sun bewitched, that bums 
Your shadow from you, and still shines in sighC' 
How oould you bear it ? Would you not cry out, 
Among those eyes grown blind to you, those ears 
That hear no more your voice you hear the same,— 



Digitized 



by Google 



3a A LAST CONFESSION. 

" God ! what is left but hell for company, 

But hell, hell, hell ? " — until the name so breathed 

Whirled with hot wind and sucked you down in fine ? 

Even so I stood the day her empty heart 

Left her place empty in our home, while yet 

I knew not why she went nor where she went 

Nor how to reach her : so I stood the day 

When to my prayers at last one sight of her 

Was granted, and I looked on heaven made pale 

With scorn, and heard heaven mock me in that laugh. 

O sweet, long sweet I Was that some ghost of you. 
Even as your ghost that haunts me now, — ^twin shapes 
Of fear and hatred ? May I find you yet 
Mine when death wakes ? Ah f be it even in flam^ 
We may have sweetness yet, if you but say 
As once in childish sorrow : '' Not my pain. 
My pain was nothing : oh your poor poor lov^ 
Your broken love I " 

My Father, have I not 
Yet told you the last things of that last day 
On which I went to meet her by the sea ? 

God, O God I but I must tell you all. 

Midway upon my journey, when I stopped 
To buy the dagger at the village fair, 

1 saw two cursed rats about the place 

I knew for spies — blooa-sellers both. That day 
Was not yet over ; for three hours to come^ 
I prized my life : and so I looked around 
For safety. A poor painted mountebank 
Was playing tricks and shouting in a crowd. 
I knew he must have heard my name, so I 
Pushed past and whispered to him who I was. 
And of my danger. Straight he hustled me 
Into his bootib, as it were in the trick, 
And brought me out next minute with my face 
All smeared in patches and a zany's gown ; 



Digitized 



by Google 



A LAST CONFESSIOI/. 33 

f 

And there I handed him his cups and balls 
And swung the sand-bags round to clear the ring 
For half an hour. The spies came once and looked ; 
And while they stopped, and made all sights and 

sounds 
Sharp to my startled senses, I remember 
A woman laughed above me. I looked up 
And saw where a brown-shouldered harlot leaned 
Half through a tavern window thick with vine. 
Some man had come behind her in the room 
And caught her by her arms, and she had turned 
With that coarse empty laugh on him, as now 
He munched her neck with kisses, while the vine 
Crawled in her back. 

And three hours afterwards, 
When she that I had run all risks to meet 
Laughed as I told you, my life burned to death 
Within me, for I thought it like the laugh 
Heard at the lair. She had not left me long ; 
But all she might have changed to, or might change to, 
(I know nought since — she never speaks a word — ) 
Seemed in that laugh. Have I not told you yet. 
Not told you all this time what happened. Father, 
When I had offered her the little knife, 
And bade her keep it for my sake that loved her. 
And she had laughed ? Have I not told you yet ? 

"Take it," I said to her the second time, 
** Take it and keep it'* And then came a fire 
That burnt my hand ; and then the fire was blood. 
And sea and sky were blood and fire, and all 
The day was one red blindness ; till it seemed, 
Within the whirling brain's eclipse^ that she 
Or I or all things bled or burned to death. 
And then I found her laid against my feet 
And knew that I had stabbed her, and saw still 
Her look in falling. For she took the knife 
Deep in her heart, even as I bade her then, 



Digitized 



by Google 



34 ^ LAST CONFESSION. 

And fell ; and her stiflf bodice scooped the sand 
Into her bosom. 

And she keeps it, see. 
Do you not see she keeps it ? — there, beneath 
Wet fingers and wet tresses, in her heart 
For look you, when she stirs her hand, it shows 
The little hilt of horn and pearl,— even such 
A dagger as our women of the coast 
Twist in their garters. 

Father, I have done : 
And from her side she now unwinds the thick 
Dark hair ; all round her side it is wet through, 
But, like the sand at Iglio, does not change. 
Now you may see the dagger clearly. Father, 
I have told all : tell me at once what hope 
Can reach me still. For now she draws it out 
Slowly, and only smiles as yet : look, Father, 
She scarcely smiles : but I shall hear her laugh 
Soon, when she shows the crimson steel to God. 



Digitized 



by Google 



35 



THE BRIDFS PRELUDE. 

"Sister," said busy Amelotte 

To listless Aloyse ; 
''Along your wedding-road the wheat 
Bends as to hear your horse's feet, 
And the noonday stands still for heat* 

Amelotte laughed into the air 

With eyes that sought the sun : 
But where the walls in long brocade 
Were screened, as one who is afraid 
Sat Aloyse within the shade. 

And even in shade was gleam enough 

To shut out full repose 
From the bride's 'tiring-chamber, which 
Was like the inner altar-niche 
Whose dimness worship has made rich* 

Within the window's heaped recess 
The light was counterchanged 
In blent reflexes manifold 
From perfume-caskets of wrought gold 
And gems the bride's hair could not hold 

All thrust together : and with these 
A slim-curved lute, which now, 
At Amelotte's sudden passing there, 
Was swept in somewise unaware, 
And shook to music the close air. 



Digitized 



by Google 



36 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

Against the haloed lattice-panes 

The bridesmaid sunned her breast ; 
Then to the glass turned tall and free, 
And braced and shifted daintily 
Her loin-belt through her cote-hardie. 



The belt was silver, and the clasp 

Of lozenged arm-bearings ; 
A world of mirrored tints minute 
The rippling sunshine wrought into \ 
That flushed her hand and warmed her foot 



At least an hour had Aloyse, — 
' Her jewels in her hair, — 
Her white gown, as became a bride, 
Quartered in silver at each side, — 
Sat thus aloof, as if to hide. 

Over her bosom, that lay still, 

The vest was rich in grain. 
With close pearb wholly overset : 
Around her throat the fastenings met 
Of chevesayle and mantelet. 

Her arms were laid along her lap 

With the hands open : life 
Itself did seem at fault in her : 
Beneath the drooping brows, the stir 
Of thought made noonday heavier. 

Long sat she silent; and then raised 

Her head, with such a gasp 
As while she summoned breath to speak 
Fanned high that furnace in the cheek 
But sucked the heart-pulse cold and weak. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 37 

(Oh gather round her now, all ye 

Piist seasons of her fear, — 
Sick springs, and summers deadly cold I 
To flight your hovering wings unfold. 
For now your secret shall be told. 

Ye many sunlights, barbed with darts 

Of dread detecting flame, — 
Gaunt moonlights that like sentinels 
Went past with iron clank of bells, — 
Draw round and render up your spells I) 

" Sister," said Alo^se, *' I had 

A thing to tell thee of 
Long since, and could not But do thou 
Kneel first in prayer awhile, and bow 
Thine heart, and I will tell thee now.** 

Amelotte wondered with her eyes ; 

But her heart said in her : 
^ Dear Alo^se would have me pray 
Because the awe she feels to-day 
Must need more prayers than she can say." 

So Amelotte put by the folds 
That covered up her feet. 
And knelt, — beyond the arras'd gloom 
And the hot window's dull perfume- 
Where day was stillest in the room. 

** Queen Mary, hear,** she said, ** and say 

To Jesus the Lord Christ, 
This bride's new joy, which He confers. 
New joy to many ministers. 
And many griefs are bound in hers." 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

The bride turned in her chair, and hid 

Her face against the back, 
And took her pearl-girt elbows in 
Her hands, and could not yet begin, 
But shuddering, uttered, " Urscelyn I " 

Most weak she was ; for as she pressed 

Her hand against her throa^ 
Along the arras she let trail 
Her face, as if all heart did fail. 
And sat with shut eyes, dumb and pale. 

Amelotte still was on her knees 
As she had kneeled to pray. 
Deeming her sister swooned, she thought. 
At first, some succour to have brought ; 
But Aloyse rocked, as one distraught 

She would have pushed the lattice wide 

To gain what breeze might be ; 
But marking that no leaf once beat 
The outside casement, it seemed meet 
Not to bring in more scent and heat. 

So she said only : " Aloyse, 

Sister, when happened it 
At any time that the bride came 
To ill, or spoke in fear of shame 
When speaking first the bridegroom's name ? " 

A bird had out its song and ceased 

Ere the bride spoke. At length 
She said : '' The name is as the thing :^ 
Sin hath no second christening. 
And shame is all that shame can bring. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIBERS PRELUDE. 39 

'' In divers places many an while 
I would have told thee this ; 
But faintness took me, or a fit 
Like fever. God would not permit 
That I should change thine eyes with it. 

"Yet once I spoke, hadst thou but heard :— 

That time we wandered out 
All the sun's hours, but missed our way 
When evening darkened, and so lay 
The whole night covered up in hay. 

"At last my face was hidden : so, 
Having God's hint, I paused 
Not long ; but drew myself more near 
Where thou wast laid, and shook off fear. 
And whispered quick into thine ear 

*' Something of the whole tale. At first 

I lay and bit my hair 
For the sore silence thou didst keep : 
Till, as thy breath came long and deep, 
I knew that thou hadst been asleep. 

" The moon was covered, but the stars 

Lasted till morning broke. 
Awake, thou told'st me that thy dream 
Had been of me, — that all did seem 
At jar, — ^but that it was a dream. 

" I knew God's hand and might not speak. 

After that night I kept 
Silence and let the record swell : 
Till now there is much more to tell 
Which must be told out ill or well.** 



Digitized 



by Google 



40 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

She paused then, weary, with dry lips 

Apart From the outside 
By fits there boomed a dull report 
From where i' the hanging tennis-court 
The bridegroom's retinue made sport. 

The room lay still in dusty glare, 
Having no sound through it 
Except the chirp of a caged bird 
That came and ceased : and if she stirred, 
Amelotte's raiment could be heard. 



Quoth Amelotte : " The night this chanced 

Was a Imte summer night 
Last year I What secret, for Christ's love, 
Keep'st thou since then ? Mary above I 
What thing is this thou speakest of? 

*' Mary and Christ I Lest when 'tis told 

I should be prone to wrath, — 
This prayer beforehand I How she errs 
Soe'er, take count of grief like hers, 
Whereof the days are turned to years ! " 

She bowed her neck, and having said. 

Kept on her knees to hear; 
And then, because strained thought demands 
Quiet before it understands, 
Darkened her eyesight with her hands. 

So when at last her sister spoke, 

She did not see the pain 
C the mouth nor the asham^ eyes, 
But marked the breath that came in sighs 
And the half-pausing for replies. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 41 

This was the bride's sad prelude-strain : — 

" r the convent where a girl 
I dwelt till near my womanhood, 
I had but preachings of the rood 
And Aves told in solitude 



'* To spend my heart on : and my hand 

Had but the weary skill 
To eke out upon silken cloth 
Christ's visage, or the long bright growth 
Of Mary's hair, or Satan wroth. 

" So when at last I went, and thou, 

A diild not known before, 
Didst come to take the place I left, — 
My limbs, after such lifelong theft 
Of life, could be but little deft 

" In all that ministers delight 

To noble women : I 
Had learned no word of youth's discourse, 
Nor gazed on games of warriors, 
Kor trained a hound, nor ruled a horse. 

'* Besides, the daily life i' the sun 

Made me at first hold back. 
To thee this came at once ; to me 
It crept with pauses timidly ; 
I am not blidie and strong like thee. 

"Yet my feet liked the dances well, 

The songs went to my voice. 
The music made me shake and weep j 
And often, all night long, my sleep 
Gave dreams I had been fain to keep. 



Digitized 



by Google 



42 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

'' But though I loved not holy things, 

To hear them scorned brought pain,— 
They were my childhood ; and these dames 
Were merely perjured in saints' names 
And fixed upon saints' days for games. 

'* And sometimes when my father rode 

To hunt with his loud friends, 
I dared not bring him to be quafiTd, 
As my wont was, his stirrup-draughty 
Because they jested so and laugh'd. 

"At last one day my brothers said, 

' The girl must not grow thus,— 
Bring her a jennet, — she shall ride.' 
They helped my mounting, and I tried 
To laugh with them and keep their side. 

" But brakes were rough and bents were steep 

Upon our path that day : 
My palfrey threw me ; and I went 
Upon men's shoulders home, sore spent, 
While the chase followed up the scent. 

" Our shrift-father (and he alone 

Of all the household there 
Had skill in leechcraft,) was away 
When I reached home. I tossed, and lay 
Sullen with anguish the whole day. 

*' For the day passed ere some one brought 

To mind that in the hunt 
Rode a young lord she named, long bred 
Among the priests, whose art (she said) 
Might chance to stand me in much stead. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 43 

'^ I bade them seek and summon him : 

But long ere this^ the chase 
Had scattered, and he was not found. 
I lay in the same weary stound, 
Therefore, until the night came roimd. 

" It was dead night and near on twelve 

When the horse-tramp at length 
Beat up the echoes of the court : 
By then, my feverish breath was short 
With pain the sense could scarce support 

" My fond nurse sitting near my feet 
Rose softly, — her lamp's flame 
Held in her hand, lest it should make 
My heated lids, in passing, ache ; 
And she passed softly, for my sake. 

** Returning soon, she brought the youth 

They spoke o£ Meek he seemed. 
But good knights held him of stout heart 
He was akin to us in part. 
And bore our shield, but barred athwart 

** I now remembered to have seen 

His face, and heard him praised 
For letter-lore and medicine, 
Seeing his youth was nurtured in 
Priests' knowledge, as mine own had been. 

The bride's voice did not weaken here, 

Yet by her sudden pause 
She seemed to look for questioning ; 
Or else (small need though) 'twas to bring 
Well to her mind the bygone thing. 



Digitized 



by Google 



44 TRE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

Her thought, long stagnant, stirred by speech, 

Gave her a skk recoil ; 
As, dip thy fingers through the green 
That masks a pool, — where they have been 
The naked depth is black between. 

Amelotte kept her knees ; her face 

Was shut within her hands. 
As it had been throughout the tale ; 
Her forehead's whiteness might avail 
Nothing to say if she were pale. 

Although the lattice had dropped loose, 

There was no wind ; the heat 
Being so at rest that Amelotte 
Heard far beneath the plunge and float 
Of a hound swimming in the moat 

Some minutes since, two rooks had toiled 

Home to the nests that crowned 
Ancestral ash-trees. Through the glare 
Beating again, they seemed to tear 
With that thick caw the woof o* the air. 



But else, 'twas at tiie dead of noon 

Absolute silence ; all. 
From the raised bridge and guarded sconce 
To green-clad places of pleasaunce 
Where the long lake was white with swans. 

Amelotte sp>oke not any word 

Nor moved she once ; but felt 
Between her hands in narrow space 
Her own hot breath upon her face, 
And kept in silence the same place. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 45 

Aloyse did not hear at all 

The sounds without She heard 
The inward voice (past help obeyed) 
Which might not slacken nor be stay'd. 
But urged her till the whole were said. 



Therefore she spoke again : "That night 

But little could be done : 
My foot, held in ray nurse's hands, 
He swathed up heedfuUy in bands, 
And for my rest gave close commands. 

** I riept till noon, but an ill sleep 

Of dreams : through all that day 
My side was stiff and caught the breath ; 
Next day, such pain as sickeneth 
Took me, and I was nigh to death. 

** Life strove, Death claimed me for his own, 

Through days and nights : but now 
Twas the good father tended me, 
Having returned. Still, I did see 
The youth I ^poke of constantly. 

^ For he would with my brothers come 

To stay beside my couch, 
And fix my eyes against his own, 
Noting my pulse ; or else alone. 
To sh at gaze while I made moan. 

" (Some nights I knew he kept the watch, 

Becau s e my women laid 
The rushes thick for his steel shoes.) 
Through many days this pain did use 
The life God would not let me lose. 



Digitized 



by Google 



46 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

"At length, with my good nurse to aid, 

I could walk forth again : 
And still, as one who broods or grieves, 
At noons I'd meet him and at eves. 
With idle feet that drove the leaves. 



*' The day when I first walked alone 

Was thinned in grass and leaf, 
And yet a goodly day o* the year : 
The last bird's cry upon mine ear 
Left my brain weak, it was so clear. 

" The tears were sharp within mine eyes. 

I sat down, being glad, 
And wept ; but stayed the sudden flow 
Anon, for footsteps that fell slow ; 
'Twas that youth passed me, bowing low. 

"He passed me without speech ; but when, 

At least an hour gone by, 
Rethreading the same covert, he 
Saw I was still beneath the tree. 
He spoke and sat him down with me. 

*' Little we said ; nor one heart heard 

Even what was said within ; 
And, faltering some farewell, I soon 
Rose up ; but then i' the autumn noon 
My feeble brain whirled like a swoon* 

" He made me sit ' Cousin, I grieve 

Your sickness stays by you.' 
' I would,' said I, ' that you did err 
So grieving. I am wearier 
Than death, of the sickening dying year.* 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 47 

" He answered : ' If your weariness 

Accepts a remedy, 
I hold one and can give it you.' 
I gazed : ' What ministers thereto, 
Be sure/ I said, 'that I will do.' 



''He went on quickly : — Twas a cure 

He had not ever named 
Unto our kin lest they should stint 
Their favour, for some foolish hint 
Of wizardry or magic in't : 

** But that if he were let to come 

Within my bower that nighty 
(My women still attending me, 
He said, while he remained there,) he 
Could teach me the cure privily. 

*'I bade him come that night He came; 

But little in his speech 
Was cure or sickness spoken o^ 
Only a passionate fierce love 
That clamoured upon God above. 

" My women wondered, leaning close 

Aloof. At mine own heart 
I think great wonder was not stirr'd. 
I dared not listen, yet I heard 
His tangled speedi, word within word. 

" He craved my pardon first, — all else 

Wild tumult In the end 
He remained silent at my feet 
Fumbling the rushes. Strange quick heat 
Made all the blood of my life meet. 



Digitized 



by Google 



48 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

"And lo 1 1 loved him. I but said, 

If he would leave me then, 
His hope some future might forecast 
His hot lips stung my hand : at last 
My damsels led him forth in haste." 



The bride took breath to pause ; and turned 

Her gaze where Amelotte 
Knelt, — the gold hair upon her back 
Quite still in all its threads, — the track 
Of her still shadow sharp smd black. 

That listening without sight had grown 

To stealthy dread ; and now 
That the one sound she had to mark 
Left her alone too, she was stark 
Afraid, as children in the dark. 

Her fingers felt her temples b-^at ; 
Then came that brain-sickness 
Which thinks to scream, and murmureth ; 
And pent between her hands, the breath 
Was damp against her face like death. 

Her arms both fell at once ; but when 

She gasped upon the light, 
Her sense returned She would have pray'd 
To change whatever words still stayed 
Behind, but felt there was no aid 

So she rose up, and having gone 

Within the window's arch 
Once more, she sat there, all intent 
On torturing doubts, and once more benT 
To hear, in mute bewilderment 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 49 

But Aloyse still paused. Thereon 

Amelotte gathered voice 
In somewise from the torpid fear 
Coiled round her spirit Low but cleat 
She said : '' Speak, sister ; for I hear." 



But Aloyse threw up her neck 

And called the name of God : — 
•' Judge, God, 'twixt her and me to-day ! 
She knows how hard this is to say, 
Yet will not have one word away." 

Her sister was quite silent Then 

Afresh : — " Not she, dear Lord I 
Thou be my judge, on Thee I call I " 
She ceased, — her forehead smote the wall : 
" Is there a God," she said, "at all ?" 

Amelotte shuddered at the soul, 

But did not speak. The pause 
Was long this time. At length the bride 
Pressed her hand hard against her side, 
And trembling between shame and pride 

Said by fierce effort : *' From that night 

Often at nights we met : 
That night, his passion could but rave : 
The next, what grace his lips did crave 
I knew not, but I know I gave." 

Where Amelotte was sitting, all 

The light and warmth of day 
Were so upon her without shade 
That the thing seemed by sunshine made 
Most foul and wanton to be said. 



Digitized 



by Google 



50 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

She would have questioned more, and known 

The whole truth at its worst, 
But held her silent, in mere shame 
Of day. Twas only these words came : — 
'' Sister, thou hast not said his name." 



"Sister," quoth Aloyse, "thou know'st 

His name. I said that he 
Was in a manner of our kin. 
Waiting the title he might win. 
They called him the Lord Urscelyn.'' 

The bridegroom's name, to Amelotte 

Daily familiar, — ^heard 
Thus in this dreadful history^ — 
Was dreadful to her ; as might be 
Thine own voice spring unto thee. 

The day's mid-hour was almost full ; 

Upon the dial-plate 
The angel's sword stood near at One. 
An hour's remaining yet ; the sim 
Will not decrease till all be done. 

Through the bride's lattice there crept in 

At whiles (from where the train 
Of minstrels, till the marriage-call, 
Loitered at windows of the wall,) 
Stray lute-notes, sweet and musical 

They clung in the green growths and moss 

Against the outside stone ; 
Low like dirge-wail or requiem 
They murmured, lost 'twixt leaf and stem : 
There was no wind to carry themu 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

Amelotte gathered herself back 

Into the wide recess 
That the sun flooded : it o'erspread 
Like flame the hair upon her head 
And fringed her face with burning red. 

All things seemed shaken and at change : 

A silent place o' the hills 
She knew, into her spirit came : 
Within herself she said its name 
And wondered was it still the same. 

The bride (whom silence goaded) now 

Said strongly, — her despair 
By stubborn will kept underneath : — 
" Sister, 'twere well thou didst not breathe 
That curse of thine. Give me my wreath." 

"Sister," said Amelotte, "abide 

In peace. Be God thy judge, 
As thou hast said — not I. For me, 
I merely will thank God that he 
Whom thou hast loved loveth thee." 



Then Aloyse lay back, and laughed 

With wan lips bitterly, 
Saying, " Nay, thank thou God for this, — 
That never any soul like his 
Shall have its portion where love is." 

Weary of wonder, Amelotte 

Sat silent : ^e would ask 
No more, though all was unexplained : 
She was too weak ; the ache still pained 
Her eyes, — her forehead's pulse remained. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

The silence lengthened. Aloyse 

Was fain to turn her face 
Apart, to where the arras told 
Two Testaments, the New and Old, 
In shapes and meanings manifold. 

One solace that was gained, she hid. 

Her sister, from whose curse 
Her heart recoiled, had blessed instead : 
Yet would not her pride have it said 
How much the blessing comforted. 

Only, on looking round again 

After some while, the face 
Which from the arras turned away 
Was more at peace and less at bay 
With shame than it had been that day. 

She spoke right on, as if no pause 

Had come between her speech : 
"That year from warmth grew bleak and pass'd," 
She said ; " the days from first to last 
How slow, — ^woe's me I the nights how fast I 

" From first to last it was not known : 

My nurse, and of my train 
Some four or five, alone could tell 
What terror kept inscrutable : 
There was good need to guard it welL 

'• Not the guilt only made the shame, 

But he was without land 
And bom amiss. He had but come 
To train his youth here at our home, 
And, being man, depart therefrom. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 53 

"Of the whole time each single day 
Brought fear and great unrest : 
It seemed that all would not avail 
Some once, — that my close watch would fail, 
And some sign, somehow, tell the tale. 

" The noble maidens that I knew. 

My fellows, oftentimes 
Midway in talk or sport, would look 
A wonder which my fears mistook, 
To see how I turned faint and shook. 



" They had a game of cards, where each 

By painted arms might find 
What knight she should be given to. 
Ever with trembling hand I threw 
Lest I should learn the thing I knew. 

" And once it came. And Aure d'Honvaubc 

Held up the bended shield 
And laughed : ' Gramercy for our share I — 
If to our bridal we but fare 
To smutch the blazon that we bear I ' 



" But proud Denise de Villenbois 

Kissed me, and gave her wench 
The card, and said : ' If in these bowers 
You women play at paramours. 
You must not mix your game with ours.' 



" And one upcast it from her hand : 
' Lo I see how high hell soar I ' 
But then their laugh was bitterest ; 
For the wind veered at fate's behest 
And blew it back into my breast 



Digitized 



by Google 



S4 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

"Oh I if I met him in the day 

Or heard his voice, — at meals 
Or at the Mass or through the hall,— 
A look turned towards me would appal 
My heart by seeming to know alL 

"Yet I grew curious of my shame, 
And sometimes in the church. 
On hearing such a sin rebuked. 
Have held my girdle-glass unhooked 
To see how such a woman looked. 

" But if at night he did not come, 

I lay all deadly cold 
To think they might have smitten sore 
And slain him, and as the night wore. 
His corpse be lying at my doon 

*' And entering or going forth. 

Our proud shield o'er the gate 
Seemed to arraign my shrinking eyes. 
With tremors and unspoken lies 
The year went past me in this wise, 

"About the spring of the next year 

An ailing fell on me ; 
(I had been stronger till the spring ;) 
'Twas mine old sickness gathering, 
I thought ; but 'twas another thing. 

''I had such yearnings as brought tears, 

And a wan dizziness : 
Motion, like feeling, grew intense; 
Sight was a haunting evidence 
And sound a pang that snatched the sense. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 55 

^ It now was hard on that great ill 

Which lost our wealth from us 
And all our lands. Accursed be 
The peevish fools of liberty 
Who will not let themselves be free I 

**The Prince was fled into the west : 

A price was on his blood, 
But he was safe. To us his friends 
He left that ruin which attends 
The strife against God's secret ends. 

** The league dropped all asunder, — lord, 

Gentle and serf. Our house 
Was marked to falL And a day came 
When half the wealth that propped our name 
Went from us in a wind of flame, 

'^Six hours I lay upon the wall 

And saw it burn. But when 
It dogged the day in a black bed 
Of louring vapour, I was led 
Down to the postern, and we fled 

•* But ere we fled, there was a voice 

Which I heard speak, and say 
That many of our friends, to shun 
Our fate, had left us and were gone, 
And that Lord Urscelyn was one. 

" That name, as was its wont, made sight 

And hearing whirl. I gave 
No heed but only to the name : 
I held my senses, dreading them, 
And was at strife to look the sam« 



Digitized 



by Google 



56 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE, 

* We rode and rode. As the speed grew, 

The growth of some vague curse 
Swarmed in my brain. It seemed to me 
Numbed by the swiftness, but would be — 
That still— clear knowledge certainly. 



" Night lapsed. At dawn the sea was there 

And the sea-wind : afar 
The ravening surge was hoarse and loud 
And underneath the dim dawn-cloud 
Each stalking wave shook like a shroud* 

" From my drawn litter I looked out 

Unto the swarthy sea, 
And knew. That voice, which late had cross'd 
Mine ears, seemed with the foam uptoss'd : 
I knew that Urscelyn was lost. 

^ Then I spake all : I turned on one 

And on the other, and spake : 
' My curse laughed in me to behold 
Their eyes : I sat up, stricken cold, 
Mad of my voice till all was told. 

" Oh I of my brothers, Hugues was mute^ 

And Gilles was wild and loud, 
And Raoul strained abroad his face. 
As if his gnashing wrath could trace 
Even there the prey that it must chase. 

"And round me murmured all our train. 

Hoarse as the hoarse-tongued sea \ 
Till Hugues from silence louring woke. 
And cried : * What ails the foolish folk ? 
Know ye not frenzy's lightning-stroke ? * 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE, 57 

'' But my stem father came to them 
And quelled them with his look, 
Silent and deadly pale. Anon 
I knew that we were hastening on, 
My litter closed and the light gone. 

'' And I remember all that day 

The barren bitter wind 
Without, and the sea's moaning ther^ 
That I first moaned with unaware, 
And when I knew, shook down my hair. 

*' Few followed us or faced our flight : 

Once only I could hear, 
Far in the front, loud scornful words, 
And cries I knew of hostile lords, 
And crash of spears and grind of swords. 

** It was soon ended. On that day 

Before the light had changed 
We reached our refuge ; miles of rock 
Bulwarked for war ; whose strength might mock 
Sky, sea, or man, to storm or shock. 

" Listless and feebly conscious, I 

Lay far within the night 
Awake. The many pains incurred 
That day, — the whole, said, seen or heard,— 
Stayed by in me as things deferred. 

**Not long. At dawn I slept In dreams 

AU was passed through afresh 
From end to end. As the mom heaved 
Towards noon, I, waking sore aggrieved, 
That I might die, cursed God, and lived. 



Digitized 



by Google 



S8 THE BRIBERS PRELUDE. 

*' Many days went, and I saw none 

Except my women. They 
Calmed their wan faces, loving me ; 
And when they wept, lest I should see^ 
Would chaunt a desolate melody. 



" Panic unthreatened shook my blood 

Each sunset, all the slow 
Subsiding of the turbid light 
I would rise, sister, as I might, 
And bathe my forehead through the night 

" To elude madness. The stark wall 
Made chill the mirk : and when 
We oped our curtains, to resume 
Sun- sickness after long sick gloom. 
The withering sea-wind walked the room. 

"Through the gaunt windows the great gales 

Bore in the tattered clumps 
Of waif-weed and the tamarisk-boughs ; 
And sea-mews, 'mid the storm's carouse. 
Were flung, wild-clamouring, in the house. 

** My hounds I had not; and my hawk, 

Which they had saved for me. 
Wanting the sun and rain to beat 
His wings, soon lay with gathered feet ; 
And my flowers faded, lacking heat 

" Such still were griefs : for grief was still 

A separate sense, untouched 
Of that despair which had become 
My life. Great anguish could benumb 
My soul, — my heart was quarrelsome. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 59 

"Time crept Upon a day at length 

My kinsfolk sat with me : 
That which they asked was bare and plain : 
I answered : the whole bitter strain 
Was again said, and heard again. 

"Rerce Raoul snatched his sword, and turned 

The point against my breast 
I bared it, smiling : 'To the heart 
Strike home,' I said ; ' another dart 
Wreaks hourly there a deadlier smart' 

" Twas then my sire struck down the sword, 

And said with shaken lips : 
' She from whom all of you receive 
Your life, so smiled ; and I forgive.* 
Thus, for my mother's sake, I live. 

'' But I, a mother even as she. 

Turned shuddering to the wall : '. 
For I said : ' Great God I and what would I do. 
When to the sword, with the thing I knew, 
I. offered not one life but two 1 ' 



'' Then I fell back from them, and lay 

Outwearied. My tired sense 
Soon filmed and settled, and like stone 
I slept ; till something made me moan, 
And I woke up at night alone. 

" I woke at midnight, cold and dazed ; 

Because I found myself 
Seated upright, with bosom bare. 
Upon my bed, combing my hair. 
Ready to go, I knew not where. 



Digitized 



by Google 



6o THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

" It dawned light day, — the last of those 

Long months of longing days. 
That noon, the change was wrought on me 
In somewise, — nought to hear or see, — 
Only a trance and agony." 



The bride's voice failed her, from no will 

To pause. The bridesmaid leaned. 
And where the window-panes were white. 
Looked for the day : she knew not quite 
If there were either day or night 

It seemed to Alojrse that the whole 

Day's weight lay back on her 
Like lead. The hours that did remain 
Beat their dry wings upon her brain 
Once in mid-flight, and passed again. 

There hung a cage of burnt perfumes 

In the recess : but these, 
For some hours, weak against the sun. 
Had simmered in white ash. From One 
The second quarter was begum 

They had not heard the stroke. The air, 

Though altered with no wind, 
Breathed now by pauses, so to say : 
Each breath was time that went away,^ 
Each pause a minute of the day. 

r the almonry, the almoner, 

Hard by, had just dispensed 
Church-dole and march-dole. High and wide 
Now rose the shout of thanks, which cried 
On God that He should bless the bride. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 6i 

Its echo thrilled within their feet, 

And in the furthest rooms 
Was heard, where maidens flushed and gay 
Wove with stooped necks the wreaths alway 
Fair for the vii^n's marriage-day. 

The mother leaned along, in thought 

After her child ; till tears, 
Bitter, not like a wedded girl's. 
Fell down her breast along her curls, 
And ran in the close work of pearls. 

The speech ached at her heart. She said : 

" Sweet Mary, do thou plead 
This hour with thy most blessed Son 
To let these shameful words atone, 
That I may die when I have done." 

The thought ached at her soul. Yet now : — 

"Itself—that life" (she said,) 
'' Out of my weary life — when sense 
Unclosed, was gone. What evil men's 
Most evil hands had borne it thence 



*' I knew, and cursed them. Still in sleep 

I have my child ; and pray 
To know if it indeed appear 
As in my dream's perpetual sphere. 
That I— Kleath reached — may seek it there. 

''Sleeping, I wept; though until dark 

A fever dried mine eyes 
Kept open ; save when a tear might 
Be forced from the mere ache of sight 
And I nursed hatred day and night. 



Digitized 



by Google 



62 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE, 

^' Aye, and I sought revenge by spells ; 

And vainly many a time 
Have laid my face into the lap 
Of a wise woman, and heard clap 
Her thunder, the fiend's juggling trap, 

" At length I feared to curse them, lest 

From evil lips the curse 
Should be a blessing ; and would sit 
Rocking myself and stifling it 
With babbled jarg<m of no wit. 

'' But this was not at first : the days 

And weeks made frenzied months 
Before this came. My curses, pil'd 
Then with each hour unreconcil'd, 
Still wait for those who took my child." 

She stopped, grown fainter. "Amelotte, 

Surely," she said, " this sun 
Sheds judgment-fire from the fierce south ; 
It does not let me breathe : the drouth 
Is like sand spread within my mouth." 

The bridesmaid rose. F the outer glare 
Gleamed her pale cheeks, and eyes 
Sore troubled ; and aweary weigh'd 
Her brows just lifted out of shade ; 
And the light jarred within her head. 

'Mid flowers fair-heaped there stood a bowl 

With water. She therein 
Through eddying bubbles slid a cup. 
And ofiered it, being risen up. 
Close to her sister's mouth, to sup. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 63 

The freshness dwelt upon her sense, 

Yet did not the bride drink ; 
But she dipped in her hand anon 
And cooled her temples ; and all wan 
With lids that held their ache, went on. 

** Through those dark watches of my woe, 

Time, an ill plant, had waxed 
Apace. That year was finished. Dumb 
And blind, life's wheel with earth's had come 
Whirled round : and we might seek our home. 

' Our wealth was rendered back, with wealth 

Snatched from our foes. The house 
Had more than its old strength and feme : 
But still 'neath the fair outward claim 
/ rankled, — a fierce core of shame. 

" It chilled me from their eyes and lips 

Upon a night of those 
First days of triumph, as I gazed 
Listless and sick, or scarcely raised 
My face to mark the sports they praised. 

*^ The endless changes of the dance 

Bewildered me : the tones 
Of lute and cithern struggled tow'rds 
Some sense ; and still in the last chords 
The music seemed to sing wild words. 

'' My shame possessed me in the light 

And pageant, till I swooned. 
But from that hour I put my shame 
From me, and cast it over them 
By God's command and in God's name 



Digitized 



by Google 



64 THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE. 

" For my child's bitter sake. O thou 

Once felt against my heart 
With longing of the eyes, — a pain 
Since to my heart for ever, — tiien 
Beheld not, and not felt again 1 " 

She scarcely paused, continuing :— 

" That year drooped weak in March ; 
And April, finding the streams dry, 
Choked, with no rain, in dust : the sky 
Shall not be fainter this July, 

•' Men sickened ; beasts lay without strength ; 

The year died in the land. 
But I, already desolate. 
Said merely, sitting down to wait, — 
' The seasons change and Time wears late.' 

" For I had my hard secret told, 

In secret, to a priest ; 
With him I communed ; and he said 
The world's soul, for its sins, was sped, 
And the sun's courses number^. 



" The year slid like a corpse afloat t 

None trafficked, — ^who had bread 
Did eat. That year our legions, come 
Thinned from the place of war, at home 
Found busier death, more burdensome. 

'' Tidings and rumours came with them, 

The first for months. The chiefs 
Sat daily at our board, and in 
Their speech were names of friend and kin \ 
One day they spoke of Urscelyn, 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BRIDE'S PRELUDE, 65 

" The words were light, among the rest : 

Quick glance my brothers sent 
To sift the speech ; and I, struck through, 
Sat sick and giddy in full view : 
Yet did none gaze, so many knew. 

" Because in the beginning, much 

Had caught abroad, through them 
That heard my clamour on the coast : 
But two were hanged ; and then the most 
Held silence wisdom, as thou knoVst 

" That year the convent yielded thee 

Back to our home ; and thou 
Then knew'st not how I shuddered cold 
To kiss thee, seeming to enfold 
To my changed heart myself of old. 

" Then there was showing thee the house, 

So many rooms and doors ; 
Thinking the while how thou wouldst start 
If once I flung the doors apart 
Of one dull chamber in my heart 

" And yet I longed to open it ; 

And often in that year 
Of plague and want, when side by side 
WeVe knelt to pray with them that died, 
My prayer was, ' Show her what I hide 1 ' " 



End of Part I. 



Digitized 



by Google 



C6 



SISTER HELEN. 

** Why did you melt your waxen man,' 
Sister Helen ? 

To-day is the third since you began." 

"The time was long, yet the time ran, 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Maty Mother^ 

Three days to-day, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" But if you have done your work aright, 
Sister Helen, 

You'll let me play, for you said I might." 

" Be very still in your play to-night, 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Maty Mother, 

Third night, to-night, between Hell and Heaven /) 

"You said it must melt ere vesper-bell, 
Sister Helen ; 
If now it be molten, all is welL" 
" Even so, — ^nay, peace I you cannot tell. 
Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
O what is this, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

** Oh the waxen knave was plump to-day, 
Sister Helen ; 

How like dead folk he has dropped away I " 

" Nay now, of the dead what can you say. 
Little brother?" 
(O Mother, Maty Mother, 

What o/the dead, between Hell and Heaven ?) 



Digitized 



by Google 



SISTER HELEN. 67 

" See, see, the sunken pile of wood, ' 
Sister Helen, 

Shines through the thinned wax red as blood I " 

" Nay now, when looked you yet on blood. 
Little brother?" 
(O Mother^ Mary Mother^ 

How pah she is, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" Now close your eyes, for they're sick and sore. 

Sister Helen, 
And FU play without the gallery door." 
*' Aye, let me rest, — I'll lie on the floor, 
Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
What rest to-night, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

" Here high up in the balcony. 

Sister Helen, 
The moon flies face to face with me." 
** Aye, look and say whatever you see. 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
What sight to-night, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

'* Outside it's merry in the wind's wake. 
Sister Helen ; 

In the shaken trees the chill stars shake." 

** Hush, heard you a horse-tread as you spake, 
Little brother?" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

What sound to-night, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

" I hear a horse-tread, and I see. 

Sister Helen, 

Three horsemen that ride terribly." 

*' Little brother, whence come the three. 

Little brother ? " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Whence should they come, between Hell and Heaven ?) 



Digitized 



by Google 



68 SISTER HELEN, 

" They come by the hill-verge from Boyne Bar, 
Sister Helen, 

And one draws nigh, but two are afar." 

'* Look, look, do you know them who they are. 
Little brother?" 
(O Mother f Mary Mother ^ 

Who should they be^ between Hell and Heaven ?) 

" Oh, it's Keith of Eastholm rides so fast, 
Sister Helen, 

For I know the white mane on the blast." 

" The hour has come, has come at last, 

Little brother ! " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Her hour at last, between Hell and Heaven I) 

" He has made a sign and called Halloo ! 

Sister Helen, 
And he says that he would speak with you." 
" Oh tell him I fear the frozen dew. 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
Why laughs she thus, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

*' The wind is loud, but I hear him cry. 
Sister Helen, 

That Keith of Ewem's like to die." 

'' And he and thou, and thou and I, 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

And they and we, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" Three days ago, on his marriage-morn. 
Sister Helen, 

He sickened, and lies since then forlorn." 

" For bridegroom's side is the bride a thorn, 
Little brother?" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother^ 

Cold briial cheer, between Hell and Heaven !) 



Digitized 



by Google 



SISTER HELEN. 69 

** Three days and nights he has lain abed, 

Sister Helen, 
And he prays in torment to be dead." 
" The thing may chance, if he have prayed, 
Little brother I " 
(O Mother y Mary Mother ^ 
If hi have prayed, between Hell and Heaven /) 

** But he has not ceased to cry to-day. 
Sister Helen, 

That you should take your curse away." 

" My prayer was heard> — he need but pray, 
Little brother \ " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Shall God not hear, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

" But he says, till you take back your ban. 

Sister Helen, 
His soul would pass, yet never can." 
'' Nay then, shall I slay a living man. 

Little brother ? " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
A living soul, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" But he calls for ever on your name. 

Sister Helen, 

And says that he melts before a flame." 

" My heart for his pleasure fared the same. 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Maty Mother, 

Fire at the heart, between Hell and Heaven /) 

^ Here's Keith of Westholm riding fast. 

Sister Helen, 
For I know the white plume on the blast" 
" The hour, the sweet hour I forecast, 

Little brother I" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
Is the hour sweet, between Hell and Heaven ?) 



Digitized 



by Google 



70 SISTER HELEN. 

" He stops to speak, and he stills his horse, 

Sister Helen; 

But his words are drowned in the wind's course." 

*' Nay hear, nay hear, you must hear perforce, 

Little brother I" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

What word now heard, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

" Oh he says that Keith of Ewem's cry, 

Sister Helen, 

Is ever to see you ere he die." 

" In all that his soul sees, there am I, 

Little brother I " 
(O Mother, Maty Mother, 

The souTs one sight, between Hell and Heaven !) 

" He sends a ring and a broken coin, 

Sister Helen, 

And bids you mind the banks of Boyne." 

" What else he broke will he ever join, 

Little brother?" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

No, never joined, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" He yields you these and craves full fain. 

Sister Helen, 
You pardon him in his mortal pain." 
" What else he took will he give again, 

Little brother?" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
Not twice to give, between Hell and Heaven !) 

" He calls your name in an agony. 

Sister Helen, 
That even dead Love must weep to see." 
" Hate, bom of Love, is blind as he, 

Little brother!" 
{O Mother, Maty Mother, 
Love turned to hate, between Hell and Heaven !) 



Digitized 



by Google 



SISTER HELEN. 71 

*' Oh if s Keith of Keith now that rides fast, 

Sister Helen, 

For I know the white hair on the blast." 

" The short short hour will soon be past, 

Little brother!" 
(O Mother^ Mary Mother^ 

Will soon be past, between Hell and Heaven /) 

''He looks at me and he tries to speak, 

Sister Helen, 

But oh I his voice is sad and weak I " 

" What here should the mighty Baron seek, 

Little brother?" 
(O Mot her f Mary Mother^ 

Is this the end, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

^ Oh his son still cries, if you forgive, 

Sister Helen, 

The body dies but the soul shall live." 

" Fire shall forgive me as I forgive. 

Little brother!" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

As she forgives, between Hell and Heaven I ) 

" Oh he prays you, as his heart would rive. 

Sister Helen, 

To save his dear son's soul alive." 

" Fire cannot slay it, it shall thrive. 

Little brother!" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Alas, alas, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" He cries to you, kneeling in the road. 

Sister Helen, 

To go with him for the love of God ! " 

" The way is long to his son's abode, 

Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

The way is long, between Hell and Heaven /) 



Digitized 



by Google 



72 SISTER HELEN. 

*\K lady's here, by a dark steed brought, 

Sister Helen, 
So darkly clad, I saw her not" 
" See her now or never see aught, 

Little brother!" 
(O Mother, Maty Mother, 
What more to see, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

** Her hood falls back, and the moon shines fair, 
Sister Helen, 

On the Lady of Ewem's golden hair." 

*' Blest hour of my power and her despair. 
Little brother I" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Hour blest and banned, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" Pale, pale her cheeks, that in pride did glow, 
Sister Helen, 

'Neath the bridal-wreath three days ago." 

" One mom for pride and three days for woe. 
Little brother I " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Three days, three nights, between Hell and Heaven !) 

"Her clasped hands stretch from her bending head. 

Sister Helen ; 
"With the loud wind's wail her sobs are wed." 
" What wedding-strains hath her bridal-bed. 
Little brother ? " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
What strain but death's, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" She may not speak, she sinks in a swoon, 

Sister Helen, — 
She lifts her lips and gasps on the moon." 
" Oh I might I but hear her soul's blithe tune. 
Little brother I " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
Her wo^s dumb cry, between Hell and Heaven f) 



Digitized 



by Google 



SISTER HELEN. 73 

" They've caught her to Westholm's saddle-bow, 
Sister Helen, 

And her moonlit hair gleams white in its flow." 

" Let it turn whiter than winter snow. 

Little brother 1 " 
(O Mother y Mary Mother^ 

Woe-withered goldf betweeft Hell and Heaven /) 

** O Sister Helen, you heard the bell, "" 

Sister Helen f \ 
More loud than the vesper-chime it fell.'* 
" No vesper-chime, but a dying knell, 

Little brother 1" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother^ 
His dying knell, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" Alas I but I fear the heavy sound. 

Sister Helen ; 

Is it in the sky or in the ground ? " 

'* Say, have they turned their horses round. 
Little brother?" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

What would she more, between Hell and Heaven ?) 

** They have raised the old man from his knee. 
Sister Helen, 

And they ride in silence hastily." 

'* More fast the naked soul doth flee. 

Little brother ! " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

The naked soul, between Hell and Heaven I) 

" Flank to flank are the three steeds gone, 
Sister Helen, 

But the lad3r's dark steed goes alone." 

" And lonely her bridegroom's soul hath flown, 
Little brother." 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

The lonely ghost, between Hell and Heaven I) 



Digitized 



by Google 



74 SISTER HELEN. 

** Oh the wind is sad in the iron chill, 

Sister Helen, 
And weary sad they look by the hilL" 
'< But he and I are sadder still. 

Little brother!" 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 
Most sad of all, between Hell and Heaven /) 

" See, see, the wax has dropped from its place. 
Sister Helen, 

And the flames are winning up apace I '' 

" Yet here they bum but for a space. 

Little brother 1 " 
(O Mother, Mary Mother, 

Here for a space, between Hell and Heaven /) 

*' Ah ! what white thing at the door has cross'd. 

Sister Helen ? 
Ah 1 what is this that sighs in the frost ? " 
"A soul that's lost as mine is lost. 

Little brother 1" 
(O Mother, Maty Mother, 
Lost, lost, all lost, between Hell and Heaven I) 



Digitized 



by Google 



75 



THE STAFF AND SCRIP. 

" Who rules these lands ? " the Pilgrim said. 

" Stranger, Queen Blanchelys." 
" And who has thus harried them ? ** he said. 

" It was Duke Luke did this : 
God's ban be his I " 

The Pilgrim said : " Where is your house ? 

rU rest there, with your will." 
" You've but to climb these blackened boughs 

And you'll see it over the hill, 
For it bums still." 

" Which road, to seek your Queen ? " said he. 

" Nay, nay, but with some wound 
You'll fly back hither, it may be. 

And by your blood i' the ground 
My place be found." 

** Friend, stay in peace. God keep your head, 

And mine, where I will go ; 
For He is here and there," he said. 

He passed the hill-side, slow. 
And stood below. 

The Queen sat idle by her loom : 

She heard the arras stir, 
And looked up sadly : through the room 

The sweetness sickened her 
Of musk and myrrh. 



Digitized 



by Google 



J6 THE STAFF AND SCRIP. 

Her women, standing two and two, 
In silence combed the fleece. 

The Pilgrim said, " Peace be with you, 
Lady ; " and bent his knees. 
She answered, " Peace." 



Her eyes were like the wave within ; 

Like water-reeds the poise 
Of her soft body, dainty thin ; 

And like the water's noise 
Her plaintive voice. 

For him, the stream had never well'd 

In desert tracks malign 
So sweet ; nor had he ever felt 

So faint in the smishine 
Of Palestine. 



Right so, he knew that he saw weep 
Each night through every dream 

The Queen's own face, confused in sleep 
With visages supreme 
Not known to him. 

•' Lady," he said, " your lands lie burnt 

And waste : to meet your foe 
All fear : this I have seen and learnt 

Say that it shall be so. 
And I wiU go." 

She gazed at him. " Your cause is just. 

For I have heard the same," 
He said : " God's strength shall be my trust. 

Fall it to good or grame, 
Tis in His name." 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STAFF AND SCRIP. 77 

''Sir, you are thanked My cause is dead. 

Why should you toil to break 
A grave, and fall therein ? " she said. 

He did not pause but spake * 
" For my vow's sake." 

'' Can such vows be, Sir — to God*s ear, 

Not to God's will ? " " My vow 
Remains : God heard me there as here," 

He said with reverent brow, 
" Both then and now." 



They gazed together, he and she. 

The minute while he spoke ; 
And when he ceased, she suddenly 

Looked rouqd upon her folk 
As though she woke. 

** Fight, Sir," she said ; " my prayers in pain 

Shall be your fellowship." 
He whispered one among her train, — 

"To-morrow bid her keep 
This staff and scrip." 

She sent him a sharp sword, whose belt 

About his body there 
As sweet as her own arms he felt 

He kissed its blade, all bare, 
Instead of her. 



She sent him a green banner wrought 

With one white lily stem. 
To bind his lance with when he fought 

He writ upon the same 
And kissed her name. 



Digitized 



by Google 



78 THE STAFF AND SCRIP. 

She sent him a white shield, whereon 
She bade that he should trace 

His will. He blent fair hues that shone, 
And in a golden space 
He kissed her face. 



Born of the day that died, that eve 
Now dying sank to rest ; 

As he, in likewise taking leave, 
Once with a heaving breast 
Looked to the west 



And there the sunset skies unseal'd, 
Like lands he never knew, 

Beyond to-morrow's battle-field 
Lay open out of view 
To ride into. 



Next day till dark the women pray'd : 

Nor any might know there 
How the fight went : the Queen has bade 

That there do come to her 
No messenger. 

The Queen is pale, her maidens ail ; 

And to the organ-tones 
They sing but faintly, who sang well 

The matin-orisons. 

The lauds and nonea. 



Lo, Father, is thine ear inclin'd. 
And hath thine angel pass'd ? 

For these thy watchers now are blind 
With vigil, and at last 
Dizzy with &st« 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STAFF AND SCRIP. 79 

Weak now to them the voice o' the priest 

As any trance affords ; 
And when each anthem failed and ccas'd. 

It seemed that the last chords 
Still sang the words. 



" Oh what is the light that shines so red ? 

Tis long since the sun set ; " 
Quoth the youngest to the eldest maid : 

" Twas dim but now, and yet 
The light is great" 

Quoth the other : " Tis our sight is dazed 

That we see flame i' the air." 
But the Queen held her brows and gazed, 

And said, " It is the glare 
Of torches there." 



" Oh what are the sounds that rise and spread ? 

All day it was so still ; " 
Quoth the youngest to the eldest maid : 

*« Unto the furthest hill 
The air they fiU." 

Quoth the other : " Tis our sense is blurr'd 

With all the chants gone by." 
But the Queen held her breath and heard, 

And said, *' It is the cry 
Of Victory." 

The first of all the rout was sound, 

The next were dust and flame, 
And then the horses shook the ground : 

And in the thick of them 
A still band came. 



Digitized 



by Google 



So THE STAFF AND SCRIP, 

" Oh what do ye bring out of the fight, 
Thus hid beneath these boughs ? " 

" Thy conquering guest returns to-night, 
And yet shall not carouse, 
Queen, in thy house." 

*' Uncover ye his face," she said. 

" O changed in little space ! " 
She cried, " O pale that was so red I 

O God, O God of grace I 
Cover his face." 



His sword was broken in his hand 
Where he had kissed the blade. 

" O soft steel that could not withstand 1 
O my hard heart unstayed, 
That prayed and prayed ! " 

His bloodied banner crossed his mouth 
Where he had kissed her name. 

*' O east, and west, and north, and south, 
Fair flew my web, for shame, 
To guide Death's aim ! " 

The tints were shredded from his shield 
Where he had kissed her face. 

" Oh, of all gifts that I could yield, 
Death only keeps its place, 
My gift and grace I " 

Then stepped a damsel to her side. 
And spoke, and needs must weep : 

" For his sake, lady, if he died, 
He prayed of thee to keep 
This stafif and scrip." 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STAFF AND SCRIP. 8l 

That night they hung above her bed, 

Till morning wet with tears. 
Year after year above her head 

Her bed his token wears, 
Five years, ten years. 

That' night the passion of her grief 

Shook them as there they hung. 
Each year the wind that shed the leaf 

Shook them and in its tongue 
A message flung. 

And once she woke with a clear mind 

That letters writ to calm 
Her soul lay in the scrip ; to find 

Only a torpid balm 
And dust of palnu 

They shook fer oflf with palace sport 
When joust and dance were rife; 

And the hunt shook them from the court ; 
For hers, in peace or strife. 
Was a Queen's life. 

A Queen's death now : as now they shake 

To gusts in chapel dim, — 
Hung where she sleeps, not seen to wake, 

(Carved lovely white and slim). 
With them by him. 

Stand up to-day, still armed, with her. 

Good knight, before His brow 
Who then as now was here and there. 

Who had in mind thy vow 
Then even as now. 

6 



Digitized 



by Google 



83 THE STAFF AND SCRIP, 

The lists are set in Heaven to-day, 
The bright pavilions shine ; 

Fair hangs thy shield, and none gainsay 
The trumpets sound in sign 
That she is thine. 

Not tithed with days' and years' decease 
He pays thy wage He owed. 

But with imperishable peace 
Here in His own abode. 
Thy jealous God. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Si 



JENNY. 

Vengeance of Jennys case! Fie on her! Never name 
her, child! — (Mrs. Quickly.) 

Lazy laughing languid Jenny, 
Fond of a kiss and fond of a guinea. 
Whose head upon my knee to-night 
Rests for a while, as if grown light 
With all our dances and the sound 
To which the wild tunes spun you round • 
Fair Jenny jnin^ the thoughtless queen 
Of kisses which the bhjsh between 
Could hardly make much daintier ; 
Whose eyes are as blue skies, whose hair 
Is countless gold incomparable : 
Fresh flower, scarce touched with signs that tell 
Of Love's exuberant hotbed : — Nay, 
Poor flower left torn since yesterday 
Until to-morrow leave you bare ; 
jToor handful of bright spring- water 
vFlung in the whirlpool's shrieking face ; 
^ Poor shameful Jenny, full of grac^ 
Thus with your head upon my knee ; — 
Whose person or whose purse may be 
The lodestar of your reverie ? 

This room of yours, my Jenny, looks 
A change from ijiiae so full of books, ' 
Whose serried ranks lioIdlastTTorsooth, 
So many captive hours of youth, — 



Digitized 



by Google 



84 JENNY. 

The hours they thieve from day and night 
To make one's cherished work come right, 
And leave it wrong for all their theft, 
Even as to-night my work was left : 
Until I vowed that since my brain 
And eyes of dancing seemed so fain, 
My feet should have some dancing too : — 
And thus it was I met with you. 
Well^ I suppose 'twas hard to part. 
For here I am. And now, sweetheart^ 
You seem too tired to get to bed. 

It was a careless life I led 
When rooms like this were scarce so strange 
Not long ago. What breeds the change — 
The many aims or the few years ? 
^ f / Because to-night it all appears 

Something I do not know again. 
"> 
\ The cloud's not danced out of my brain, — 

/ The cloud that made it turn and swim 

While hour by hour th e books gr ew dim. 
Why, Jenny, as I watch you there, — 
; ' For all your wealth of loosened hair, 

/ , N Your silk ungirdled and unlac'd 

^ ^ And warm sweets open to the waist, 

^ / , ' All golden in the lamplight's gleam, — 

^ .^ You know not what a bodc^you seem^ 

_HaJfc*»ad by lightning in a dream 1 
"How should you know, my Jenny ? Nay, 
And I should be ashamed to say: — 
Poor beauty, so well worth a kiss ! 
But while my thought runs on like this 
With wasteful whims more than enough, 
I wonder what you're thinking of. 

If of myself you think at all. 
What is the thought ?— conjectural 



\ , 



Digitized 



by Google 



fENNY. 85 



On sorry matters best unsolved ?— 

Or inly is each grace revolved 

To fit me with a lure ? — or (sad 

To think 1) perhaps you're merely glad 

That I'm not drunk or ruffianly , ^' 

And let you rest upon my knee,- -^^ 



A>^ 



For sometimes, were the truth confessed, 

You're thankful for a little rest, x.ov^^ 

Glad from the crush to rest within, 
From the heart-sickness and the din 
Where envy's voice at virtue's pitch 
Mocks you because your gown is rich ; 
And from the pale girl's dumb rebuke, 
Whose ill-clad grace and toil-worn look 
Proclaim the strength that keeps her weak. 
And other nights than yours bespeak ; 
And from the wise unchildish elf, 
To schoolmate lesser than himself 
Pointing you out, what tlUBg you are : — 
Yes, from the daily jeer and jar, 
From shame and shame's outbraving too, 
Is rest not sometimes sweet to you?^--^ - 
T5ut most from the hatefulness of man, 
Who spares not to end what he began, 
Whose acts are ill and his speech ill, 
Who, having used you at his will, 
Thrusts you aside, as when I dine 
I serve the dishes and the wine. 

Well, handsome Jenny mine, sit up : 
I've filled our glasses, let us sup. 
And do not let me think of you, 
Lest shame of yours suffice for two. 
What, still so tired ? Well, well then, keep 
Your head there, so you do not sleep ; 
But that the weariness may pass 
And leave you merry, take this glass. 



Digitized 



by Google 



'86 ^ JENNY. 

Ah I lazy lilylhand, more bless'd 
If ne'er in rinigs it had been dress'd 
Nor ever by a glove concealed ! 

Behold the lilies of the field, 
Tliey toil notjf neither do they spin ; 
(So doth the ancient text begin, — 
Not of such rest as one of these 
Can share.) Another rest and ease 
Along each summer-sated path 
From its new lord the garden hath, 
Than that whose spring in blessings ran 
Which praised the bounteous husbandman, 
Ere yet, in days of hankering breath, 
The lilies sickened unto death. 

What, Jenny, are your lilies dead ? 
Aye, and the snow-white leaves are spread 
Like winter on the garden-bed. 
But you had roses left in May, — 
^ They were not gone too. Jenny, nay, 
^ , • ^ But must your roses die, and those 

Their purfled buds that should unclose? 
Even so ; the leaves are curled apart, 
/ SiiU red as from the broken heart, 
And here's the naked stem of thorns. 

Nay, nay,f mere words. Here nothing warns 
As yet of wint^. Sicknesa here 
Or want alone could waken fear,— 
Nothing but passion wrings a tear. 
Except when there may rise unsoug'at 
Haply at times a passing thought 
Of the old days which seem to be 
Much older than any history 
That is written in any book ; 
When she would lie in fields and look 
Along the ground through the blown grass. 
And wonder where the city was. 



Digitized 



by Google 



JENNY, 87 

Far out of sight, whose broil and bale 
They told her then for a child's tale, 

Jenny, you know the city now. 
A child can tell the tale there, how 
Some things which are not yet enroll'd 
In market-lists are bought and sold 
Even till the early Sunday light, 
When Saturday night is market-night 
Everywhere, be it dry or wet. 
And market-night in the Haymarket. 
Our learned London children know. 
Poor Jenn3% all your pride and woe ; 
Have seen your lifted silken skirt 
Advertise dainties through the dirt j 
Have seen your coach-wheels splash rebuke 
On virtue ; and have learned your look 
When, wealth and health slipped past, you stare 
Along the streets alone, and there, 
Round the long park, across the bridge. 
The cold lamps at the pavement's edge 
Wind on together and apart, 
A fiery serpent for your heart. / 

Let the thoughts pass, an empty cloud I ^ ^^ 

Suppose I were to think aloud, — ,<- ^ '.'' ' 

What if to her all this were said ? /^ '' . ^. rJ 
Why, as avolum e seldom read /^ ^ '^ ^ 

Being openeHTiaSWay shiits^again, ^'^ ,..,-'* , < 
So might the pagggj^f Jier hiain ,.' \ ' ' ^ 

Be p arted at j iich wnrdg, and thence J\^^ ' . -^-^ 
Clo^^cFupon the dusty. sense. .^ - - 

For is there hue or shape defin'd ^ 

In Jenny's desecrated mind. 
Where all contagious currents meet, 
A Leilie of the middle street ? 
Nay, it reflects not any face, 
Nor sound is in its sluggish pace, 



Digitized 



by Google 



•N^ 



88 JENI^Y. 

But as they coil those eddies clot, 
And night and day remember not 

Why, Jenny, you're asleep at last I — 
Asleep, poor Jenny, hard and fast, — 
So young and soft and tired ; so fair, 
With chin thus nestled in your hair, r 

Mouth quiet, eyelids almost blue ^ ' c 

As if some sky of dreams shone through \ 'i^ 

Just as another woman sleeps I ^ 

Enough to throw one's thoughts in heaps 
^ Of doubt and horror, — what to say 

P Or think, — this awful secret sway, 

TTie^pptteii-pQwer over the clay I 
__ Qf jjjg same lump (it has been said) 

For honour and dishonour made. 

Two sister vessels. Here is one. 

My cousin Nell is fond of fun,. 
And fond of dress, and change, and praise, 
80 mere a woman in her ways : 
And if her sweet eyes rich in youth 
Are like her lips that tell the truth,. 
My cousin Nell is fond of love.. 
And she's the girl Fm proudest o£. 
Who does not prize her, guard, her well ? 
The love of change, in cousin Nell, 
Shall find the best and hold it dear : 
^The unconquered mirth turn quieter 
Not through her own, through others' woe : 
The conscious pride of beauty glow 
Beside another's pride in her, 
One little part of all they share. 
For Love himself shall ripen these 
In a kind soil to just increase 
Through years of fertilizing peace. 



Digitized 



by Google 



fENNY. 89 

Of the same lump (as it is said) 
For honour and dishonour made, 
Two sister vessels. Here is one. 

It makes a goblin of the sun. 

So pure, — so faU'n \ How dare to think 
Of the first common kindred link ? 
Yet, Jenny, till the world shall bum 
It seems that all things take their turn ; 
And who shall say but this fair tree 
May need, in changes that may be. 
Your children's children's charity ? 
Scorned then, no doubt, as you are scom'd I 
Shall no man hold his pride forewam'd 
Till in the end, the Day of Days, 
At Judgment, one of his own race, 
As frail and lost as you, shall rise, — 
His daughter, with his mother's eyes ? 

How Jenny's clock ticks on the shelf t 
Might not the dial scorn itself 
That has such hours to register ? 
Yet as to me, even so to her 
Are golden sun and silver moon, 
In daily largesse of earth's boon, 
G>unted for life-coins to one tune. 
And if, as blindfold fates are toss'd. 
Through some one man this life be lost, 
Shall soul not somehow pay for soul ? 

Fair shines the gilded aureole 
In which our highest painters place 
Some living woman's simple face. 
And the stilled features thus descried 
As Jenny's long throat droops aside, — 
The shadows where the cheeks are thin, 
And pure wide curve from ear to chin, — 



Digitized 



by Google 



90 JENNY. 



> . With Raffael's, Leonardo's hand * 






V^ /-"' To show them to men's souls, might stand, 
Whole ages long, the whole world through, 
For preachings of what God can do. 
'" ' > What has man done here? How atone, 

'^ yjT Great God, for this which man has done ? 

And for the body and soul which by 
Man's pitiless doom must now comply 
With lifelong hell, what lullaby 
Of sweet forgetful second birth 
Remains ? All dark. No sign on earth 
What measure of God's rest endows 
The many mansions of his house. 






}^ If but a woman's heart might see 

^ . ^ Such erring heart unerringly 

For once I But that can never be. 






^ 



Like a coscL^hut in a book. 
In which pure women may not look, 
For its base pagea.cldim control ^ 
To crush the flower within the soul ; 
Where through each dead rose-leaf that clings. 
Pale as transparent Psyche-wings, 
To the vile text, are traced such things 
As migKtmaTe lady's cheek indeed 
More than a living rose to read ; 
So nought save foolish foulness may 
Watch with hard eyes the sure decay ; 
And so the life-blood of this rose, 
Puddled with shameful knowledge, flows 
Through leaves no chaste hand may unclose : 
Yet still it keeps such faded show 
Of when 'twas gathered long ago. 
That the crushed petals' lovely grain, 
The sweetness of the sanguine stain, 
Seen of a woman's eyes, must make 
Her pitiful heart, so prone to ache, 



Digitized 



by Google 



fENNY. ^ 91 

Love roses better for its sake :— \\^ <^ *^ >v-w^jC 

Only that this can never be : — 
Even so unto her sex is she. 

Yet, Jenny, looking long at you, 
The woman almost fades from view. 
A cipher of man's changeless sum 
Of lust, past, present, and to come, 
Is left A riddle that one shrinks 
To challenge from the scornful sphinx. 

like a toad within a stone 
Seated while Time crumbles on ; 
Which sits there since the earth was curs'd 
For Man's transgression at the first ; 
Which, living through all centuries, 
Not once has seen the sun arise ; 
Whose life, to its cold circle charmed. 
The earth's whole summers have not warmed ; 
Which always — whitherso the stone 
Be flung — sits there, deaf, blind, alone ; — 
Aye, and shall not be driven out 
Till that which shuts him round about 
Break at the very Master's stroke, 
And the dust thereof vanish as smoke. 
And the seed of Man vanish as dust :— 
Even so within this world is Lust 

Come, come, what use in thoughts like this ? 
Poor little Jenny, good to kiss, — 
You'd not believe by what strange roads V'^"' ^ 

Thought travels, when your beauty goads "^^ • '.. ,^ *' * 

A man to-night to think of toads I 
Jenny, wake up ... . Why, there's the dawn! 

And there's an early waggon drawn 
To market, and some sheep that jog 
Bleating before a barking dog ; 
And the old streets come peering through 



Digitized 



by Google 



9a JENNY. 

Another night that London knew ; 
And all as ghostlike as the lamps. 

So on the wings of day decamps 
My last night's frolic Glooms begin 
To shiver off as lights creep in 
Past the gauze curtains half drawn-to, 
/ And the lamp's doubled shade grows blue, — 
Your lamp, my Jenny, kept alight, 
Like a wise virgin's, all one night I 
And in the alcove coolly spread 
Glimmers with dawn your empty bed ; 
And yonder your fair face I see 
Reflected lying on my knee. 
Where teems with first foreshadowings 
Your pier-glass scrawled with diamond rings : 
And on your bosom all night worn 
Yesterday's rose n ow droops forlorn. 
But dies not^et this summer mom. 

And now without, as if some word 
Had called upon them that they heard, 
The London sparrows far and nigh 
Clamour together suddenly ; 
And Jenny's cage-bird grown awake 
Here in their song his part must take, 
Because here too the day doth break. 

And somehow in myself the dawn 
Among stirred clouds and veils withdrawn 
Strikes greyly on her. Let her sleep. 
But will it wake her if I heap 
These cushions thus beneath her head 
Where my knee v»ras ? No,— there's your bed. 
My Jenny, while you dream. And there 
I lay among your goldeji hair 
Perhaps the subject of your dreams, 
These golden coins. 

For still one deems 



Digitized 



by Google 



JENNY. 93 

That Jenny's flattering sleep confers 

New magic on the magic purse, — v ^ ^ 

Grim web, how clogged with shrivelled flies I 

Between tiie threads fine fumes arise 

And shape their pictures in the brain. 

There roll no sti-eets in glare and rain, 

Nor flagrant man-swine whets his tusk ; 

But delicately sighs in musk 

The homage of the dim boudoir ; 

Or like a palpitating star 

Thrilled into song, the opera-night 

Breathes faint in the quick pulse of light ; 

Or at the carriage-window shine 

Rich wares for choice ; or, free to dine, 

Whirls through its hour of health (divine 

For her) the concourse of the Park. 

And though in the discounted dark 

Her functions there and here are one, 

Beneath the lamps and in the sun 

There reigns at least the acknowledged belle 

Ap parell ed lyyond paralle l. 

Ah Jenny, yes, we know your dreams. 

For even the Paphian Venus seems 
A goddess o'er the realms of love, 
When silver-shrined in shadowy grove : 
Aye, or let offerings nicely plac'd 
But hide Priapus to the waist. 
And whoso looks on him shall see 
An eligible deity. 

Why, Jenny, waking here along 
May help you to remember one. 
Though all the memory's long outworn 
Of many a double-pillowed mom. 
I think I see you when you wake, 
And rub your eyes for me^ and shake 



Digitized 



by Google 



94 ^^ /JJ^iVK 



¥^ 



My gold, in rising, from your hair, 
A Danae for a moment there. 

Jenny, my love rang true I for still 
Love at first sight is vague, until 
That tinkling makes him audible. 

And must I mock you to the last, 
Ashamed of my own shame, — aghast 
Because some thoughts not bom amiss 
Rose at a poor fair face like this ? 
Well, of such thoughts so much I know j 
In my life, as in hers, they show, 
By a far gleam which I may near, 
A dark path I can strive to clear. 

Only one kiss. Good-bye, my dear. 



Digitized 



by Google 



95 



THE STREAM'S SECRET. 

What thing unto mine ear 
Wouldst thou convey, — what secret thing, 
O wandering water ever whispering ? 
Surely thy speech shall be of her. 
Thou water, O thou whispering wanderer, 
What message dost thou bring ? 

Say, hath not Love leaned low 
This hour beside thy far well-head. 
And there through jealous hollowed fingers said 

The thing that most I long to know, — 
Murmuring with curls all dabbled in thy flow 
And washed lips rosy red ? 

He told it to thee there 
Where thy voice hath a louder tone ; 
But where it welters to this little moan 

^Hiswill decrees that I should hear. 
Now speak : for with the silence is no fear, 
And I am all alone. 



Shall Time not still endow 
One hour with life, and I and she 
Slake in one kiss the thirst of memory ? 

Say, stream ; lest Love should disavow 
Thy service, and the bird upon the bough 
Sing first to tellit me. 



Digitized 



by Google 



96 THE STREAM'S SECRET. 

What whisperest thou ? Nay, why 
Name the dead hours ? I mind them well : 
Their ghosts in many darkened doorways dwell 

With desolate eyes to know them by. 
The hour that must be bom ere it can die, — 
Of that I'd have thee tell. 



But hear, before thou speak I 
Withhold, I pray, the vain behest 
That while the maze hath still its bower for quest 

My burning heart should cease to seek. 
Be sure that Love ordained for soub more meek 
His roadside dells of rest 



Stream, when this silver thread 
In Qood-time is a torrent brown 
May any bulwark bind thy foaming crown ? 
Shall not the waters surge and spread 
And to the crannied boulders of their bed 
Still shoot the dead drift down ? 



Let no rebuke find place 
In speech of thine : or it shall prove 
That thou dost ill expound the words of Love, 

Even as thine eddy's rippling race 
Would blur the perfect image of hisjjftce. 
I will have none thereof. 



O learn and understand 
That 'gainst the wrongs himself did wreak 
Love sought her aid ; until her shadowy cheek 

And eyes beseeching gave command ; 
And compassed in \ssx close compassionate hand 
My heart must burn and speak. 



Digitized 



by Google 






THE STREAM'S SECRET. 97 

For then at last we spoke 
What eyes so oft had told to eyes 
Through that long-lingering silence whose half-sighs 

Alone the buried secret broke, 
Which with snatched hands and lips' reverberate stroke 
Then from the heart did rise. 



But she is far away 
Now ; nor the hours of night grown hoar 
Bring yet to me, long gazing from the door. 
The wind-stirred robe of roseate grey 
And rose-crown of the hour that leads the day 
When we shall meet once more. 



Dark as thy blinded wave 
When brimming midnight floods the glen,— 
Bright as the laughter of thy runnels when 

The dawn yields all the light they crave ; 
Even so these hours to wound and that to save 
Are sisters in Love's ken. 



Oh sweet her bending grace 
Then when I kneel beside her feet ; 
And sweet her eyes' o'erhanging heaven ; and sweet 

The gathering folds of her embrace ; 
And her fall'n hair at last shed round my face 
When breaths and tears shall meet 



Beneath her sheltering hair, 
In the warm silence near her breas^ 
Our kisses and our sobs shall sink to rest ; 

As in some still trance made aware 
That day and night have wrought to fulness there 
And Love has built our nest. 



Digitized 



by Google 



98 THE STREAM'S SECRET. 

And as in the dim grove, 
When the rains cease that hushed them long, 
'Mid glistening boughs the song-birds wake to song, — 

So from our hearts deep-shrined in love, 
While the leaves throb beneath, around, above^ 
The quivering notes shall throng. 



Tin tenderest words found vain 
Draw back to wonder mute and deep, 
And closed lips in closed arms a silence keep, 
t ^ Subdued by memory's circling strain, — 

V ' The wind-rapt sound that the wind brings again 

While all the willows weep. 



Then by her summoning art 
Shall Qiem^iy conjure back the sere 
Autumnal Springs, from many a dying year 

Bom dead ; and, bitter to the heart, 
The very ways where now we walk apart 
Who then shall cling so near. 



And with each thought new-grown, 
Some sweet caress or some sweet name 
Low-breathed shall let me know her thought the same; 

Making me rich with every tone 
And touch of the dear heaven so long unknown 
That filled my dreams with flame. 



Pity and love shall bum 
In her pressed cheek and cherishing hands ; 
And from the living spirit of love that stands 

Between her lips to soothe and yearn. 
Each separate breath shall clasp me round in turn 
And loose my spirit's bands. 



Digitized 



by Google 



7HE STREAMS SECRET. 99 

Oh passing sweet and dear, 
Then when the worshiped form and face 
Are felt at length in darkling close embrace ; 
Round which so oft the sun shone clear, 
With mocking light and pitiless atmosphere, 
In many an hour and place. 



Ah me ! with what proud growth 
Shall that hour's thirsting race be run ; 
While, for each several sweetness still begun 

Afresh, endures love's endless drouth : 
Sweet hands, sweet hair, sweet cheeks, sweet eyes, 
Each singly wooed and won. [sweet mouth, 



Yet most with the sweet soul " ~ ^ - .^ 
y' Shall love's espousals then be knit ; 
^' For very passion of peace shall breathe from it 
O'er tremulous wings that touch the goal. 
As on the unmeasured height of Love's control 
The lustral fires are lit 



Therefore, when breast and cheek 
Now part, from long embraces free, — 
Each on the other gazing shall but see 
A self that has no need to speak : 
All things unsought, yet nothing more to seek,- 
One love in unity. 



O water wandering p)ast,— 
Albeit to thee I speak this thing, 
O water, thou that wanderest whispering. 
Thou keep'st thy counsel to the last 
What spell upon thy bosom should Love cast^ 
His message thence to wring ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



100 TUE STREAM'S SECRET. 

Nay, must thou hear the tale 
Of the past days, — the heavy debt 
Of life that obdurate time withholds,— ^re yet 

To win thine ear these prayers prevail, 
And by thy voice Love's self with high All-hail 
Yield up the love-secret ? 



How should all this be told ?— 
All tlie sad sum of wayworn days ; — 
Heart's aoguish in the impenetrable maze ; 

And on the waste uncoloured wold 
The visible burthen of the sun grown cold 
And the moon's labouring gaze ? 



Alas I shall hope be nurs'd 
On life's all-succouring breast in vain, 
And made so perfect only to be slain ?' 

Or shall not rather the sweet thirst 
Even yet rejoice the heart with warmth dispersed 
And strength grown fair again ? 



Stands it not by the door — 
Love's Hour — till she and I shall meet ; 
With bodiless form and unapparent feet 

That cast no shadow yet before, 
Though round its head the dawn begins to pour 
The breath that makes day sweet ? 



Its eyes invisible 
Watch till the dial's thin-thrown shade 
Be bom, — yea, till the journeying line be laid 

Upon the point that wakes the spell. 
And there in lovelier light than tongue can tell 
Its presence stand array'd. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STREAM'S SECRET loi 

Its soul remembers yet 
Those sunless hours that passed it by ; 
And still it hears the night's disconsolate cry, 

And feels the branches wringing wet 
Cast on its brow, that may not once forget, 
Dumb tears from the blind sky. 



But oh ! when now her foot 
Draws near, for whose sake night and day 
Were long in weary longing sighed away, — 

The Hour of Love, 'mid airs grown mute, 
Shall sing beside the door, and Lx»ve's own lute 
Thrill to the passionate lay. 



Thou know'st, for Love has told 
Within thine ear, O stream, how soon 
That song shall lift its sweet appointed tune> 

O tell me, for my lips are cold. 

And in my veins the blood is waxing old 

Even while I beg the boon. 



So, in that hour of sighs 
Assuaged, shall we beside this stone 
Yield thanks for grace ; while in thy mirror shown 

The twofold image softly lies. 
Until we kiss, and each in other's eyed 
Is imaged all alone. 



Still silent ? Can no art 
Of Love's then move thy pity 7 Nay, 
To thee let nothing come that owns his sway : 

Let happy lovers have no part 
With thee; nor even so sad and poor a heart 
As thou hast spumed to-day. 



Digitized 



by Google 



102 THE STREAM'S SECRET. 

To-day ? Lo I night is here. 
The glen grows heavy with some veil 
Risen from the earth or fall'n to make earth pale ; 

And all stands hushed to eye and ear, 
Until the night-wind shake the shade like fear 
And every covert quaiL 



Ah f by a colder wave 
On deathlier airs the hour must come 
Which to thy heart, my love, shall call me home. 

Between the lips of the low cave 

Against that night the lapping waters lave. 

And the dark lips are dumb. 



But there Love's self doth stand, 
And with Life's weary wings far-flown, 
And with Death's eyes that make the water moan, 

Gathers the water in his hand : 
And they that drink know nought of sky or land 
But only love alone. 



O soul-sequestered face 
Far off, — O were that night but now I 
So even beside that stream even I and thou 

Through thirsting lips should draw Love's grace, 
And in the zone of that supreme embrace 
Bind aching breast and brow* 



O water whispering 
Still through the dark into mine ears, — 
As with mine eyes, is it not now with hers ? — 

Mine eyes that add to thy cold spring. 
Wan water, wandering water weltering. 
This hidden tide of tears. 



Digitized 



by Google 



103 



ROSE MARY. 



Of hit two fights with thi Btryl-sUmit 
Lost th$ firstf but the second won. 



PART I. 

** Mary mine that art Mary's Rose, 

Come in to me from the garden-close. 

The sun sinks fast with the rising dew, 

And we marked not how the faint moon grew ; 

But the hidden stars are calling you. 

" Tall Rose Mary, come to my side^ 
And read the stars if you'd be a bride« 
In hours whose need was not your own. 
While you were a young maid yet ungrown, 
YouVe read the stars in the Beryl-stone. 



i 



' Daughter, once more I bid yoa read ; 
But now let it be for your own need ; 
Because to-morrow, at break of day^ 
To Holy Cross he rides on his way. 
Your knight Sir James of Heronhayc.?' 

" Ere he wed you, flower of mine, 
For a heavy shrift he se^l s the shrine* 
Now hark to my words and do not fear;- 
111 news next I have for your ear ; 
But be you strong, and our help is here. 



Digitized 



by Google 



104 I^OSE MARY. 

" On his road, as the rumour's rife, 
An ambush waits to take his life. 
He needs will go, and will go alone ; 
Where the peril lurks may not be known ; 
But in this glass all things are shown/' 

Pale Rose Mary sank to the floor : — 
" The night will come if the day is o'er I " 
" Nay, heaven takes counsel, star with star. 
And help shall reach your heart from afar : 
A bride you'll be, as a maid you are." 

The lady unbound her jewelled zone 
And drew from her robe the B eryl -stone. 
Shaped it was to a shadowy sphere, — 
World of our world, the sun's compeer. 
That bears and buries the toiling year. 

With shuddering light 'twas stirred and strewn 
Like the cloud-nest of the wading moon : 
Freaked it was as the bubble's ball, 
Rainbow-hued through a misty pall 
Like the middle light of the waterfall. 

Shadows dwelt in its teeming girth 
Of the known and unknown things of earth ; 
The cloud above and the wave around, — 
The central fire at the sphere's heart bound. 
Like doomsday prisoned underground. 

A thousand years it lay in the sea 
With a treasure wrecked from Thessaly; 
Deep it lay 'mid the coiled sea-wrack, 
But the ocean-spirits found the track : 
A soul was lost to win it back. 



Digitized 



by Google 



nOSB MARY. 105 

The lady upheld the wondrous thing : — 
" 111 fare" (she said) "with a fiend's-feiring : 
But Moslem blood poured forth like wine 
Can hallow Hell, 'neath the Sacred Sign ; 
And my lord brought this from Palestine. 



** Spirits who fear the Blessed Rood 
Drove forth the accursed multitude 
That heathen worship housed herein, — 
Never again such home to win, 
Save only by a Christian's sin. 

** All last night at an altar fair 

I burnt strange fires and strove with prayer; 

Till the flame paled to the red sunrise, 

All rites I then did solemnize ; 

And the spell lacks nothing but your eyes." 

Low spake maiden Rose Mary : — 
*' O mother mine, if I should not see I " 
** Nay, daughter, cover your face no more. 
But bend love's heart to the hidden lore. 
And you shall see now as heretofore." 

Paler yet were the pale cheeks grown 
As the grey eyes sought the Beryl-stone : 
Then over her mother's lap leaned she. 
And stretched her thrilled throat passionately. 
And sighed from her soul, and said, " I see." 

Even as she spoke, they two were 'ware 
Of music-notes that fell through the air; 
A chiming shower of strange device. 
Drop echoing drop, once twice and thrice, 
As rain may &11 in Paradise. 



Digitized 



by Google 



io6 ROSE MARY. 

An instant come, in an instant gone^ 
No time there was to think thereon. 
The mother held the sphere on her knee : — 
*' Lean this way and speak low to me, 
And take no note but of what you see.** 



" I see a man with a besom grey 
That sweeps the flying dust away." 
**Ay, that comes first in the mystic sphere; 
But now that the way is swept and clear, 
Heed well what next you look on there." 



'' Stretched aloft and adown I see 
Two roads that part in waste-country : 
The glen lies deep and the ridge stands tall ; 
Wha?s great below is above seen small, 
And the hill-side is the valley-wall." 

'' Stream-bank, daughter, or moor and moss^ 
Both roads will take to Holy Cross. 
The hills are a weary waste to wage ; 
But what of the valley-road's presage ? 
That way must tend his pilgrimage." 



" As 'twere the turning leaves of a book. 
The road runs past me as I look ; 
Or it is even as though mine eye 
Should watch calm waters filled with sky 
While lights and clouds and wings went by." 

" In every covert seek a spear ; 
They'll scarce lie close till he draws near." 
" The stream has spread to a river now ; 
The stiff blue sedge is deep in the slough, 
But the banks are bare of shrub or bough." 



Digitized 



by Google 



JiOSE MARY. 107 

" Is there any roof that near at hand 
Might shelter yield to a hidden band ?" 
*' On the further bank I see but one. 
And a herdsman now in the sinking sun 
Unyokes his team at the threshold-stone." 

" Keep heedful watch by the water's edge, — 
Some boat might lurk 'neath the shadowed sedge. ' 
" One slid but now 'twixt the winding shores, 
But a peasant woman bent to the oars 
And only a young child steered its course. 

" Mother, something flashed to my sight ! — 
Nay, it is but the lapwing's flight — 
What glints there like a lance that flees ? — 
Nay, the flags are stirred in the breeze. 
And the water's bright through the dart-rushes. 

" Ah I vainly I search from side to side : — 
Woe's me I and where do the foemen hide ? 
Woe's me I and perchance I pass them by. 
And under the new dawn's blood-red sky 
Even where I gaze the dead shall lie." 



Said the mother : " For dear love's sake, 
Speak more low, lest the spell should break." 
Said the daughter : " By love's control, 
My eyes, my words, are strained to the goal ; 
But oh I the voice that cries in my soul I " 

'* Hush, sweet, hush I be calm and behold." 
'' I see two floodgates broken and old : 
The grasses wave o'er the ruined weir. 
But the bridge still leads to the breakwater ; 
And — ^mother, mother, O mother dear 1 " 



Digitized 



by Google 



io8 ROSS MARY. 



The damsel clung to her mother's knee, 

And dared not let the shriek go free ; 

Low she crouched by the lady's chair, 

And shrank blindfold in her fallen hair, 

And whispering said, ** The spears are there I " 



The lady stooped aghast from her place, 
And cleared the locks from her daughter's face. 
" More's to see, and she swoons, alas ! 
Look, look again, ere the moment pass t 
One shadow comes but once to the glass. 

" See you there what you saw but now ? " 
" I see eight men 'neath the willow bough. 
All over the weir a wild growth's spread : 
Ah me I it will hide a living head 
As well as the water hides the dead. 



"They lie by the broken water-gate 

As men who have a while to wait. 

The chiefs high lance has a blazoned scroll. 

He seems some lord of tithe and toll 

With seven squires to his bannerole. 

" The little pennon quakes in the air, 
I cannot trace the blazon there : — 
Ah I now I can see the field of blue. 
The spurs and the merlins two and two ; — 
It is the Warden of Holydeugh f " 

" God be thanked for the thing we know I 
You have named your good knight's mortal foe. 
Last Shrovetide in the tourney-game 
He sought his life by treasonous shame ; 
And this way now doth he seek the same. 



Digitized 



by Google 



HOSE AfARy. 109 

" So, feir lord, such a thing you are I 
But we too watch till the morning star. 
Well, June is kind and the moon is clear : 
Saint Judas send you a merry cheer 
For the night you lie at Warisweir 1 



''Now, sweet daughter, but one more sight, 
And you may lie soft and sleep to-night. 
We know in the vale what perils be : 
Now look once more in the glass, and see 
If over the hills the road lies free." 



Rose Mary pressed to her mother's cheek. 
And almost smiled but did not speak ; 
Then turned again to the saving spell. 
With eyes to search and with lips to tell 
The heart of things invisible. 

" Again the shape with the besom grey 
Comes back to sweep the clouds away. 
Again I stand where the roads divide ; 
But now all's near on the steep hillside. 
And a thread far down is the rivertide." 



" Ay, child, your road is o'er moor and moss, 

Past Holycleugh to Holy Cross. 

Our hunters lurk in the valley's wake, 

As they knew which way the chase would take : 

Yet search the hills for your true love's sake," 

" Swift and swifter the waste runs by. 
And nought I see but the heath and the sky ; 
No brake is there that could hide a spear. 
And the gaps to a horseman's sight lie clear ; 
StiU past it goes, and there's nought to fear." 



Digitized 



by Google 



no ROSE MARY. 

** Fear no trap that you cannot see,— 

They'd not lurk yet too warily. 

Relow by the weir they lie in sight, 

And take no heed how they pass the night 

Till close they crouch with the morning light ** 

"The road shifts ever and brings in view 
Now first the heights of Holycleugh : 
Dark they stand o'er the vale below, 
And hide that heaven which yet shall show 
The thing their master's heart doth know. 

'' Where the road looks to the castle steep, 
There are seven hill-clefts wide and deep : 
Six mine eyes can search as they list, 
But the seventh hollow is brimmed with mist : 
If aught were there, it might not be wist" 

" Small hope, my girl, for a helm to hide 
In mists that cling to a wild moorside : 
Soon they melt with the wind and sun. 
And scarce would wait such deeds to be done : 
God send their snares be the worst to shun." 



** Still the road winds ever anew 
As it hastens on towards Holycleugh ; 
And ever the great walls loom more near, 
Till the castle-shadow, steep and sheer. 
Drifts like a cloud, and the sky is clear." 

" Enough, my daughter," the mother said, 
And took to her breast the bending head ; 
*' Rest, poor head, with my heart below. 
While love still lulls you as long ago : 
For all is learnt that we need to know. 



Digitized 



by Google 



JiOSE MARY. Ill 

'' Long the miles and many the hours 
From the castle-height to the abbey-towers ; 
But here the journey has no more dread ; 
Too thick with life is the whole road spread 
For murder's trembling foot to tread." 

She gazed on the Beryl-stone full fain 
Ere she wrapped it close in her robe again ; 
The flickering shades were dusk and dun, 
And the lights throbbed faint in unison, 
Like a high heart when a race is run. 

As the globe slid to its silken gloom, 
Once more a music rained through the room ; 
Low it splashed like a sweet star-spray, 
And sobbed like tears at the heart of May, 
And died as laughter dies away. 

The lady held her breath for a space. 
And then she looked in her daughter's face : 
But wan Rose Mary had never heard ; 
Deep asleep like a sheltered bird 
She lay with the long spell minister'd. 

" Ah I and yet I must leave you, dear. 

For what you have seen your knight must hear. 

Within four days, by the help of God, 

He comes back safe to his heart's abode : 

Be sure he shall shun the valley-road." 

Rose Mary sank with a broken moan. 
And lay in the chair and slept alone, 
Weary, lifeless, heavy as lead : 
Long it was ere she raised her head 
And rose up all discomforted. 



Digitized 



by Google 



iia ROSE MARY. 

She searched her brain for a vanished thing; 
And clasped her brows, remembering ; 
Then knelt and lifted her eyes in awe, 
And sighed with a long sigh sweet to draw :^- 
''Thank God, thank God, thank God I sawT' 

The lady had lefl her as she lay, 
To seek the Knight of Heronhaye. 
But first she clomb by a secret stair, 
And knelt at a carven altar fair. 
And laid the precious Beryl there. 

Its girth was graved with a mystic rune 

In a tongue long dead 'neath sun and moon : 

A priest of the Holy Sepulchre 

Read that writing and did not err ; 

And her lord had told its sense to her. 

She breathed the words in an undertone :-^ 

^*None sees here but the pure alone" 

" And oh I " she said, " what rose may be 

In Mary's bower more pure to see 

Than my own sweet maiden Rose Mary?** 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 113 

Beryl-Song. 

We whose home is the Beryl, 
Fire-spirits of dread desire, 

IVho entered in 

By a secret sin, 

* Gainst whom alt powers that strive with ours are sterile^ — 

We cry, Woe to thee, mother! 
What hast thou taught her, the girl thy daughter. 
That she and none other 
Should this dark morrow to her deadly sorrow imperil? 
What were her eyes 
But the fiend* s own spies, 
O mother. 
And shall We not fee her. Our proper prophet and seer? 
Go to her, mother. 
Even thou, yea thou and none other, 

Thou, from the Beryl : 
Her fee must thou take her. 
Her fee that We send, and make her, 
Even in this hour, her sin's unsheltered avower. 
Whose steed did neigh. 
Riderless, bridleless. 
At her gate before it was day ? 
Lo ! where doth hover 
The soul of her lover ? 
She sealed his doom, she, she was the sworn approver, — 
Whose eyes were so wondrous wise. 
Yet blind, ah / blind to his peril! 
For stole not We in 
Through a love-linked sin, 

* Gainst whom all powers at war with ours are sterile, — 

Fire-spirits of dread desire, 
We whose home is the Beryl? 



Digitized 



by Google 



114 I^OSE MARY. 

PART IL 

" Pale Rose Mary, what shall be done 
With a rose that Mary weeps upon ? * 
" Mother, let it fall from the tree, 
And never walk where the strewn leaves be 
Till winds have passed and the path is free." 

. j^ " Sad Rose Mary, what shall be done 
^j,^ With a cankered flower beneath the sun ? " 
V " Mother, let it wait fOf the night ; 

-\^ Be sure its shame shall be out of sight 

Ere the moon pale or the east grow light" 

" Lost Rose Mary, what shall be done 
With a heart that is but a broken one ? ** 
'* Mother, let it lie where it must ; 
The blood was drained with the bitter thrust. 
And dust is all that sinks in the dust" 

" Poor Rose Mary, what shall I do, — 
I, your mother, that lovM you ? " 
" O my mother, and is love gone ? 
Then seek you another love anon : 
Who cares what shame shall lean upon ? " 

Low drooped trembling Rose Mary, 
Then up as though in a dream stood she. 
" Come, my heart, it is time to go ; 
This is the hour that has whispered low 
When thy pulse quailed in the nights we know. 

" Yet O my heart, thy shame has a mate 
Who will not leave thee desolate. 
/ Shame for shame, yea and sin for sin : 
"* Yet peace at length may our poor souls win 
If love for love be found therein. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 11$ 

" O thou who seek'st our shrift to-day," 
She cried, '' O James of Heronhaye — 
Thy sin and mine was for love alone ; 
And oh ! in the sight of God 'tis known 
How the heart has since made heavy moan. 

" Three days yet I " she said to her heart ; 
" But then he comes, and we will not part. 
God, God be thanked that I still could see ! 
Oh I he shall come back assuredly. 
But where, alas I must he seek for me ? 

" O my heart, what road shall we roam 
Till my wedding-music fetch me home ? 
For love's shut from us and bides afar, 
And scorn leans over the bitter bar 
And knows us now for the thing we are.*' 

Tall she stood with a cheek flushed high \ 
And a gaze to bum the heart-strings by. , /.^ 
Twas the lightning-flash o'er sky and plain ' 
Ere labouring thunders heave the chain 
From the floodgates of the drowning rain. \ 

The mother looked on the daughter still 

As on a hurt thing that's yet to kilL 

Then wildly at length the pent tears came ; 

The love swelled high with the swollen shame. 

And their hearts' tempest burst on them. 

Closely locked, they clung without speech. 
And the mirrored souls shook each to each. 
As the cloud-moon and the water-moon _ 
Shake face to face when the dim stars swoon 
In stormy bowers of the night's mid-noon. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Ii6 HOSE MAJ^Y. 

They swayed together, shuddering sore, 
Till the mother's heart could bear no more. 
Twas death to feel her own breast shake 
Even to the very throb and ache 
Of the burdened heart she still must break. 



All her sobs ceased suddenly, 

And she sat straight up but scarce could see. 

" O daughter, where should my speech begin ? 

Your heart held fast its secret sin : 

How think you, child, that I read therein ? '* 

" Ah me ! but I thought not how it came 

When your words showed that you knew my shame : 

And now that you call me still your own, 

I half forget you have ever known. 

Did you read my heart in the Beryl-stone ?•• 

The lady answered her mournfully : — 
" The Beryl-stone has no voice for me : 
But when you charged its power to show 
The truth which none but the pure may know, 
Did naught speak once of a coming woe ? " 

Her hand was close to her daughter's heart, 
And it felt the life-blood's sudden start : 
A quick deep breath did the damsel draw. 
Like the struck fawn in the oakenshaw : 
" O mother," she cried, " but still I saw 1 ** 

" O child, my child, why held you apart 
From my great love your hidden heart ? 
Said I not that all sin must chase 
From the spell's sphere the spirits of grace. 
And yield their rule to the evil race ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 117 

"Ah I would to God I had clearly told 
How strong those powers, accurst of old : 
Their heart is the ruined house of lies ; 
O girl, they can seal the sinful eyes. 
Or show the truth by contraries I " 

The daughter sat as cold as a stone, 

And spoke no word but gazed alone, 

Nor moved, though her mother strove a space 

To clasp her round in a close embrace, 

Because she dared not see her face; 



** Oh I " at last did the mother cry, 
" Be sure, as he loved you, so will 1 1 
Ah I still and dumb is the bride, I trow ; 
But cold and stark as the winter snow 
Is the bridegroom's heart, laid dead below ! 

" Daughter, daughter, remember you 
That cloud in the hills by Holycleugh ? 
'Twas a Hell-screen hiding truth away : 
There, not i' the vale, the ambush lay. 
And thence was the dead borne home to-day." 

Deep the flood and heavy the shock 
When sea meets sea in the riven rock : 
But calm is the pulse that shakes the sea 
To the prisoned tide of doom set free 
In the breaking heart of Rose Mary. 

Once she sprang as the heifer springs 

With the wolfs teeth at its red heart-strings. 

First 'twas fire in her breast and brain. 

And then scarce hers but the whole world's pain. 

As she gave one shriek and sank again. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Ii8 HOSE MARY. 

In the hair dark- waved the face lay white 

As the moon lies in the lap of night ; 

And as night through which no moon may dart 

Lies on a pool in the woods apart, 

So lay the swoon on the weary heart. 

The lady felt for the bosom's stir, 
And wildly kissed and called on her ; 
Then turned away with a quick footfall, 
And slid the secret door in the wall, 
And domb the strait stair's interval. 

There above in the altar-cell 
A little fountain rose and fell : 
She set a flask to the water's flow, 
And, backward hurrying, sprinkled now 
The still cold breast and the pallid bro\¥. 

Scarce cheek that warmed or breath on the air. 
Yet something told that life was there. 
" Ah I not with the heart the body dies I " 
The lady moaned in a bitter wise ; 
Then wnmg her hands and hid her eyes. 

" Alas ! and how may I meet again 
In the same poor eyes the selfsame pain r 
What help can I seek, such grief to guide ? 
Ah I one alone might avail," she cried, — 
•" The priest who prays at the dead man's side." 

The lady arose, and sped down all 
The winding stairs to the castle-hall. 
Long-known valley and wood and stream, 
As the loopholes passed, naught else did seem 
Than the torn threads of a broken dream. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 119 

The hall was full of the castle-folk ; 
The women wept, but the men scarce spoke. 
As the lady crossed the rush-strewn floor, 
The throng fell backward, murmuring sore, 
And pressed outside round the open door. 

A stranger shadow hung on the hall 
Than the dark pomp of a funeral. 
'Mid common sights that were there alway, 
As 'twere a chance of the passing day, 
On the ingle-bench the dead man lay. 

A priest who passed by Holycleugh 

The tidings brought when the day was new. 

He guided them who had fetched the dead ; 

And since that hour, unwearied, 

He knelt in prayer at the low bier's head. 

Word had gone to his own domain 

That in evil wise the knight was slain ; 

Soon the spears must gather apace 

And the hunt be hard on the hunters* trace; 

But all things yet lay still for a space. 

As the lady's hurried step drew near,, 
The kneeling priest looked up to her. 
*' Father, death is a grievous thing; 
But oh 1 the woe has a sharper sting 
That craves by me your ministering. 

" Alas for the child that should have wecL 
This noble knight here lying dead 1 
Dead in hope, with all blessed boon 
Of love thus rent from her heart ere noon,. 
I left her laid in a heavy swoon. 



Digitized 



by Google 



lao EOSS MARY. 

" O haste to the open bower-chamber 
That's topmost as you mount the stair : 
Seek her, father, ere yet she wake ; 
Your words, not mine, be the first to slake 
This poor heart's fire, for Christ's sweet sake I 

" God speed I " she said as the priest passed through, 
" And I ere long will be with you." 
Then low on the hearth her knees sank prone ; 
She signed all folk from the threshold-stone, 
And gazed in the dead man's face alone. 

The fight for life found record yet 
In the clenched lips and the teeth hard-set ; 
The wrath from the bent brow was not gone. 
And stark in the eyes the hate still shon^ 
Of that they last had looked upon. 

The blazoned coat was rent on his breast 
Where the golden field was goodliest ; 
But the shivered sword, close-gripped, could tell 
That the blood shed round him where he fell 
Was not all his in the distant dell. 



The lady recked of the corpse no whit, 
But saw the soul and spoke to it : 
A light there was in her steadfast eyes,—* 
The fire of mortal tears and sighs 
That pity and love immortalize. 

** By thy death have I learnt to-day 

Thy deed, O James of Heronhaye t 

Great wrong thou hast done to me and mine ; 

And haply God hath wrought for a sign 

By our blind deed this doom of thine. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. lai 

" Thy shrift, alas I thou wast not to win ; 
But may death shrive thy soul herein I 
Full well do I know thy love should be 
Even yet — had life but stayed with thee — 
Our honour's strong security." 

She stooped, and said with a sob's low stir, — 
" Peace be thine, — but what peace for her ? " 
But ere to the brow her lips were pressed, 
She marked, half-hid in the riven vest, 
A packet close to the dead man's breast. 

'Neath surcoat pierced and broken mail 
It lay on the blood-stained bosom pale. 
The clot clung round it, dull and dense, 
And a faintness seized her mortal sense 
As she reached her hand and drew it thence. 

Twas steeped in the heart's flood welling hgh 
From the heart it there had rested by : 
'Twas glued to a broidered fragment gay, — 
A shred by spear-thrust rent away 
From the heron-wings of Heronhaye. 



She gazed on the thing with piteous eyne : — 
" Alas, poor child, some pledge of thine I 
Ah me ! in this troth the hearts were twain, 
And one hath ebbed to this crimson stain, 
And when shall the other throb again ? " 



She opened the packet heedfully ; 
The blood was stiff, and it scarce m-ght be. 
She found but a folded paper there. 
And round it, twined with tenderest care, 
A long bright tress of golden hair. ^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



HOSE MARY. 

Even as she looked, she saw again 
That dark-haired face in its swoon of pain : 
It seemed a snake with a golden sheath 
Crept near, as a slow flame flickereth, 
And stung her daughter's heart to death. 

She loosed the tress, but her hand did shake 
As though indeed she had touched a snake ; 
And next she undid the paper's fold. 
But that too trembled in her hold, 
And the sense scarce grasped the tale it told. 

" My heart's sweet lord," ('twas thus she read,) 
" At length our love is garlanded. 
At Holy Cross, within eight days* space, 
I seek my shrift ; and the time and place 
Shall fit thee too for thy soul's good grace* 

" From Holycleugh on the seventh day 
My brother rides, and bides away : 
And long or e'er he is back, mine own, 
Afar where the face of fear's unknown 
We shall be safe with our love alone. 



" Ere yet at the shrine my knees I bow, 

I shear one tress for our holy vow. 

As round these words these threads I wind, 

So, eight days hence, shall our loves be twined 

Says my lord's poor lady, Jocelind." 

She read it twice, with a brain in thrall. 
And then its echo told her all. 
O'er brows low-fall'n her hands she drew : — 
" O God I " she said, as her hands fell too, — 
" The Warden's sister of Holycleugh I " 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 123^ 

She rose upright with a long low moan 
And stared in the dead man's face new-known. 
Had it lived indeed ? She scarce could tell : 
Twas a cloud where fiends had come to dwell, — 
A mask that hung on the gate of HelL 

She lifted the lock of gleaming hair 

And smote the lips and lefl it there. 

" Here's gold that Hell shall take for thy toll I 

Full well hath thy treason found its goal, 

O thou dead body and damn^ soul 1 " 

She turned, sore dazed, for a voice was near. 
And she knew that some one called to her. 
On many a column fair and tall 
A high court ran round the castle-hall ; 
And thence it was that the priest did call. 

*' I sought your child where you bade me go, 
And in rooms around and rooms below ; 
But where, alas I may the maiden be ? ^ 

Fear nought, — we shall find her speedily, — 
But come, come hither, and seek with me," 

She reached the stair like a lifelom thing, 
But hastened upward murmuring : — 
** Yea, Death's is a face that's fell to see ; 
But bitterer pang Life hoards for thee, 
Thou broken heart of Rose Mary I " 



Digitized 



by Google 



124 J^OSE MARY. 



Beryl-Song. 

We whose throne is the Beryl, 
Dire-gifted spirits ojfire, 
Who for a twin 
Leash Sorrow to Sin, 
Who on no flower refrain to lour with peril, — 

We cry, — O desolate daughter ! 
Thou and thy mother share newer shame with each other 
Than last night's slaughter. 
Awake and tremble, for our curses assemble ! 
What more, that thou know'st not yet, — 
That life nor death shall forget? 
No help from Heaven, — thy woes heart-riven are sterile ! 

O once a maiden. 
With yet worse sorrow can any morrow be laden ? 
It waits for thee, . 
It looms, it must be, 
O lost among women, — 
// comes and thou canst not flee. 
Amen to the omen, 
Says the voice of the BetyU 
Thou sleep* st? Awahe,^ 
What da/st thou yet for his sake. 
Who each for other did Goa's own Future imperil? 
Dost dare to live 
*Mid the pangs each hour must give ? 
Nay, rather die, — 
With htm thy lover 'neath HelTs cloud-cover to fly, — 
Hopeless, yet not apart, 
Cling heart to heart. 
And beat through the nether storm-eddying winds together? 

Shall this be so? 
There thou shall meet him, but mayst thou greet him? 
ah no t 
He loves, but thee he hoped nevetmore to see, — 
He sighed as he died. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 125 

But rvith mver a thought for thee. 
Alone! 

Alone, for ever alone, — 
Whose eyes were such wondrous spies for the fate foreshown ! 

Lo ! have not We leashed the twin 

Of endless Sorrow to Sin, — 
Who on no flower refrain to lour with peril,-^ 

Dire-gifted spirits of fire, 

We whose throne is the Beryl? 



Digitized 



by Google 



126 HOSE MARY. 



PART III. 



A SWOON that breaks is the whelming wave 
When help comes late but still can save. 
With all blind throes is the instant rife, — 
Hurtling clangour and clouds at strife, — 
The breath of death, but the kiss of life. 

The night lay deep on Rose Mary's heart, 
For her swoon was death's kind counterpart : 
The dawn broke dim on Rose Mary's soul,— 
No hill-crown's heavenly aureole. 
But a wild gleam on a shaken shoal. 



Her senses gasped in the sudden air, 

And she looked around, but none was there. 

She felt the slackening frost distil 

Through her blood the last ooze dull and chill : 

Her lids were dry and her iips were stilL 



Her tears had flooded her heart again ; 
As after a long day's bitter rain, 
At dusk when the wet flower-cups shrink. 
The drops run in from the beaHed brink, 
And all the close-shut petals drink. 



Again her sighs on her heart were rolled ; 
As the ^windL that long has swept the wold, — 
Whose moan was made with the moaning jea,— 
Beats out its breath in the last torn tree^ 
And sinks at length in lethargy. 



\ 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 127 

She knew she had waded bosom-deep 
Along death's bank in the s edge of sleep : 
All else was lost to her clou3e3' mind ; 
Nor, looking back, could she see defln'd 
O'er the dim dumb waste what lay behind. 



Slowly fades the sun from the wall 
Till day lies dead on the sun-dial : 
And now in Rose Mary's lifted eye 
'Twas shadow alone that made reply 
To the set face of the soul's dark sky. 

Yet still through her soul there wandered past 
Dread phantoms borne on a wailing blast, — 
Death and sorrow and sin and shame ; 
And, murmured still, to her lips there came 
Her mother's and her lover's name. 



How to ask, and what thing to know ? 
She might not stay and she dared not go. 
From fires unseen these smoke-clouds curled ; 
But where did the hidden curse lie furled ? 
And how to seek through the weary world ? 

With toiling breath she rose from the floor 
And dragged her steps to an open door : 
'Twas the secret panel standing wide, 
As the lady's hand had let it bide 
In hastening back to her daughter's side. 

She passed, but reeled with a dizzy brain 
And smote the door which closed again. 
She stood within by the darkling Stair, 
But her feet might mount more freely there,— 
Twas the open light most blinded her. 



Digitized 



by Google 



128 ROSE MARY. 

Within her mind no wonder grew 

At the secret path she never knew : 

All ways alike were strange to her now, — 

One field bare-ridged from the spirit* s plough, 

One thicket black with the C3rpress-bough. 

Once she thought that she heard her name ; 
And she paused, but knew not whence it came. 
Down the shadowed stair a faint ray fell 
That guided the weary footsteps well 
Till it led her up to the altar-cell. 

No change there was on Rose Mary's face 
As she leaned in the portal's narrow space : 
Still she stood by the pillar's stem, 
Hand and bosom and garment's hem, 
As the soul stands by at the requiem. 

The altar-cell was a dome low-lit, 

And a veil hung in the midst of it : 

At the pole-points of its circling girth 

Four symbols stood of the world's first birth,— 

Air and water and fire and earth. 

To the north, a fountain glittered free ; 
To the south, there glowed a red fruit-tree ; 
To the east, a lamp flamed high and fair ; 
To the west, a crystal casket rare 
Held fast a cloud of the fields of air. 



The painted walls were a mystic show 
Of time's ebb-tide and overflow ; 
His hoards long-locked and conquering key, 
His service-fires that in heaven be, 
And earth-wheels whirled perpetually* 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 129 

Rose Mary gazed from the open door 
As on idle things she cared not for, — 
The fleeting shapes of an empty tale ; 
Then stepped with a heedless visage pale. 
And lifted aside the altar-veil. 



The altar stood from its curved recess 
In a coiling serpent's life-likeness : 
Even such a serpent evermore 
Lies deep asleep at the world's dark core 
Till the last Voice shake the sea and shore. 



From the altar-cloth a book rose spread 
And tapers burned at the altar-head ; 
And there in the altar-midst alone, 
Twizt wings of a sculptured beast unknown. 
Rose Mary saw the B^ryl-stone. 

Firm it sat 'twizt the hollowed wings, 
As an orb sits in the hand of kings : 
And lo I for that Foe whose curse far-flown 
Had bound her life with a burning zone, 
Rose Mary knew the Beryl-stone. 

Dread is the meteor's blazing sphere 
When the poles throb to its blind career ; 
But not with a light more grim and ghast 
Thereby is the future doom forecast, 
Than now this sight brought back the past 

The hours and minutes seemed to whirr 
In a clanging swarm that deafened her ; 
They stung her heart to a writhing flame, 
And marshalled past in its glare they came, — 
Death and sorrow and sin and shame. 



Digitized 



by Google 



130 ROSE MARY. 

Round the Beryl's sphere she saw them pass 
And mock her eyes from the fated glass : 
One by one in a fiery train 
The dead hours seemed to wax and wane. 
And burned till all was known again. 

From the drained heart's fount there rose no cry, 
There sprang no tears, for the source was dry. 
Held in the hand of some heavy law, 
Her eyes she might not once withdraw, 
Nor shrink away from the thing she saw. 



Even as she gazed, through all her blood 
The flame was quenched in a coming flood : 
Out of the depth of the hollow gloom 
On her soul's bare sands she felt it boom, — 
The measured tide of a sea of doom. 



Three steps she took through the altar-gate. 
And her neck reared and her arms grew straight : 
The sinews clenched like a serpent's throe. 
And the face was white in the dark hair's flow, 
As her hate beheld what lay below. 

Dumb she stood in her malisons, — 
A silver statue tressed with bronze : 
As the fabled head by Perseus mown, 
It seemed in sooth that her gaze alone 
Had turned the carven shapes to stone. 

O'er the altar-sides on either hand 
There hung a dinted helm and brand : 
By strength thereof, 'neath the Sacred Sign, 
That bitter gifl o'er the salt sea-brine 
Her father brought from Palestine. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSE MARY. 131 

Rose Mary moved with a stem accord 

And reached her hand to her father's sword ; 

Nor did she stir her gaze one whit 

From the thing whereon her brows were knit ; 

But gazing still, she spoke to it 

** O ye, three times accurst,** she said, 
*' By whom this stone is tenanted I 
Lo I here ye came by a strong sin's mignf ; 
Yet a sinner's hand that's weak to smite 
Shall send you hence ere the day be night 



" This hour a clear voice bade me know 
My hand shall work your overthrow : 
Another thing in mine ear it spake, — 
With the broken spell my life shall break. 
I thank Thee, God, for the dear death's sake I ^ 

^ And he Thy heavenly minister 

Who swayed erewhile this spell-bound sphere, — 

My parting soul let him haste to greet. 

And none but he be guide for my feet 

To where Thy rest is made complete." 

Then deep she breathed, with a tender moan : — 

" My love, my lord, my only one I 

Even as I held the cursed clue, 

When thou, through me, these foul ones slew, — 

By mine own deed shall they slay me too I 

" Even while they speed to Hell, my love, 

Two hearts shall meet in Heaven above. 

Our shrift thou sought'st, but might'st not bring : 

And oh I for me 'tis a blessed thing 

To work hereby our ransoming. 



Digitized 



by Google 



132 ROSE MARY. 

" One were our hearts in joy and pain, 
And our souls e'en now grow one again. 
And O my love, if our souls are three, 
O thine and mine shall the third soul be, — 
One threefold love eternally." 

Her eyes were soft as she spoke apart, 

And the lips smiled to the broken heart : 

But the glance was dark and the forehead scored 

With the bitter frown of hate restored, 

As her two hands swung the heavy sword. 

Three steps back from her Foe she trod : — 
" Love, for thy sake ! In Thy Name, O God f" 
In the fair white hands small strength was shown ; 
Yet the blade flashed high and the edge fell prone, 
And she cleft the heart of the Beryl-stone. 

What living flesh in the thunder-doud 

Hath sat and felt heaven cry aloud ? 

Or known how the levin's pulse may beat ? 

Or wrapped the hour when the whirlwinds meet 

About its breast for a winding-sheet ? 

Who hath crouched at the world's deep heai^ 
While the earthquake rends its loins apart ? 
Or walked far under the seething main 
While overhead the heavens ordain 
The tempest-towers of the hurricane ? 

Who hath seen or what ear hath heard 
The secret things unregister'd 
Of the place where all is past and done, 
And tears and laughter sound as one 
In Hell's unhallowed unison ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSB MARY. 133 

Nay, is it writ how the fiends despair 
In earth and water and fire and air ? 
Even so no mortal tongue may tell 
How to the clang of the sword that fell 
The echoes shook the altar-celL 



When all was still on the air again 
The Beryl-stone lay cleft in twain ; 
The veil was rent from the riven dome; 
And every wind thaf s winged to roam 
Might have the ruined place for home. 

The fountain no more glittered free ; 
The fruit hung dead on the leafless tree ; 
The flame of the lamp had ceased to flare ; 
And the crystal casket shattered there 
Was emptied now of its cloud of air. 

And lo f on the ground Rose Mary lay. 
With a cold brow like the snows ere May, 
With a cold breast like the earth till Spring; 
With such a smile as the June days bring 
When the year grows warm for harvesting. 

The death she had won might leave no trace 
On the soft sweet form and gentle face : 
In a gracious sleep she seemed to lie ; 
And over her head her hand on high 
Held fast the sword she triumphed by. 

Twas then a clear voice said in the room : — 
" Behold the end of the heavy doom. 
O come, — ^for thy bitter love's sake blest ; 
By a sweet path now thou joumeyest, 
And 1 will lead thee to thy rest 



Digitized 



by Google 



134 ROSE MARY. 

** Me thy sin by Heaven's sore ban 
Did chase erewhile from the talisman : 
But to my heart, as a conquered home, 
In glory of strength thy footsteps come 
Who hast thus cast forth my foes therefrom. 

"Already thy heart remembereth 
No more his name thou sought'st in death : 
For under all deeps, all heights above, — 
So wide the gulf in the midst thereof, — 
Are Hell of Treason and Heaven of Love, 



" Thee, true soul, shall thy truth prefer 
To blessed Mary's rose-bower : 
Warmed and lit is thy place afar 
With guerdon-fires of the sweet Love-star 
Where hearts of steadfast lovers are : — 

" Though naught for the poor corpse lying here 
Remain to-day but the cold white bier. 
But burial-chaunt and bended knee. 
But sighs and tears that heaviest be, 
But rent rose-flower and rosemary." 



Digitized 



by Google 



ROSS MARY. 135 



Beryl-Sono. 

We^ cast forth Jrom the Befyl, 
Gyre-circling spirits offire^ 
Whose pangs begin 
With God's grace to sin, 
For whose spent powers the immortal hours are stertte, — 

Woe ! must We behold this mother 
Find grace in her dead child's fctce, and doubt of none other 
But that perfect pardon, alas / hath assured her guerdon ? 

Woe ! must We behold this daughter, 
Made<iean from the soil of sin wherewith We had fraught 
her, 

Shake off a man's blood like water? 

Write up her story 
On the Gate of Heaven* s glory, 
Whom there We behold so fair in shining apparel, 
And beneath her the ruin 
Of our own undoing! 
Alas, the Beryl! 
We had for afoeman 
But one weak woman; 
' In one da^s strife, 
Her hope fell dead from her life; 
And yet no iron. 
Her soul to environ. 
Could this manslayer, this false soothsayer imperil! 
Lo, where she bows* 
In the Holy House ! 
Who now shall dissever her soul from its joy for ever. 
While every ditty 
Of love and plentiful pity 
Fills the White City, 
And the floor of Heaven to her feet for ever is given ? 
Hark, a voice cries "Flee!** 



Digitized 



by Google 



136 ROSS MARY. 

Woe ! wot ! what shelter have We, 

Whose pangs begin 

With God's grace to sin, 
For whose spent powers the immortal hours are sterile, 
Gyre-circling spirits of fire, 
We, cast forth from the Beryl? 



Digitized 



by Google 



«37 



THE WHITE SHIP. 

Henry I. of England. — 2Sth November irao. 

By none but me can the tale be told. 
The butcher of Rouen, poor Berold. 

{Lands are swayed by a King an a throne.) 
Twas a royal train pot forth to sea, 
Vet the tale can be told by none but me. 

{The sea hath no King but God alone.) 

King Henry held it as life's tdiole gain 
That after his death his son should reign. 

Twas so in my youth I heard men say. 
And my old age calls it back to^lay. 

King Henry of England's realm was he. 
And Henry Duke of Normandy. 

The times had changed when on either coast 
" Clerkly Harry " was all his boast. 

Of ruthless strokes full many an one 

He had struck to crown himself and his son ; 

\nd his elder brother's eyes were gone. 

And when to the chase his court would crowd, 
The poor flung ploughshares on his road, 
And shrieked : " Our cry is from King to God I " 



Digitized 



by Google 



138 THE WHITE SHIP, 

But all the chiefs of the English land 
Had knelt and kissed the Prince's hand. 

And next with his son he sailed to France 
To claim the Norman allegiance * 

And every baron in Normandy 
Had taken the oath of fealty. 

Twas sworn and sealed, and the day had come 
When the King and the Prince might journey home . 

For Christmas cheer is to home hearts dear, 
And Christmas now was drawing near. 

Stout Fitz-Stephen came to the King, — 
A pilot famous in seafaring ; 

And he held to the King, in all men's sight, 
A mark of gold for his tribute's right. 

" Liege Lord I my father guided the ship 
From whose boat your father's foot did slip 
When he caught the English soil in his grip, 

*' And cried : *By this clasp I claim command 
O'er every rood of English land I ' 

*' He was borne to the realm you rule o'er now 
In that ship with the archer carved at her prow : 

" And thither I'll bear, an it be my due, 
Your father's son and his grandson too. 

'* The fkmed White Ship is mine in the bay, 
From Harfleur's harbour she sails to-day, 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE WHITE SHIP. 139 

''With masts fair-pennoned as Norman spears 
And with fifty well-tried mariners." 

Quoth the King : " My ships are chosen each one, 
But m not say nay to Stephen's son. 

" My son and daughter and fellowship 
Shall cross the water in the White Ship.** 

The King set sail with the eve's south wind, 
And soon he left that coast behind. 

The Prince and all his, a princely show, 
Remained in the good White Ship to go. 

With noble knights and with ladies fair, 
With courtiers and sailors gathered there. 
Three hundred living souls we were : 

And I Berold was the meanest hind 
In all that train to the Prince assigned. 

The Prince was a lawless shameless youth ; 
From his father's loins he sprang without ruth : 

Eighteen years till then he had seen. 
And the devil's dues in him were eighteen. 

And now he cried : " Bring wine from below ; 
Let the sailors revel ere yet they row : 

" Our speed shall o'ertake my father's flight 
Though we sail from the harbour at midnight." 

The rowers made good cheer without check ; 

The lords and ladies obeyed his beck ; 

The night was light, and they danced on the deck. 



Digitized 



by Google 



I40 THE WHITE SHIP. 

But at midnight's stroke they cleared the bay, 
And the White Ship furrowed the water-way. 

The sails were set, and the oars kept tune 
To the double flight of the ship and the moon : 

Swifler and swifter the White Ship sped 
Till she flew as the spirit fHes from the dead : 

As white as a lily glimmered she 
Like a ship's fair ghost upon the sea. 

And the Prince cried^ "Friends, 'tis the hour to 

sing I 
Is a songbird's course so swift on the wing ? " 

And under the winter stars' still throng. 

From brown throats, white throats, merry and 

strong. 
The knights and the ladies raised a song. 

A song, — nay, a shriek that rent the sky, 
That leaped o'er the deep I — the grievous cry 
Of three hundred living that now must die. 

An instant shriek that sprang to the shock 
As the ship's keel felt the sunken rock. 

Tis said that afar — a shrill strange sigh — 
The King's ships heard it and knew not why. 

Pale Fitz-Stephen stood by the helm 

'Mid all those folk that the waves must whelm. 

A great King's heir for the waves to whelm. 
And the helpless pilot pale at the helm ! 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE WHITE SHIP, 141 

The ship was eager and sucked athirst. 

By the stealthy stab of the sharp reef pierc'd ; 

And like the moil round a sinking cup 
The waters against her crowded up. 

A moment the pilot's senses spin, — 

The next he snatched the Prince 'mid the din, 

Cut the boat loose, and the youth leaped in. 

A few friends leaped with him, standing near. 
** Row I the sea's smooth and Uie night is clear ! " 

^ What I none to be saved but these and I ?** 
" Row, row as you'd live I All here must die I " 

Out of the chum of the choking ship, 
Which the gulf grapples and the waves strip, 
They struck with the strained oars' flash and dip. 

Twas then o'er the splitting bulwarks' brim 
The Prince's sister screamed to him. 

He gazed aloft, still rowing apace, 

And through the whirled surf he knew her face. 

To the toppling decks clave one and all 
As a fly cleaves to a chamber-wall. 

I Berold was dinging anear ; 

I prayed for myself and quaked with fear, 

But I saw his eyes as he looked at her. 

He knew her face and he heard her cry. 
And he said, '' Put back ! she must not die ! " 

And beck with the current's force they reel 
Like a leaf that's drawn to a water-wheel. 



Digitized 



by Google 



142 THE WHITE SHIP. 

'Neath the ship's travail they scarce might float, 
But he rose and stood in the rocking boat 

Low the poor ship leaned on the tide : 
O'er the naked keel as she best might slid^ 
The sister toiled to the brother's side. 

He reached an oar to her from below, 
And stiffened his arms to clutch her so. 

But now from the ship some spied the boat. 
And " Saved I " was the cry from many a throat 

And down to the boat they leaped and fell : 

It turned as a bucket turns in a well, 

And nothing was there but the surge and swell 

The Prince that was and the King to come, 
There in an instant gone to his doom. 

Despite of all England's bended knee 
And maugre the Norman fealty I 

He was a Prince of lust and pride ; 

He showed no grace till the hour he died. 

When he should be King, he oft would vow, 
He'd yoke the peasant to his own plough. 
O'er him the ships score their furrows now. 

God only knows where his soul did wake. 
But I saw him die for his sister's sake. 

By none but me can the tale be told. 
The butcher of Rouen, poor Berold. 

(Lands are swayed by a King on a throne.) 
Twas a royal train put forth to sea. 
Yet the tale can be told by none but me. 

(The sea hath no King but God alone.) 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE WHiTE SHIP. 

And now the end came o'er the waters' womb 
Like the last great Day that's yet to come. 

With prayers in vain and curses in vain, 
The White Ship sundered on the mid-main : 

And what were men and what was a ship 
Were toys and splinters in the sea's grip. 

I Berold was down in the sea ; 

And passing strange though the thing may be, 

Of dreams then known I remember me. 

Blithe is the shout on Harfleur's strand 
When morning lights the sails to land : 

And blithe is Honfleur's echoing gloam 
When mothers call the children home : 

And high do the bells of Rouen beat 

When the Body of Christ goes down the street. 

These things and the like were heard and shown 
In a moment's trance 'neath the sea alone ; 

And when I rose, 'twas the sea did seem, 
And not these things, to be all a dream. 

The ship was gone and the crowd was gone, 
And the deep shuddered and the moon shone. 

And in a strait grasp my arms did span 

The mainyard rent from the mast where it ran ; 

And on it with me was another man. 

Where lands were none 'neath the dim sea-sky, 
We told our names, that man and I. 



143, 



Digitized 



by Google 



144 THE WHITE SHIP, 

" O I am Godefroy de TAigle hight, 
And son I am to a belted knight" 

*' And I am Berold the butcher's son 
Who slays the beasts in Rouen town." 

Then cried we upon God's name, as we 
Did drift on the bitter winter sea. 

But lo I a third man rose o'er the wave, 
And we said, ''Thank God I us three may He 
save I " 

He clutched to the yard with panting stare. 
And we looked and knew Fitz-Stephen there. 

He clung, and " What of the Prince ? " quoth he. 
" Lost, lost I " we cried. He cried, " Woe on me ! " 
And loosed his hold and sank through the sea. 

And soul with soul again in that space 
We two were together face to face : 

And each knew each, as the moments sped. 
Less for one living than for one dead : 

And every still star overhead 

Seemed an eye that knew we were but dead. 

And the hours passed ; till the noble's son 
Sighed, " God be thy help I my strength's foredone ! 

'* O farewell, friend, for I can no more I " 

" Christ take thee I " I moaned ; and his life was o'er. 

Three himdred souls were all lost but one, 
And I drifted over the sea alone. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE WHITE SHIP. t4S 

At last the morning rose on the sea 

Like an angel's wing that beat tow'rds me. 

Sore numbed I was in my sheepskin coat ; 
Half dead I hung, and might nothing note, 
Till I woke sunTwarmed in a fisher-boat 

The sun was high o'er the eastern brim 
As I praised God and gave thanks to Him. 

That day I told my tale to a priest, 

Who charged me, till the shrift were released, 

That I should keep it in mine own breast 

And with the priest I thence did fare 
To King Henry's court at Winchester. 

We spoke with the King's high chamberlain. 
And he wept and mourned again and again, 
As if his own son had been slain : 

And round us ever there crowded fast 
Great men with faces all aghast : 

And who so bold that might tell the thing 
Which now they knew to their lord the King ? 
Much woe I learnt in their communing. 

The King had watched with a heart sore stirred 
For two whole days, and this was the third : 

And still to all his court would he say, 
** What keeps my son so long away ? " 

And they said : " The ports lie far and wide 
That skirt the swell of the English tide; 

ID 



Digitized 



by Google 



146 THE WHITE SHIP, 

" And England's cliffs are not more white 
Than her women are, and scarce so light 
Her skies as their eyes are blue and bright ; 

** And in some port that he reached from France 
The Prince has lingered for his pleasaiince." 

But once the King asked : ** What distant cry 
Was that we heard 'twixt the sea and sky ? " 

And one said : " With suchlike shouts, pardie I 
Do the fishers fling their nets at sea." 

And one : '* Who knows not the shrieking quest 
When the sea-mew misses its young from the nest?" 

Twas thus till now they had soothed his dread, 
Albeit they knew not what they said : 

But who should speak to-day of the thing 
That all knew there except the King ? 

rhen pondering much they found a way. 
And met round the King's high seat that day : 

And the King sat with a heart sore stirred. 
And seldom he spoke and seldom heard. 

Twas then through the hall the King was 'ware 
Of a little boy with golden hair, 

V As bright as the golden poppy is 

^ That the beach breeds for the surf to kiss : 

Yet pale his cheek as the thorn in Spring, 
And his garb black like the raven's wing. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE WHITE SHIP. 147 

Nothing heard but his foot through the hall, 
For now the lords were silent all. 

And the King wondered, and said, " Alack ! 
Who sends me a fair boy dressed in black ? 

" Why, sweet heart, do you pace thropgh the hall 
As though my court were a funeral ? " 

Then lowly knelt the child at the dais, 
And looked up weeping in the King's face. 

" O wherefore black, O King, ye may say, 
For white is the hue of death to-day. 

" Your son and all his fellowship 

Lie low in the sea with the White Ship/' 

King Henry fell as a man struck dead ; 
And speechless still he stared from his bed 
When to him next day my rede I read. 

There's many an hour must needs beguile 
A King's high heart that he should smile, — 

Full many a lordly hour, full fain 

Of his realm's rule and pride of his reign : — 

But this King never smiled again. 

By none but me can the tale be told, 
The butcher of Rouen, poor Berold. 

{Lands are swayed by a King on a throne,) 
Twas a royal train put forth to sea, 
Yet the tale can be told by none but me. 

(The sea hath no King but God alone,) 



Digitized 



by Google 



l^ 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

James I. of Scots. — 2oth February 1437. 

NOTE. 

Tradition says that Catherine Douglas, in honour of her heroic 
act when she barred the door with her arm against the murderers 
of James the First of Scots, received popularly the name of " Bar- 
lass.'' This name remains to her descendants, the Barlas family, 
in Scotland, who bear for their crest a broken arm. She married 
Alexander Lovell of Bolunnie. 

A few stanzas from King James's lovely poem, known as The 
King's QuatTf are quoted in the course of this ballad. The writer 
must express regret for the necessity which has compelled him to 
shorten the ten-syllabled lines to eight syUables, in order that 
they might harmonize with the ballad metre. 

I Catherine am a Douglas born, 

A name to all Scots dear ; 
And Kate Barlass they've called me now 

Through many a waning year. 

This old arm's withered now. 'Twas once 

Most deft 'mong maidens all 
To rein the steed, to wing the shaft, 

To smite the palm-play baU. 

In hall adown the close-linked dance 
It has shone most white and fair ; 
It has been the rest for a true lord's head, 
And many a sweet babe's nursing-bed, 
And the bar to a King's chamb^re. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 149 

Aye, lasses, draw round Kate Barlass, 

And hark with bated breath 
How good King James, King Robert's son, 

Was foully done to death. 

Through all the days of his gallant youth 

The princely James was pent, 
By his friends at first and then by his foes, 

In long imprisonment. 

For the elder Prince, the kingdom's heir, 

By treason's murderous brood 
Was slain ; and the father quaked for the child 

With the royal mortal blood. 

r the Bass Rock fort, by his father's care. 

Was his childhood's life assured ; 
And Henry the subtle Bolingbroke, 
Proud England's King, 'neath the southron yoke 

His youth for long years immured. 

Yet in all things meet for a kingly man 

Himself did he approve ; 
And the nightingale through his prison-wall 

Taught him both lore and love. 

For once, when the bird's song drew him close 

To the opened window-pane. 
In her bower beneath a lady stood, 
A light of life to his sorrowful mood, 

Like a lily amid the rain. 

And for her sake, to the sweet bird's note, 

He framed a sweeter Song, 
More sweet than ever a poet's heart 

Gave yet to the English tongue. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ISO THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

She was a lady of royal blood ; 

And when, past sorrow and teen, 
He stood where still through his crownless years 

His Scotish realm had been, 
At Scone were the happy lovers crowned, 

A heart-wed King and Queen. 

But the bird may fall from the bough of youth. 

And song be turned to moan, 
And Love's storm-cloud be the shadow of Hate, 
When the tempest- waves of a troubled State 

Are beating against a throne. 

Yet well they loved ; and the god of Love, 

Whom well the King had sung, 
Might find on the earth no truer hearts 

His lowliest swains among. 

From the days when first she rode abroad 

With Scotish maids in her train, 
I Catherine Douglas won the trust 

Of my mistress sweet Queen Jane. 

And oft she sighed, '< To be bom a King I ** 

And oft along the way 
When she saw the homely lovers pass 

She has said, " Alack the day I " 

Tears waned, — the loving and toiling years : 

Till England's wrong renewed 
Drove James, by outrage cast on his crown, 

To the open field of feud. 

Twas when the King and his host were met 

At the leaguer of Roxbro' hold. 
The Queen o' the sudden sought his camp 

With a tale of dread to be told. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 151 

And she showed him a secret letter writ 

That spoke of treasonous strife, 
And how a band of his noblest lords 

Were sworn to take his life. 

"And it may be here or it may be there, 
In the camp or the court," she said : 

" But for my sake come to your people's arms 
And guard your royal head." 

Quoth he, " Tis the fifteenth day of the siege, 

And the castle's nigh to yield.*' 
" O face your foes on your throne," she cried, 

" And show the power you wield ; 
And under your Scotish people's love 

You shall sit as under your shield.'' 

At the fair Queen's side I stood that day 
When he bade them raise the siege, 

And back to his Court he sped to know 
How the lords would meet their Liege. 

But when he summoned his Parliament, 

The louring brows hung round. 
Like clouds that circle the mountaii.-head 

Ere the first low thunders sound. 

For he had tamed the nobles* lust 
And curbed their power and pride, 

And reached out an arm to right the poor 
Through Scotland far and wide ; 

And many a lordly wrong-doer 
By the headsman*s axe had died. 

Twas then upspoke Sir Robert Graeme, 

The bold o'ermastering man : — 
"O King, in the name of your Three Estates 

I set you imder their ban I 



Digitized 



by Google 



152 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

" For, as your lords made oath to you 

Of service and fealty, 
Even in like wise you pledged your oath 

Their faithful are to be : — 

" Yet all we here that are nobly sprung 

Have mourned dear kith and kin 
Since first for the Scotish Barons' curse 

Did your bloody rule begin." 

With that he laid his hands on his King : — 

" Is this not so, my lords ? " 
But of all who had sworn to league with him 

Not one spake back to his words. 

Quoth the King: — "Thou speak'st but for one 
Estate, 

Nor doth it avow thy gage. 
Let my hege lords hale this traitor hence ! " 

The Graeme fired dark with rage : — 
" Who works for lesser men than himself, 

He earns but a witless wage I " 

But soon from the dungeon where he lay 

He won by privy plots. 
And forth he fled with a price on his head 

To the country of the Wild Scots. 

And word there came from Sir Robert Graeme 

To the King at Edinbro' :— 
" No Liege of mine thou art ; but I see 
From this day forth alone in thee 

God's creature, my mortal foe. 

" Through thee are my wife and children lost, 

My heritage and lands ; 
And when my God shall show me a way, 
Thyself my mortal foe will I slay 

With these my proper hands." 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 153 

Against the coming of Christmastide 

That year tfie King bade call 
r the Black Friars' Charterhouse of Perth 

A solemn festival. 

And we of his household rode with him 

In a dose-ranked company ; 
But not till the sun had sunk from his^throne 

Did we reach the Scotish Sea. 

That eve was clenched for a boding storm, 

'Neath a toilsome moon half seen ; 
The cloud stooped low and the surf rose high ; 
And where there was a line of the sky, 

Wild wings loomed dark betweep. 

And on a rock of the black beach-side, 

By the veileci moon dimly lit. 
There was something seemed to heave with life 

As the King drew nigh to it 

And was it only the tossing furze 

Or brake of the waste sea-wold ? 
Or was it an eagle bent to the blast ? 
When near we came, we knew it at last 

For a woman tattered and old. 

But it seemed as though by a fire within 

Her writhen limbs were wrung ; 
And as soon as the King was close to her, 

She stood up gaunt and strong. 

Twas then the moon sailed clear of the rack 

On high in her hollow dome ; 
And still as aloft with hoary crest 

Each clamorous wave rang home. 
Like fire in snow the moonlight blazed 

Amid the champing foam. 



Digitized 



by Google 



154 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

And the woman held his eyes with her eyes : — 
" O King, thou art come at last ; 

But thy wraith has haunted the Scotish Sea 
To my sight for four years past 

" Four years it is since first I met, 
Twixt the Duchray and the Dhu, 

A shape whose feet clung close in a shroud. 
And that shape for thine I knew. 

" A year again, and on Inchkeith Isle 

I saw thee pass in the breeze, 
With the cerecloth risen above thy feet 

And wound about thy knees. 

" And yet a year, in the Links of Forth, 

As a wanderer without rest. 
Thou cam'st with both thine arms i' the shroud 

That clung high up thy breast 

" And in this hour I find thee here, 

And well mine eyes may note 
That the winding-sheet hath passed thy breast 

And risen around thy throat 

" And when I meet thee again, O King, 

That of death hast such sore drouth, — 
Except thou turn again on this shore, — 
The winding-sheet shall have moved once more 
And covered thine eyes and mouth. 

"O King, whom poor men bless for their King, 

Of thy fate be not so fain ; 
But these my words for God's message take, 
And turn thy steed, O King, for her sake 

Who rides beside thy rein 1 " 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 155 

While the woman spoke, the King's horse reared 

As if it would breast the sea, 
And the Queen turned pale as she heard on the gale 

The voice die dolorously. 

When the woman ceased, the steed was still, 

But the Kang gazed on her yet, 
And in silence save for the wail of the sea 

His eyes and her eyes met. 

At last he said : — " God's ways are His own ; 

Man is but shadow and dust 
Last night I prayed by His altar-stone ; 
To-night I wend to the Feast of His Son ; 

And in Him I set my trust. 

" I have held my people in sacred charge, 

And have not feared the sting 
Of proud men's hate, — to His will resign'd 
Who has but one same death for a hind 

And one same death for a King. 

" And if God in His wisdom have brought close 

The day when I must die, 
That day by water or fire or air 
My feet shall fall in the destined snare 

Wherever my road may lie. 

*' What man can say but the Fiend hath set 

Thy sorcery on my path. 
My heart with the fear of death to fill, 
And turn me against God's very will 

To sink in His burning wrath ? " 

The woman stood as the train rode past. 

And moved nor limb nor eye ; 
And when we were shipped, we saw her there 

Still standing against the sky. 



Digitized 



by Google 



156 THE KING^S TRAGEDY. 

As the ship made way, the moon once more 

Sank slow in her rising pall ; 
And I thought of the shrouded wraith of the King, 

And I said, " The Heavens know all" 

And now, ye lasses, must ye hear 
How my name is Kate Barlass :— 

But a little thing, when all the tale 
Is told of the weary mass 

Of crime and woe which in Scotland's realm 
God's will let come to pass. 

Twas in the Charterhouse of Perth 

That the King and all his Court 
Were met, the Christmas Feast being done^ 

For solace and disport 

Twas a wind-wild eve in February, 

And against the casement-pane 
The branches smote like summoning hands. 

And muttered the driving rain. 

And when the wind swooped over the lift 
And made the whole heaven frown, 

It seemed a grip was laid on the walls 
To tug the housetop down. 

And the Queen was there, more stately fair 

Than a lily in garden set ; 
And the King was loth to stir from her side ; 
For as on the day when she was his bride. 

Even so he loved her yet 

And the Earl of Athole, the Icing's false friend, 

Sat with him at the board ; 
And Robert Stuart the chamberlain 

Who had sold his sovereign Lord. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 157 

Yet the traitor Christopher Chaumber there 

Would fain have told him all, 
And vainly four times that night he strove 

To reach the King through the hall. 

But the wine is bright at the goblet's brim 

Though the poison lurk beneath ; 
And the apples still are red on the tree 
Within whose shade may the adder be 

That shall turn thy life to death. 

There was a knight of the King's fast friends 
Whom he called the King of Love ; 

And to such bright cheer and courtesy 
That name might best behove. 

And the King and Queen both loved him well 

For his gentle knightliness ; 
And with him the King, as that eve wore on, 

Was playing at the chess. 

And the King said, (for he thought to jest 
And soothe the Queen thereby ;) — 

" In a book 'tis writ that this same year 
A King shall in Scotland die. 

" And I have pondered the matter o'er, 
And this have I found, Sir Hugh, — 

There are but two Kings on Scotish ground, 
And those Kings are I and you. 

" And I have a wife and a newborn heir. 

And you are yourself alone ; 
So stand you stark at my side with me 

To guard our double throne. 



Digitized 



by Google 



158 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

" For here sit I and my wife and child, 
As well your heart shall approve, 

In full surrender and sooth fastness, 
Beneath your Kingdom of Love." 

And the Knight laughed, and the Queen too smiled ; 

But I knew her heavy thought, 
And I strove to find in the good King's jest 

What cheer might thence be wrought. 



And I said, " My Liege, for the Queen's dear love 
'' Now sing the song that of old 
You made, when a captive Prince you lay, 
And the nightingale sang sweet on the spray. 
In Windsor's castle-hold." 

Then he smiled the smile I knew so well 
When he thought to please the Queen ; 

The smile which under all bitter frowns 
Of fate that rose between 

For ever dwelt at the poet's heart 
Like the bird of love unseen. 



And he kissed her hand and took his harp. 

And the music sweetly rang ; 
And when the song burst forth, it seemed 

Twas the nightingale that sang. 



" Worship, ye lovers^ on this May : 
Of bliss your kalends are begun : 

Sing with us, Away, Winter, away I 

Come, Summer, the sweet season and sun ! 
Awake for shame,— your heaven is won, — 

And amorously your heads lift all: 

Thank Love, that you to his grace doth call!** 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 159 

But when he bent to the Queen, and sang 
The speech whose praise was hers, 

It seemed his voice was the voice of the Spring 
And the voice of the bygone years. 



" The fairest and the freshest flower 
That ever I saw before that hour^ 
The which o* the sudden made to start 

The blood of my body to my heart, 

•• * * ♦ * * 

Ah sweet, are ye a worldly creature 
Or heavenly thing inform of nature?** 



And the song was long, and richly stored 
With wonder and beauteous things ; 

And the harp was tuned to every change 
Of minstrel ministerings ; 

But when he spoke of the Queen at the last, 
Its strings were his own heart-strings. 



" Unworthy but only of her grace. 

Upon Love's rock thafs easy and sure, 

In guerdon of all my lov^s space 
She took me her humble credture. 
Thus Jell my blissful aventure 

In youth of love that from day to day 

Flowereth aye new, and further I say. 



" To reckon all the circumstance 
As it happed when lessen gan my sore, 

Of my rancour and woful chance. 
It were too long, — I have done therefor. 
And of this flower I say no more, 

Bui unto my help her heart hath tended 

And even from death her man defendidJ* 



Digitized 



by Google 



i6o THS KING'S TRAGEDY. 

" Aye^ even from death," to myself I said ; 

For I thought of the iay when she 
Had borne him the news, at Roxbro' siege. 

Of the fell confederacy. 



But Death even then took aim as he sang 

With an arrow deadly bright ; 
And the grinning skull lurked grimly aloof, 
And the wings were spread far over the roof 

More dark than the winter night. * 



Yet truly along the amorous song 

Of Love's high pomp and state, 
There were words of Fortune's trackless doom 

And the dreadful face of Fate. 



And oft have I heard again in dreams 

The voice of dire appeal 
In which the King then sang of the pit 

That is under Fortune's wheeL 



*' And under the wheel beheld I there 
An ugly Pit as deep as hell, 

That to behold I quaked for fear : 
And this I heard, that who therein fell 
Came no more up, tidings to tell : 

Whereat, astound of the fearful sight, 

I wist not what to do for fright ** 

And oft has my thought called up again 
These words of the changeful song : — 
" Wist thou thy pain and thy travail 
To come, well mighfst thou weep and wailT 
And our wail, O God I is long. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. i6i 

But the song's end was all of his love ; 

And well his heart was grac'd 
With her smiling lips and her tear-bright eyes 

As his arm went round her waist. 

And on the swell of her long fair throat 

Qose clung the necklet-chain 
As he bent her pearl-tir'd head aside, 
And in the warmth of his love and pride 

He kissed her lips full fain. 

And her true face was a rosy red, 

The very red of the rose 
That, couched on the happy garden-bed, 

In the summer sunlight glows. 

And all the wondrous things of love « 
That sang so sweet through the song 

Were in the look that met in their eyes, 
And the look was deep and long. 

Twas then a knock came at the outer gate. 

And the usher sought the King. 
" The woman you met by the Scotish Sea, 

My Li^e, would tell you a thing ; 
And she says that her present need for speech 

Will bear no gainsaying." 

And the King said : "The hour is lat-4 

To-morrow will serve, I ween." 
Then he chained the usher strictly, and said : 

"No word of this to the Queen." 

But the usher came again to the King. 

" Shall I call her back ?" quoth he : 
* For as she went on her way, she cried, 

'WocI Woel then the thing must be I "• 

II 



Digitized 



by Google 



i62 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

And the King paused, but he did not speak. 

Then he called for the Voidee-cup : 
And as we heard the twelfth hour strike, 
There by true lips and false lips alike 

Was the draught of trust drained up. 

So with reverence meet to King and Queen, 

To bed went all from the board ; 
And the last to leave of the courtly train 
Was Robert Stuart the chamberlain 
Who had sold his sovereign lord. 

And all the locks of the chamber-door 

Had the traitor riven and brast ; 
And that Fate might win sure way from afar, 
He had drawn out every bolt and bar 
That made the entrance fast. 

And now at midnight he stole his way 
To the moat of the outer wall, 

And laid strong hurdles closely across 
Where the traitors' tread should falL 

But we that were the Queen's bower-maids 

Alone were left behind ; 
And with heed we drew the curtains close 

Against the winter wind. 

And now that all was still through the hall. 
More clearly we heard the rain 

That clamoured ever against the glass 
And the boughs that beat on the pane; 

But the fire was bright in the ingle-nook. 

And through empty space around 
The shadows cast on the arras'd wall 
'Mid the pictured kings stood sudden and tall 
Like spectres sprung from the ground. 



Digitized 



by Google 



7HB KING'S TRAGEDY, 163 

And the bed was dight in a deep alcove ; 

And as he stood by the fire 
The King was still in talk with the Queen 

While he doflfed his goodly attire. 

And the song had brought the image back 

Of many a bygone year ; 
And many a loving word they said 
With hand in hand and head laid to head ; 

And none of us went anear. 

But Love was weeping outside the house, 

A child in the piteous rain ; 
And as he watched the arrow of Death, 
He wailed for his own shafls close in the sheath 

That never should fly again. 

And now beneath the window arose 

A wild voice suddenly : 
And the King reared straight, but the Queen fell back 

As for bitter dule to dree ; 
And all of us knew the woman's voice 

Who spoke by the Scotish Sea. 

" O King," she cried, '' in an evil hour 

They drove me from thy gate ; 
And yet my voice must rise to thine ears ; 

But alas 1 it comes too late 1 

' Last night at mid-watch, by Aberdour, 
When the moon was dead in the skies, 

O King, in a death-light of thine own 
I saw thy shape arise. 

''And in full season, as erst I said, 

The doom had gained its growth ; 
And the shroud had risen above thy neck 

And covered thine eyes and mouth. 



Digitized 



by Google 



i64 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

''And no moon woke, but the pale dawn broke. 

And still thy soul stood there ; 
And I thought its silence cried to my soul 

As the first rays crowned its hair. 

'' Since then have I journeyed fast and fain 

In very despite of Fate, 
Lest Hope might still be found in God's will : 

But they drove me from thy gate. 

" For every man on God's ground, O King, 
His death grows up from his birth 

In a shadow-plant perpetually ; 

And thine towers high, a black yew-tree. 
O'er the Charterhouse of Perth I " 

That room was built far out from the house; 

And none but we in the room 
Might hear the voice that rose beneath, 

Nor the tread of the coming doom. 

For now there came a torchlight-glare. 
And a clang of arms there came ; 

And not a soul in that space but thought 
Of the foe Sir Robert Gramme. 

Yea, from the country of the Wild Scots, 

O'er mountain, valley, and glen. 
He had brought with him in murderous league 

Three hundred armM men. 

The King knew all in an instant's flash ; 

And like a King did he stand ; 
But there was no armour in all the room, 

Nor weapon lay to his hand. 

And all we women flew to the door 
And thought to have made it fast ; 

But the bolts were gone and the bars were gone 
And the locks were nven and brast 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. i6s 

And he caught the pale pale Queen in his arms 

As the iron footsteps fell, — 
Then loosed her, standing alone, and said, 

" Our bliss was our farewell I " 

And 'twixt his lips he murmured a prayer, 

And he crossed his brow and breast ; 
And proudly in royal hardihood 
Even so with folded arms he stood, — 
The prize of the bloody quest 

Then on me leaped the Queen like a deer : — 

" O Catherine, help I " she cried. 
And low at his feet we clasped his knees 

Together side by side. 
^ Oh 1 even a King; for his people's sake. 

From treasonous death must hide 1 ^ 

" For kir sake most.1 " I cried, and I marked 
The pang that my words could wring. 

And the iron tongs from the chimney-nook 
I snatched and held to the king : — 

'^ Wrench up the plank I and the vault beneath 
Shall yield safe harbouring." 

With brows low-bent, from my eager hand 

The heavy heft did he take ; 
And the plank at his feet he wrenched and tore ; 
And as he frowned through the open floor, 

Again I said, ''For her sake!" 

Then he cried to the Queen, *' God's will be done I " 
For her hands were clasped in prayer. 

And down he sprang to the inner crypt ; 

And straight we closed the plank he had ripp'd 
And toiled to smooth it &ir. 



Digitized 



by Google 



iC6 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

(Alas I in that vault a gap once was 

Wherethro' the King might have fled : 
But three days since close- walled had it been 
By his will ; for the ball would roll therein 
When without at the palm he pla/d.) 

Then the Queen cried, *' Catherine, keep the door, 

And I to this will suffice I " 
At her word I rose all dazed to my feet. 

And my heart was fire and ice. 

And louder ever the voices grew, 

And the tramp of men in mail ; 
Until to my brain it seemed to be 
As though I tossed on a ship at sea 

In the teeth of a crashing gale. 

Then back I flew to the rest ; and hard 

We strove with sinews knit 
To force the table against the doorf 

But we might not compass it» 

Then my ^dld gaze sped far down the hall 
To the place of the hearthstone-sill ; 

And the Queen bent ever above the floor^ 
For the plank was rising stilL 

And now the rush was heard on the stair. 
And " God, what help ? ** was our cry* 

And was I frenzied or was I bold ? 

I looked at each empty stanchion-hold^ 
And no bar but my arm had 1 1 

Like iron frit my arm, as through 

The staple I made it pass : — 
Alack I it was flesh and bone — no more 1 
'Twas Catherine Douglas sprang to the door. 

But I feU back Kate Barlass. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 167 

W\ih that they all thronged into the hall, 

Half dim to my failing ken ; 
And the space that was but a void before 

Was a crowd of wrathful men. 

Behind the door I had fall'n and lay. 

Yet my sense was wildly aware, 
And for all the pain of my shattered arm 

I never fainted there. 

Even as I fell, my eyes were cast 

Where the King leaped down to the pit ; 

And lo 1 the plank was smooth in its place, 
And the Queen stood far from it 

And under the litters and through the bed 

And within the presses all 
The traitors sought for the King, and pierced 

The arras around the waU. 

And through the chamber they ramped and stormed 

Like lions loose in the lair, 
And scarce could trust to their very eyes,?— 

For behold 1 no King was there;. 

Then one of them seized the Queen, and cried, — 

" Now tell us, where is thy lord ? " 
And he held the sharp point over her heart : 
She drooped not her eyes nor did she start, 

But she answered never a word* 

Then the sword half pierced the true true breast : 

But it was the Graeme's own son 
Cried, " This is a woman, — we seek a^ man 1 " 

And away from her girdle zone 
He struck the point of the murderoua steel ; 

And that foul deed was not done. 



Digitized 



by Google 



i68 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

And forth flowed all the throng like a sea 
And 'twas empty space once more ; 

And my eyes sought out the wounded Queen 
As I lay behind the door. 

And I said : "Dear Lady, leave me here, 

For I cannot help you now ; 
But fly while you may, and none shall reck 

Of my place here lying low." 

And she said, " My Catherine, God help thee ! " 
Then she looked to the distant floor, 

And clasping her hands, " O God help him^* 
She sobbed, " for we can no more I " 

But God He knows what help may mean. 

If it mean to live or to die ; 
And what sore sorrow and mighty moan 
On earth it may cost ere yet a throne 

Be filled in His house on high. 

And now the ladies fled with the Queen ; 

And through the open door 
The night-wind wailed round the empty room 

And the rushes shook on the floor. 

And the bed drooped low in the dark recess 

Whence the arras was rent away ; 
And the firelight still shone over the space 

Where our hidden secret lay. 

And the rain had ceased, and the moonbeams lit 

The window high in the wall, — 
Bright beams that on the plank that I knew 

Through the painted pane did fall, 
And gleamed with the splendour of Scotland's crown 

And shield armorial. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 169 

But then a great wind swept up the skies 

And the climbing moon fell back ; 
And the royal blazon fled from the floor, 

And nought remained on its track ; 
And high in the darkened window-pane 

The shield and the crown were black. 



And what I say next I partly saw 

And partly I heard in sooth, 
And partly since from the murderers' lips 

The torture wrung the truth. 

For now again came the arm^ treaa, 
And fast through the hall it fell ; 

But the throng was less ; and ere I saw, 
By the voice without I could tell 

That Robert Stuart had come with them 
Who knew that chamber well 



And over the space the Graeme strode dark 

With his mantle round him flung ; 
And in his eye was a flaming light 

But not a word on his tongue. 

And Stuart held a torch to the floor, 
And he found the thing he sought ; 

And they slashed the plank a way with their swords; 
And O God 1 1 fainted not I 



And the traitor held his torch in the gap, 

All smoking and smouldering ; 
And through die vapour and fire, beneath 

In the dark crypt's narrow ring, 
With a shout that pealed to the room's high roof 

They saw their naked King. 



Digitized 



by Google 



lyo THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

Half naked he stood, but stood as one 

Who yet could do and dare : 
With the crown, the King was stript away,- 
The Knight was 'reft of his battle-array, — 

But still the Man was there. 



From the rout then stepped a villain forth, — 

Sir John Hall was his name ; 
With a knife imsheathed he leapt to the vault 

Beneath the torchlight-flame. 



Of his person and stature was the King 

A man right manly strong. 
And mightily by the shoulder-blades 

His foe to his feet he flung^ 



Then the traitor's brother. Sir Thomas HaH, 

Sprang down to work his worst ; 
And the King caught the second man by the neck 

And flung him above the first 



And he smote and trampled them under him ; 

And a long month thence they bare 
All black their throats with the grip of his hands 

When the hangman's hand came there. 



And sore he strove to have had their knives, 
But the sharp blades gashed his hands. 

Oh James I so armed, thou hadst battled there 
Till help had come of thy bands ; 

And oh I once more thou hadst held our throne 
And ruled thy Scotish lands ^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 171 

But while the King o'er his foes still raged 
With a heart that nought could tame. 

Another man sprang down to the crypt ; 

And with his sword in his hand hard-gripp'd. 
There stood Sir Robert Graeme. 

(Now shame on the recreant traitor's heart 

Who durst not £aLce his King 
Till the body unarmed was wearied out 

With two-fold combating 1 

Ah I well might the people sing and say. 

As oft ye have heard aright : — 
'* O Robert Grosme^ O Robert Graeme j 
Who slew our King, Cod give thee shame t** 

For he slew him not as a knight) 

And the naked King turned round at bay^ 
But his strength had passed the goal, 

And he could but gasp r — "Mine hour is come; 

But oh I to succour thine own soul's doom, 
Let a priest now shrive my soul \** 

And the traitor looked on the King's spent strength, 
And said : — ** Have I kept my word ? — 

Yea, King, the mortal pledge that I gave ? 

No black friar's shrift tiiy soul shall have,. 
But the shrift of this red sword I " 

With that he smote his King through the breast ; 

And all they three in that pen 
Fell on him and stabbed and stabbed him there 

Like merciless murderous men. 

Yet seemed it now that Sir Robert Graeme, 
Ere the King's last breath was o'er. 

Turned sick at heart with the deadly sight 
And would have done no more. 



Digitized 



by Google 



172 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

But a cry came from the troop above : — 

"If him thou do not slay, 
The price of his life that thou dost spare 

Thy forfeit life shall pay I " 

O God ! what more did I hear or see, 
Or how should I tell the rest ? 

But there at length our King lay slain 
With sixteen wounds in his breast. 



O God ! and now did a bell boom forth, 

And the murderers turned and fled ;— 
Too late, too late, O God, did it sound I — 
And I heard the true men mustering round. 
And the cries and the coming tread. 

But ere they came, to the black death-gap 

Somewise did I creep and steal ; 
And lo I or ever I swooned away. 
Through the dusk I saw where the white &ce lay 

In the Pit of Fortune's Wheel 



And now, ye Scotish maids who have heard 
Dread things of the days grown old, — 

Even at the last, of true Queen Jane 
May somewhat yet be told. 

And how she dealt for her dear lord's sake 
Dire vengeance manifold. 

Twas in the Charterhouse of Perth, 

In the fair-lit Death-chapelle, 
That the slain King's corpse on bier was laid 

With chaunt and requiem-knelL 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE ICING'S TRAGEDY. 173 

And all with royal wealth of balm 

Was the body purified ; 
And none could trace on the brow and lips 

The death that he had died. 

In his robes of state he lay asleep 

With orb and sceptre in hand ; 
And by the crown he wore on his throne 

Was his kingly forehead spann'd. 

And, girls, 'twas a sweet sad thing to see 

How the curling golden hair, 
As in the day of the poet's youth, 

From the King's crown clustered there. 

And if all had come to pass in the brain 

That throbbed beneath those curb, "* 

Then Scots had said in the days to come 

That this their soil was a different home 

And a different Scotland, girls 1 

And the Queen sat by him night and day, 

And oft she knelt in prayer. 
All wan and pale in the widow's veil 

That shrouded her shining hair. 

And I had got good help of my nurt : 

And only to me some sign 
She made ; and save the priests that were there. 

No face would she see but mine. 



And the month of March wore on apace ; 

And now fresh couriers fared 
Still from the country of the Wild Scots 

With news of the traitors snared. 



Digitized 



by Google 



174 THE KING'S TRAGEDY. 

And still as I told her day by day, 

Her pallor changed to sight, 
And the frost grew to a furnace-flame 

That burnt her visage white. 

And evermore as I brought her word. 
She bent to her dead King James, 

And in the cold ear with fire-drawn breath 
She spoke the traitors* names. 

But when the name of Sir Robert Graeme 
Was the one she had to give, 

I ran to hold her up from the floor; 

For the froth was on her lips, and sore 
I feared that she could not live. 



And the month of March wore nigh to its end, 
And still was the death-pall spread ; 

For she would not bury her slaughtered lord 
Till his slayers all were dead. 

And now of their dooms dread tidings came, 

And of torments fierce and dire ; 
And nought she spake, — she had ceased to speak, — 

But her eyes were a soul on fire. 

But when I told her the bitter end 

Of the stem and just award. 
She leaned o'er the bier, and thrice three times 

She kissed the lips of her lord. 

And then she said, — " My King, they are dead 1 " 

And she knelt on the chapel-floor. 
And whispered low with a strange proud smile, — 

"James, James, they suffered more 1 " 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE ICING'S TRAGEDY. 175 

Last she stood up to her queenly height. 

But she shook like an autumn leaf. 
As though the fire wherein she burned 
Then left her body, and all were turned 

To winter of life-long grief. 

And " O James 1 " she said, — " My James I ** she 
said, — 

'' Alas for the woful thing, 
That a poet true and a friend of man, 
In desperate days of bale and ban. 

Should needs be bom a King 1 " 



Digitized 



by Google 



176 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE: 

A SONNET-SEQUENCE. 

Part I. 
YOUTH AND CHANGE. 

Part II. 
CHANGE AND FATE. 

(The present full series of Th$ Houst of Lift consists of sonnets 
only. It will be evident that many among those now first added 
are still the work of earlier years. — 1 88 1.) 

A Sonnet is a momenfs monument^ — 

Memorial from the SouTs eternity 

To one dead deathless hour. Look that it be, 
Whether for lustral rite or dire portent. 
Of its own arduous fulness reverent: 

Carve it in ivory or in ebony, 

As Day or Night mqy rule; and let Time see 
Its flowering crest impearled and orient, 

A Sonnet is a coin : its face reveals 

The soul, — its converse, to what Power 'tis due : — 
Whether for tribute to the august appeals 

Of Life, or dower in Love*s high retinue, 
It serve; or, 'mid the dark wharfs cavernous breath, 
In Charon* s palm it pay the toll to Death, 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 177 

Part I.— YOUTH AND CHANGE. 

SONNET I. 

LOVE ENTHRONED. 

I BfARKED all kindred Powers the heart finds fair : — 
Truth, with awed lips ; and Hope, with eyes upcast ; 
And Fame, whose loud wings fan the ashen Past 

To signal-fires. Oblivion's flight to scare ; 

And Youth, with still some single golden hair ' 

Unto his shoulder clinging, since the last 
Embrace wherein two sweet arms held him fast ; 

And Life, still wreathing flowers for Death to wear. 

Love's throne was not with these ; but far above 
All passionate wind of welcome and 6irewell 

He sat in breathless bowers they dream not of; 
Though Truth foreknow Love's heart, and Hope foretell, 
And Fame be for Love's sake desirable. 

And Youth be dear, and Life be sweet to Love, 

SONNET II. 

BRTOAL BIRTH. 

As when desire, long darkling, dawns, and first 
The mother looks upon the tiewbom child, 
Even so my Lady stood at gaze and smiled 

When her soul knew at length the Love it nurs'd. 

Bom with her life, creature of poignant thirst 
And exquisite hunger, at her heart Love lay 
Quickening in darkness, till a voice that day 

Cried on him, and the bonds of birth were burst. 

Now, shadowed by his wings, our faces yearn 
Together, as his full-grown feet now range 

The grove, and his warm hands our couch prepare • 
Till to his song our bodiless souls in turn 

Be bom his children, when Death's nuptial change 
Leaves us for light the halo of his hair. 

12 



Digitized 



by Google 



178 THE HOUSE OF LIFS. 

SONNET UL 

LOVE'S TESTAMENT. 

O THOU who at Love's hour ecstaticaUy 
Unto my heart dost evermore present, 
Clothed with his fire, thy heart his testament ; 

Whom I have neared and felt thy breath to be 

The inmost incense of his sanctuary ; 

Who without speech hast owned him, and, intent 
Upon his will, thy life with mine hast blent, 

And murmured, " I am thine, thou'rt one with me ! " 

O what from thee the grace, to me the prize, 
And what to Love the glory, — when the whole 
Of the deep stair thou tread'st to the dim shoal 
And weary water of the place of sighs, 
And there dost work deliverance, as thine eyes 
Draw up my prisoned spirit to thy souU 



SONNET rv. 
LOVESIGHT. 

When do I see thee most, beloved one ? 

When in the light the spirits of mine eyes 

Before thy face, their altar, solemnize 
The worship of that Love through thee made known? 
Or when in the dusk hours, (we two alone,) 

Close-kissed and eloquent of still replies 

Thy twilight-hidden glimmering visage lies, 
And my soul only sees thy soul its own ? 

O love, my love 1 if I no more should see 
Thyself, nor on the earth the shadow of thee, 

Nor image of thine eyes in any spring, — 
How then should sound upon Life's darkening slope • 
The ground- whirl of the perished leaves of Hope, 

The wind of Death's imperishable wing ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 179 

SONNET V. 

HEARTS HOPE. 

By what word's power, the key of paths untrod, 
Shall I the difficult deeps of Love explore, 
Till parted waves of Song yield up the shore 

Even as that sea which Israel crossed dryshod ? 

For lo I in some poor rhythmic period. 
Lady, I fain would tell how evermore 
Thy soul I know not from thy body, nor 

Thee from myself, neither our love from God. 

Yea, in God's name, and Love's, and thine, would I 
Draw from one loving heart such evidence 

As to all hearts all things shall signify ; 
Tender as dawn's first hill-fire, and intense 
As instantaneous penetrating sense. 

In Spring's birth-hour, of other Springs ^one by. 



SONNET VI. 

THE KISS. 

What smouldering senses in death's sick delay 
Or seizure of malign vicissitude 
Can rob this body of honour, or denude 

This soul of wedding-raiment worn to-day ? 

For lo ! even now my lady's lips did play 
With these my lips such consonant interlude 
As laurelled Orpheus longed for when he wooed 

The half-drawn hungering fece with that last lay. 

I was a child beneath her touch, — a man 

When breast to breast we clung, even I and she, — 
A spirit when her spirit looked through me, — 
A god when all our life-breath met to fan 
Our life-blood, till love's emulous ardours ran, 
Fire within fire, desire in deity. 



Digitized 



by Google 



i80 THE HOUSE 01' UFE, 

SONNET VH. 

SUPREME SURRENDER. 

To all the spirits of Love that wander by 
Along his love-sown harvest-field of sleep 
My lady lies apparent ; and the deep 

Calls to the deep ; and no man sees but L 

The bliss so long afar, at length so nigh, 
.Rests there attained. Methinks proud Love must weep 
When Fate's control doth from his harvest reap 

The sacred hour for which the years did sigh. 

First touched, the hand now warm around my neck 
Taught memory long to mock desire : and lo ! 
Across my breast the abandoned hair doth flow, 
Where one shorn tress long stirred the longing ache : 
And next the heart that trembled for its sake 
Lies the queen-heart in sovereign overthrow. 



SONNET VIII. 

LOVE'S LOVERS. 

Some ladies love the jewels in Love's zone, 
And gold-tipped darts he hath for painless play 
In idle scornful hours he flings away ; 

And some that listen to his lute*s soft tone 

Do love to vaunt the silver praise their own ; 
Some prize his blindfold sight ; and there be they 
Who kissed his wings which brought him yesterday 

And thank his wings to-day that he is flown. 

My lady only loves the heart of Love : 
Therefore Love's heart, my lady, hath for thee 
His bower of imimagined flower and tree : 
There kneels he now, and all-anhungered of 
Thine eyes grey-lit in shadowing hair above^ 
Seals with thy mouth his immortality. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THB HOUSE OF LIFE. l«i 

SONNET DC 

PASSION AND WORSHIP. 

One flame-winged brought a white-winged harp-player 
Even where my lady and I lay all alone ; 
Saying : " Behold, this minstrel is unknown ; 

Bid him depart, for I am minstrel here : 

Only my strains are to Love's dear ones dear." 

Then said I : "Through thine hautboy's rapturous tone 
Unto my lady still this harp makes moan, 

And still she deems the cadence deep and dear." 

Then said my lady : " Thou art Passion of Love, 
And this Love's Worship : both he plights to me. 
Thy mastering music walks the sunlit sea : 

But where wan water trembles in the gcove 

And the wii moon is all the light thereof. 
This harp still makes my name its voluntary.** 



SONNET X. 

THE PORTRAIT. 

O Lord of all compassionate control, 
O Love I let this my lady's picture glow 
Under my hand to praise her name, and show 

Even of her inner self the perfect whole : 

That he who seeks her beauty's furthest goal. 
Beyond the light that the sweet glances thiow 
And refluent wave of the sweet smile, may know 

The very sky and sea-line of her souL 

Lo ! it is done. Above the enthroning throat 
The mouth's mould testifies of voice and kiss. 
The shadowed eyes remember and foresee. 
Her face is made her shrine. Let all men note 
That in all years (O Love, thy gift is this !) 
They that would look on her must come 'o me. 



Digitized 



by Google 



i8a THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET XI. 

THE LOVE-LETTER. 

Warmed by her hand and shadowed by^her hair 

As close she leaned and poured her heart through 

thee, 
Whereof the articulate throbs accompany 
The smooth black stream that makes thy whiteness 

fair, — 
Sweet fluttering sheet, even of her breath aware, — 

Oh let thy silent song disclose to mc 
' That soul wherewith her lips and eyes agree 
Like married music in Love's answering air. 

Fain had I watched her when, at some fond thought, 
Her bosom to the writing closelier press'd. 
And her breast's secrets peered into her breast ; 
When, through eyes raised an instant, her soul sought 
My soul, and from the sudden confluence caught 
The words that made her love the loveliest 

SONNET XII. 

THE LOVERS' WALK. 

Sweet twining hedgeflowers wind-stirred in no wise 
0n this June day ; and hand that clings in hand :- ^ 
Still glades ; and meeting faces scarcely fann'd : — 

An osier-odoured stream that draws the skies 

Deep to its heart ; and mirrored eyes in eyes : — 
Fresh hourly wonder o'er the Summer land 
Of light and cloud ; and two souls softly spann'd 

With one o'erarching heaven of smiles and sighs : — 

Even such their path, whose bodies lean unto 
Each other's visible sweetness amorously, — 
Whose passionate hearts lean by Love's high decree 

Together on his heart for ever true, 

As the cloud-foaming firmamental blue 
Rests on the blue line of a foamless sea« 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BOUSE OF LIFE, 183 

SONNET Xin. 

YOUTH'S ANTIPHONY. 

'" I LOVE you, sweet r how can you ever learn 
How much I love you ? " " You I love even so^ 
And so I learn it."^ " Sweet, you cannot know 

How fair you are." " If fair enough to earn 

Your love, so much is all my love's concern.** 

"My love grows hourly, sweet.** "Mine too doth 

grow, 
Yet love seemed full so many hours ago I '^ 

Thus lovers speak, till kisses claim their turn. 

Ah I happy they to whom such words as these 

In youth have served for speech the whole day long, 
Hour after hour, remote from the world's throng. 
Work, contest, fame, all life's confederate pleas, — 
What while Love breathed in sighs and silences 
Through two blent souls one rapturous undersong. 

SONNET xrv. 
YOUTH'S SPRING^TRIBUTE. 

On this sweet bank your head thrice sweet and dear 
I lay, and spread your hair on either side, 
And see the newborn woodflowerjs bashful-eyed* 

Look through the golden tresses here and there, 

On^ these debateable borders^ the year 

Spring's foot half falters; scarce she yet may kno\^. 
TTie leafless blackthorn-blossom from the snow ; 

And through her bowers the wind's way still is clear^ 

But April's sun strikes down the glades to-day ; 
So shut your eyes upturned, and feel my kiss 

Creep, as the Spring now thrills through every spray^ 
Up your warm throat to your warm lips : for this 
Is even the hour of Love's sworn suitservice, 

With whom cold hearts are counted castaway.- 



Digitized 



by Google 



iS4 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET XV. 

THE BIRTH-BOND. 

Have you not noted, in some family 
Where two were bom of a first marriage-bed, 
How still they own their gracious bond, though fed 

And nursed on the forgotten breast and loiee ? — 

How to their father's children they shall be 
In act and thought of one goodwill ; but each 
Shall for the other have, in silence speech, 

And in a word complete community ? 

Even so, when first I saw you, seemed it, love. 
That among souls allied to mine was yet 

One nearer kindred than life hinted o£ 
O bom with me somewhere that men forget, 
And though in years of sight and sound unmet, 

Known for my soul's birth-partner well enough I 



SONNET XVL 

A DAY OF LOVE. 

Those envied places which do know her well. 
And are so scomful of this lonely, place, 
Even now for once are emptied of her grace : 

Nowhere but here she is : and while Love's spell 

From his predominant presence doth compel 
All alien hours, an outworn populace, 
The hours of Love fill full the echoing space 

With sweet confederate music favourable. 

Now many memories make solicitous 

The deh'cate love-lines of her mouth, till, lit 
With quivering fire, the words take wing from it 

As here between our kisses we sit thus 
Speaking of things remembered, and so sit 

Speechless while things foigotten call to us. 



Digitized 



by Google, 



THE HOUSE OP LIFE. 185 

SONNET XVn. 

BEAUTY'S PAGEANT. 

What dawn-pulse at die heart of heaven^ or last 
Incarnate flower of culminating day, — 
What marshalled marvels on the skirts of May, 

Or song full-quired, sweet June's encomiast ; 

What glory of change by Nature's hand amass'd 
Can vie with all those moods of varying grace 
Which o'er one loveliest woman's form and face 

Within this hour, within this room, have pass'd ? 

Love's very vesture and elect disguise 

Was each fine movement, — wonder new-begot 
Of lily or swan or swan-stemmed galiot ; 

Joy to his sight who now the sadlier sighs^ 

Parted again ; and sorrow yet for eyes 

Unborn, that read these words and saw her not 



SONNET xvin. 
GENIUS IN BEAUTY. 

Bgautt like hers is genius. Not the call * 

Of Homer^s or of Dante's heart sublime, — 
Not Michael's hand furrowing the zones of time, — 

Is more with compassed mysteries musical ; 

Nay, not in Spring's or Summer's sweet footfall 
More gathered gifb exuberant Life bequeaths 
Than doth this sovereign fece, whose love-spell breathes 

Even from its shadowed contour on the walL 

As many men are poets in their youth, 

But for one sweet-strung soul the wires prolong 
Even through all change the indomitable song ; 
So in likewise the envenomed years, whose tooth 
Rends shallower grace with ruin void of ruth, 
Upon this beauty's power shall wreak no wrong. 



Digitized 



by Google 



l86 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET XIX. 

SILENT NOON. 

Your hands lie open in the long fresh grass,— 
The finger-points look through like rosy blooms : 
Your eyes smile peace. The pasture gleams and glooms 

'Neath billowing skies that scatter and amass. 

All round our nest, far as the eye can pass, 
Are golden kingcup-fields with silver edge 
Where the cow-parsley skirts the hawthorn-hedge. 

Tis visible silence, still as the hour-glass. 

Deep in the sun-searched growths the dragon-fly 
Hangs like a blue thread loosened from the sky : — * 

So this wing'd hour is dropt to us from above. 
Oh ! clasp we to our hearts, for deathless dower. 
This close-companioned inarticulate hour 

When twofold silence was the song of love» 



SONNET XX. 

GRACIOUS MOONLIGHT. 

Even as the moon grows queenlier in mid-space 
When the sky darkens, and her cloud-rapt car 
Thrills with intenser radiance from afar, — 

So lambent, lady, beams thy sovereign grace 

When the drear soul desires thee. Of that face 
What shall be said, — ^which, like a governing star. 
Gathers and gamers from all things that are 

Their silent penetrative loveliness ? 

O'er water-daisies and wild waifs of Spring, 

There where the iris rears its gold-crowned sheaf 
With flowering rush and sceptred arrow-leaf, 
So have I marked Queen Dian, in bright ring 
Of cloud above and wave below, take wing 
And chase nighf s gloom, as thou the spirit's grieC 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF UFE. 187 

SONNET XXI. 

LOVE-SWEETNESS. 

Sweet dimness of her loosened hair's downfall 
About thy face ; her sweet hands round thy head 
In gracious fostering union garlanded ; 

Her tremulous smiles ; her glances' sweet recall 

Of love ; her murmuring sighs memorial ; 

Her mouth's culled sweetness by thy kisses shed 
On cheeks and neck and eyelids, and so led 

Back to her mouth which answers there for all : — 

What sweeter than these things^ except the thing 
In lacking which all these would lose their sweet : — 
The confident heart's still fervour : the swift beat 
And soft subsidence of the spirit's wing, 
Then when it feels, in cloud-girt wayfaring. 
The breath of kindred plumes against its feet ? 



SONNET xxn. 
HEART'S HAVEN. 

Sometimes she is a child within mine arms. 

Cowering beneath dark wings that love must chase, — 
With still tears showering and averted face, 

Inexplicably filled with faint alarms : 

And oft from mine own spirit's hurtling harms 
I crave the refuge of her deep embrace, — 
Against all ills the fortified strong place 

And sweet reserve of sovereign counter-charms. 

And Love, our light at night and shade at noon. 
Lulls us to rest with songs, and turns away 
All shafts of shelterless tumultuous day. 

Like the moon's growth, his face gleams through his tunc ; 

And as soft waters warble to the moon. 
Our answering spirits chime one roundelay* 



Digitized 



by Google 



i88 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET XXIU* 

LOVE'S BAUBLES, 

I STOOD where Love in brimming armfuls bore 
Slight wanton flowers and foolish toys of fruit : 
And round him ladies thronged in warm pursuit, 

Fingered and lipped and proffered the strange store. 

And from one hand the petal and the core 

Savoured of sleep ; and cluster and curled shoot 
Seemed from another hand like shame's salute, — 

Gifts that I felt my cheek was blushing for. 

At last Love bade my Lady give the same : 
And as I looked, the dew was light thereon ; 
And as I took thiem, at her touch they shone 

With inmost heaven-hue of the heart of flame. 

And then Love said : '' Lo ! when the hand is hers, 

Follies of love are love's true ministers," 



SONNET XXIV. 

PRIDE OF YOUTH. 

Even as a child, of sorrow that we give 
The dead, but little in his heart can find, 
Since without need of thought to his clear mind 

Their turn it is to die and his to live : — 

Even so the winged New Love smiles to receive 
Along his eddying plumes the auroral wind. 
Nor, forward glorying, casts one look behind 

Where night-rack shrouds the Old Love fugitive. 

There is a change in every hour's recall. 
And the last cowslip in the fields we see 
On the same day with the first corn-poppy. 

Alas for hourly change I Alas for all 

The loves that from his hand proud Youth lets fall. 
Even as the beads of a told rosary I 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF UFE. 189 

SONNET XXV. 

WINGED HOURa 

Each hour until we meet is as a bird 
That wings from far his gradual way along 
The rustling covert of my soul, — his song 

Still loudlier trilled through leaves more deeply stirr'd : 

But at the hour of meeting, a clear word 

Is every note he sings, in Love's own tongue ; 

Yet, Love, thou knoVst the sweet strain suffers wrong. 

Full oil through our contending joys unheard. 

What of that hour at last, when for her sake 
No wing may fly to me nor song may flow; 
When, wandering round my life unleaved, I know 
The bloodied feathers scattered in the brake. 
And think how she, far from me, with like eyes 
Sees through the untunefiil bough the wingless skies ? 

SONNET XXVI. 

MID-RAPTURE. 

Thou lovely and beloved, thou my love ; 

Whose kiss seems still the first; whose summomng 
eyes, 

Even now, as for our love-world's new sunrise. 
Shed very dawn ; whose voice, attuned above 
All modulation of the deep-bowered dove, 

Is like a hand laid sofUy on the soul ; 

Whose hanct is like a sweet voice to control 
Those worn tired brows it hath the keeping of :— 

What word can answer to thy word, — what gaze 
To thine, which now absorbs within its sphere 
My worshiping face, till I am mirrored there 

Light-circled in a heaven of deep-drawn rays ? 

What clasp, what kiss mine inmost heart can prove, 

O lovely and beloved, O my love? 



Digitized 



by Google 



190 THE HOUSE OF UFE. 

SONNET XXVII. 

HEARTS COMPASS. 

Sometimes thou seem'st not as thyself alone, 
But as the meaning of all things that are ; 
A breathless wonder, shadowing forth afar 

Some heavenly solstice hushed and halcyon ; 

Whose unstirred lips are music's visible tone ; 
Whose eyes the sun-gate of the soul unbar, 
Being of its furthest fires oracular ; — 

The evident heart of all life sown and mown. 

Even such Love is ; and is not thy name Love ? 
Yea, by thy hand the Love-god rends apart 
All gathering clouds of Night's ambiguous art ; 

Flings them far down, and sets thine eyes above ; 

And simply, as some gage of flower or glove, 
Stakes with a smile the world against thy heart 



SONNET xxvin. 
SOUL-LIGHT. 

What other woman could be loved like you, 
Or how of you should love possess his fill ? 
After the fulness of all rapture, still, — 

As at the end of some deep avenue 

A tender glamour of day, — there comes to view 
Far in your eyes a yet more hungering thrill, — 
Such fire as Love's soul-winnowing hands distil 

Even from his inmost ark of light and dew. 

And as the traveller triumphs with the sun. 

Glorying in heat's mid-height, yet startide brings 
Wonder new-bom, and still fresh transport springs 
From limpid lambent hours of day begun ; — 
Even so, through eyes and voice, your soul doth move 
My soul with changeful light of infinite love. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 191 

SONNET ZXIX. 

THE MOONSTAR. 

Lady, I thank thee for thy loveliness, 

Because my lady is more lovely still. 

Glorying I gaze, and yield with glad goodwill 
To thee thy tribute ; by whose sweet-spun dress. 
Of delicate life Love labours to assess 

My lady's absolute queendom ; saying, " Lo ! 

How high this beauty is, which yet doth show 
But as that beauty's sovereign votaress." 

Lady, I saw thee with her, side by side ; 

And as, when night's fair fires their queen surround. 

An emulous star too near the moon will ride, — 
Even so thy rays within her luminous bound 
Were traced no more ; and by the light so drown'd, 

Lady, not thou but she was glorified. 

SONNET xxx« 
LAST FIRE. 

Love, through your spirit and mine what summer eve 
Now glows with glory of all things possessed. 
Since this day's sun of rapture filled the west 

And the light sweetened as the fire took leave ? 

Awhile now softlier let your bosom heave, 
As in Love's harbour, even that loving breast, 
All care takes refuge while we sink to rest, 

And mutual dreams the bygone bliss retrieve. 

Many the days that Winter keeps in store, 

Sunless throughout, or whose brief sun-glimpses 
Scarce shed the heaped snow through the naked trees. 

This day at least was Summer's paramour, 

Sun-coloured to the imperishable core 

With sweet well-being of love and full heart's case. 



Digitized 



by Google 



192 THE HOUSE OF LI^Bp 

SONN£T XXXI. 

HER GIFTS. 

High grace, the dower of queens ; and therewithal 
Some wood-bom wonder's sweet simplicity 
A glance like water brimming with the sky 

Or hyacinth-light where forest-shadows fall ; 

Such thrilling pallor of cheek as doth enthral 

The heart ; a mouth whose passionate forms imply 
All music and all silence held thereby ; 

Deep golden locks, her sovereign coronal ; 

A round reared neck, meet column of Love's shrine 
To cling to when the heart takes sanctuary ; 
Hands which for ever at Love's bidding be, 

And soft-stirred feet still answering to his sign : — 

These are her gifts, as tongue may tell them o'er. 

Breathe low her name, my soul ; for that means more. 



SONNET XXXU. 

EQUAL TROTH. 

Not by one measure mayst thou mete our love ; 

For how should I be loved as I love thee ? — 

I, graceless, joyless, lacking absolutely 
All gifts that with thy queenship best behove ; — 
Thou, throned in every heart's elect alcove. 

And crowned with garlands culled from every tree, 

Which for no head but thine, by Love's decree. 
All beauties and all mysteries interwove. 

But here thine eyes and lips yield soft rebuke : — 
"Then only " (say'st thou) "could I love thee less, 
When thou couldst doubt my love's equality." 
Peace, sweet I If not to sum but worth we look, — » 
Thy heart's transcendence, not my heart's excess,— 
Then more a thousandfold thou loVst than L 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 193 

SONNET XXXIIL 

VENUS VICTRIX. 

Could Juno's self more sovereign presence wear 
Than thou, 'mid other ladies throned in grace ? — 
Or Pallas, when thou bend'st with soul-stilled face 

O'er poet's page gold-shadowed in thy hair ? 

Dost thou than Venus seem less heavenly fair 
When o'er the sea of love's tumultuous trance 
Hovers thy smile, and mingles with thy glance 

That sweet voice like the last wave murmuring there ? 

Before such triune loveliness divine 

Awestruck I ask, which goddess here most claims 
The prize that, howsoever adjudged, is thine ? 

Then Love breathes low the sweetest of thy names ; 
And Venus Victrix to my heart doth bring 
Herself, the Helen of her guerdoning. 



SONNET XXXrV. 

THE DARK GLASS. 

Not I myself know all my love for thee : 

How should I reach so far, who cannot weigh 
To-morrow's dower by gage of yesterday ? 

Shall birth and death, and all dark names that be 

As doors and windows bared to some loud sea. 
Lash deaf mine ears and blind my face with spray ; 
And shall my sense pierce love, — the last relay 

And ultimate outpost of eternity ? 

Lo ! what am I to Love, the lord of all ? 

One murmuring shell he gathers from the sand, — 
One little heart-flame sheltered in his hand. 

Yet through thine eyes he grants me clearest, call 

And veriest touch of powers primordial 
That any hour-girt life may understand. 

13 



Digitized 



by Google 



194 '^^^ HOUSE OF UFE. 

SONNET XXXV. 

THE LAMPS SHRINE. 

SoMETiMSS I fain would find in thee some fault, 
That I might love thee still in spite of it : . 
Yet how should our Lord Love curtail one whit 

Thy perfect praise whom most he would exalt ? 

Alas ! he can but make my heart's low vault 
Even in men's sight unworthier, being lit 
By thee, who thereby show'st more exquisite 

Like fiery chrysoprase in deep basalt. 

Yet will I nowise shrink ; but at Love's shrine 
Myself within the beams his brow doth dart 
Will set the flashing jewel of thy heart 
In that dull chamber where it deigns to shine : 
For lo ! in honour of thine excellencies 
My heart takes pride to show how poor it i% 



SONNET XXXVI. 

LIFE-IN-LOVE. 

Not in thy body is thy life at all, 

But in this lady's lips and hands and eyes ; 
Through these she yields thee life that vivifies 

What else were sorrow's servant and death's thralL 

Look on thyself without her, and recall 

The waste remembrance and forlorn surmise 
That lived but in a dead-drawn breath of sighs 

O'er vanished hours and hours eventual. 

Even so much life hath the poor tress of hair 
Which, stored apart, is all love hath to show 
For heart-beats and for fire-heats long ago ; 
Even so much life endures unknown, even wher^ 
'Mid change the changeless night environeth. 
Lies all that golden hair undimmed in death. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 195 

SONNET XXXVII. 

THE LOVE-MOON. 

''When that dead face, bowered in the furthest years, 
Which once was all the life years held for thee. 
Can now scarce bid the tides of memory 

Cast on thy soul a little spray of tears, — 

How canst thou gaze into these eyes of hers 
Whom now thy heart delights in, and not see 
Within each orb Love's philtred euphrasy 

Make them of buried troth remembrancers ? " 

" Nay, pitiful Love, nay, loving Pity I Well 
Thou knowest that in these twain I have confess* J. 

Two very voices of thy summoning bell. 
Nay, Master, shall not Death make manifest 

In these the culminant changes which approve 

The love-moon that must light my soul to Love ? " 



SONNET XXXVIII. 

THE MORROW'S MESSAGE. 

** Thou Ghost," I said, " and is thy name To-day ? — 
Yesterday's son, with such an abject brow I — 
And can To-morrow be more pale than thou ? " 

While yet I spoke, the silence answered : " Yea, 

Henceforth our issue is all grieved and grey. 
And each beforehand makes such poor avow 
As of old leaves beneath the budding bough 

Or night-drift that the sundawn shreds away." 

Then cried I : " Mother of many malisons, 
O Earth, receive me to thy dusty bed ! " 
But therewithal the tremulous silence said : 
** Lo ! Love yet bids thy lady greet thee once :— 
Yea, twice, — whereby thy life is still the sun's ; 
And thrice, — whereby the shadow of death is dead.' 



Digitized 



by Google 



196 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET XXXIX. 

SLEEPLESS DREAMS. 

Girt in dark growths, yet glimmering with one star, 

O night desirous as the nights of youth ! 

Why should my heart within thy spell, forsooth, 
Now beat, as the bride's fingei^pulses are 
Quickened within the girdling golden bar ? 

What wings are these that fan my pillow smooth ? 

And why does Sleep, waved back by Joy and Ruth, 
Tread softly round and gaze at me from far ? 

Nay, night deep-leaved I And would Love feign in thee 
Some shadowy palpitating grove that bears 
Rest for man's eyes and music for his ears ? 

O lonely night I art thou not known to me, 

A thicket hung with masks of mockery 

And watered with the wasteful warmth of tears ? 



SONNET XL. 

SEVERED SELVES. 

Two separate divided silences. 

Which, brought together, would find loving voice ; 

Two glances which together would rejoice 
In love, now lost like stars beyond dark trees ; 
Two hands apart whose touch alone gives ease ; 

Two bosoms which, heart-shrined with mutual flame. 

Would, meeting in one clasp, be made the same ; 

Two souls, the shores wave-mocked of sundering seas : — 

t 

Such are we now. Ah ! may our hope forecast 

Indeed one hour again, when on. this stream 

Of darkened love once more the light shall gleam ? — 

An hour how slow to come, how quickly past, — 

Which blooms and fades, and only leaves at last, 

Faint as shed flowers, the attenuated dream. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OP LIFE. 197 

SONNET XJLI. 

THROUGH DEATH TO LOVE, 

Like labour-laden moonclouds faint to flee 

From winds that sweep the winter-bitten wold, — 
Like multiform circumfluence manifold 

Of night's flood-tide, — like terrors that agree 

Of hoarse-tongued fire and inarticulate sea, — 

Even such, within some glass dimmed by our breath, 
Our hearts discern wild images of Death, 

Shadows and shoals that edge eternity. 

Howbeit athwart Death's imminent shade doth soar ^ 

One Power, than flow of stream or flight of dove 
Sweeter to glide around, to brood above. 
Tell me, my heart, — what angel-greeted door 
Or threshold of wing- winnowed threshing-floor 

Hath guest fire-fledged as thine, whose lord is Love ? 



SONNET XLII. 

HOPE OVERTAKEN. 

I DEEMED thy garments, O my Hope, were grey. 
So. far I viewed thee. Now the space between 
Is passed at length ; and garmented in green 

Even as in days of yore thou stand'st to-day. 

Ah God ! and but for lingering dull dismay. 
On all that road our footsteps erst had been 
Even thus commingled, and our shadows seen 

Blent on the hedgerows and the water-way. 

O Hope of mine whose eyes are living love. 

No eyes but hers, — O Love and Hope the same I — 
Lean close to me, for now the sinking sun 
That warmed our feet scarce gilds our hair above. 
O hers thy voice and very hers thy name ! 
Alas, cling round me, for the day is done I 



Digitized 



by Google 



198 7HE HOUSE OF UFE. 

SONNET XLIU. 

LOVE AND HOPE. 

Bless love and hope. Full many a withered year 
Whirled past us, eddying to its chill doomsday ; 
And clasped together where the blown leaves lay 

We long have knelt and wept full many a tear. 

Yet lo I one hour at last, the Spring's compeer, 
Flutes softly to us from some green byeway : 
Those years, those tears are dead, but only they • — 

Bless love and hope, true soul ; for we are here. 

Cling heart to heart ; nor of this hour demand 
Whether in very truth, when we are dead, 
Our hearts shall wake to know Love's golden )iead 

Sole sunshine of the imperishable land ; 

Or but discern, through night's unfeatured scope, 

Scorn-fired at length the illusive eyes of Hope. 



SONNET xuv. 
CLOUD AND WIND. 

Love, should I fear death most for you or me ? 
Yet if you die, can I not follow you. 
Forcing the straits of change ? Alas ! but who 

Shall wrest a bond from night's inveteracy. 

Ere yet my hazardous soul put forth, to be 

Her warrant against all her haste might rue ? — 
Ah I in your eyes so reached what dumb adieu. 

What unsunned gyres of waste eternity ? 

And if I die the first, shall death be then 

A lampless watchtower whence I see you weep ? — 
Or (woe is me I) a bed wherein my sleep 
Ne'er notes (as death's dear cup at last you drain) 
The hour when you too learn that all is vain 
And that Hope sows what Love shall never reap ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OP LIFE. 199 

SONNET XLV. 

SECRET PARTING. 

Because our talk was of the doudncontrol 

And moon-track of the journeying face of Fate, 
Her tremulous kisses faltered at love's gate 

And her eyes dreamed against a distant goal : 

But soon, remembering her how brief the whole 
Of joy, which its own hours annihilate, 
Her set gaze gathered, thirstier than of late. 

And as she kissed, her mouth became her soul. 

Thence in what ways we wandered, and how strove 
To build with fire-tried vows the piteous home 
Which memory haunts and whither sleep may roam, — 

They only know for whom the roof of Lx)ve 

Is the still-seated secret of the grove, 

• Nor spire may rise nor bell be heard therefrom. 



SONNET XLVl. 

PARTED LOVE. 

What shall be said of this embattled day 
And armM occupation of this night 
By all thy foes beleaguered, — now when sight 

Nor sound denotes the loved one far away ? 

Of these thy vanquished hours what shalt thou say, — 
As every sense to which she dealt delight 
Now labours lonely o'er the stark noon-height 

To reach the sunset's desolate disarray ? 

Stand still, fond fettered wretch I while Memory's art 
Parades the Past before thy face, and lures 
Thy spirit to her passionate portraitures : 
Till the tempestuous tide-gates flung apart 
Flood with wild will the hollows of thy heart, 
And thy heart rends thee, and thy body endures. 



Digitized 



by Google 



200 THE HOUSE OF LIFE, 

SONNET XLVII. 

BROKEN MUSIC. 

The mother will not turn, who thinks she hears 
Her nursling's speech first grow articulate ; 
But breathless with averted eyes elate 

She sits, with open lips and open ears, 

That it may call her twice. 'Mid doubts and fears 
Thus oft my soul has hearkened ; till the song, 
A central moan for days, at length found tongue, 

And the sweet music welled and the sweet tears. 

But now, whatever while the soul is fain 
To list that wonted murmur, as it were 

The speech-bound sea-shell's low importunate strain,- 
No breath of §ong, thy voice alone is there, 

O bitterly beloved I and all her gain 
Is but the pang of unpermitted prayer. 



SONNET XLVIII. 

DEATH-IN-LOVE. 

There came an image in Life's retinue 

That had Love's wings and bore his gonfalon : 
Fair was the web, and nobly wrought thereon, 

soul-sequestered face, thy form and hue I 
Bewildering sounds, such as Spring wakens to. 

Shook in its folds; and through my heart its power 
Sped trackless as the immemorable hour 
When birth's dark portal groaned and all was new. 

But a veiled woman followed, and she caught 
The banner round its staff, to furl and cling,— 
Then plucked a featlier from the bearer's wing, 
And held it to his lips that stirred it not, 
And said to me, " Behold, there is no breath : 

1 and this Love are one, and I am Death." 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE 

SONNETS XLIX, L, U, UI, 

WILLOWWOOD. 



I SAT with Love upon a woodside well, 

Leaning across the water, I and he ; 

Nor ever did he speak nor looked at me, 
But touched his lute wherein was audible 
The certain secret thing he had to tell : 

Only our mirrored eyes met silently 

In the low wave ; and that sound came to be 
The passionate voice I knew; and my tears fell. 

And at their fall, his eyes beneath grew hers ; 
And with his foot and with his wing-feathers 

He swept the spring that watered my heart's drouth. 
Then the dark ripples spread to waving hair, 
And as I stooped, her own lips rising there 

Bubbled with brinmiing kisses at my mouth. 



n. 

And now Love sang : but his was such a song 
So meshed with half-remembrance hard to free. 
As souls disused in death's sterility 

May sing when the new birthday tarries long. 

And I was made aware of a dumb throng 
That stood aloof, one form by every tree, 
All mournful forms, for each was I or she, 

The shades of those our days that had no tongue. 

They looked on us, and knew us and were known ; 
While fast together, alive from the abyss. 
Clung the soul-wrung implacable close kiss ; 
And pity of self through all made broken moan 
Which said, " For once, for once, for once alone ! ** 
And still Love sang, and what he sang was this : — 



Digitized 



by Google 



202 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

nu 

" O YE, all ye that walk in Willowwood, 

That walk with hollow faces burning white ; 
What fathom-depth of soul-struck widowhood, 

What long, what longer hours, one lifelong night, 
Ere ye again, who so in vain have wooed 

Your last hope lost, who so in vain invite 
Your lips to that their unforgotten food. 

Ere ye, ere ye again shall see the light I 

Alas I the bitter banks in Willowwood, 

With tear-spurge wan, with blood-wort burning red : 
Alas I if ever such a pillow could 

Steep deep the soul in sleep till she were dead, — 
Better all life forget her than this thing. 
That Willowwood should hold her wandering I " 



IV. 

So sang he : and as meeting rose and rose 
Together cling through the wind's wellaway 
"Hot change at once, yet near the end of day 

The leaves drop loosened where the heart-stain g!cws,- 

So when the song died did the kiss unclose ; 

And her face fell back drowned, and was as giey 
As its grey eyes ; and if it ever may 

Meet mine again I know not if Lx)ve knows. 

Only I know that I leaned low and drank 

A long draught from the water where she sank. 

Her breath and all her tears and all her soul : 
And as I leaned, I know I felt Love's face 
Pressed on my neck with moan of pity and grace, 

Till both our heads were in his aureole. 



Digitized 



by Google 



TEE HOUSE OF LIFE. 203 

SONNET Un. 

WITHOUT HER. 

What of her glass without her ? The blank grey 
There where the pool is blind of the moon's face. 
Her dress without her ? The tossed empty space 

Of cloud-rack' whence the moon has passed away. 

Her paths without her ? Day's appointed sway 
Usurped by desolate night Her pillowed place 
Without her ? Tears, ah me I for love's good grace, 

And cold forgetfulness of night or day. 

What of the heart without her ? Nay, poor heart. 
Of thee what word remains ere speeph be still ? 
A wayfarer by barren ways and chill. 
Steep ways and weary, without her thou art. 
Where the long cloud, the long wood's counterpart. 
Sheds doubled darkness up the labouring hill. 



SONNET uv. 

LOVE'S FATALITY. 

Sweet Love, — but oh ! most dread Desire of Love 
Life-thwarted. Linked in gyves I saw them stand. 
Love shackled with Vain-longing, hand to hand : 

And one was eyed as the blue vault above : 

But hope tempestuous like a fire-cloud hove 
r the other's gaze, even as in his whose wand 
Vainly all night with spell-wrought power has spann'd 

The unyielding caves of some deep treasure-trove. 

Also his lips, two writhen flakes of flame, 

Made moan : " Alas O Love, thus leashed with me ! 
Wing-footed thou, wing-shouldered, once bom free : 
And I, thy cowering self, in chains grown tame,-^ 
Bound to thy body and soul, named with thy name, — 
Life's iron hearty even Love's Fatality." 



Digitized 



by Google 



204 ' THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET LV. 

STILLBORN LOVE. 

The hour which might have been yet might not be, 
Which man's and woman's heart conceived and bore 
Yet whereof life was barren, — on what shore 

Bides it the breaking of Time's weary sea ? 

Bondchild of all consummate joys set free, 

It somewhere sighs and serves, and mute before 
The house of Love, hears through the echoing door 

His hours elect in choral consonancy. 

But lo I what wedded souls now hand in hand 
Together tread at last the immortal strand 

With eyes where burning memory lights love home ? 
Lo I how the little outcast hour has turned 
And leaped to them and in their faces yearned : — 

" I am your child ; O parents, ye have come I " 

r 
SONNETS LVI, LVII, LVIII. 

TRUE WOMAN. 

I. HERSELF. 

To be a sweetness more desired than Spring ; 
A bodily beauty more acceptable 
, Than the wild rose-tree's arch that crowns the fell ; 

To be an essence more environing 

Than wine's drained juice ; a music ravishing 
More than the passionate pulse of Philomel ;— 
To be all this 'neath one soil bosom's swell 

That is the flower of life : — how strange a thing 1 

How strange a thing to be what Man can know 
But as a sacred secret 1 Heaven's own screen 

Hides her soul's purest depth and loveliest glow ; 
Closely withheld, as all things most unseen, — 
The wave-bowered pearl, — the heart-shaped seal of 
green 

That flecks the snowdrop underneath the snow. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. ' 205 



II. HER LOVE. 



She loves him ; for her infinite soul is Love, 
And he her lodestar. Passion in her is 
A glass facing his fire, where the bright bliss 

Is mirrored, and the heat returned. Yet move 

That glass, a stranger's amorous flame to prove. 
And it shall turn, by instant contraries, 
Ice to the moon ; while her pure fire to his 

For whom it burns, clings close i' the heart's alcove. 

Lo I they are one. With wifely breast to breast 
And circling arms, she welcomes all command 
Of love, — her soul to answering ardours fanned : 
Yet as mom springs or twilight sinks to rest. 
Ah ! who shall say she deems not loveliest 
The hour of sisterly sweet hand-in-hand ? 



ni. HER HEAVEN. 

If to grow old in Heaven is to grow young, 
(As the Seer saw and said,) then blest were he 
With youth for evermore, whose heaven should be 

True Woman, she whom these weak notes have sung. 

Here and hereafter,— choir-strains of her tongue, — 
Sky-spaces of her eyes, — sweet signs that flee 
About her soul's immediate sanctuary, — 

Were Paradise all uttermost worlds among. 

The sunrise blooms and withers on the hill 
Like any hillflower ; and the noblest troth 
Dies here to dust. Yet shall Heaven's promise clothe 

Even yet those lovers who have cherished still 

This test for love : — in every kiss sealed fast 

To feel the first kiss and forebode the last. 



Digitized 



by Google 



2c6 7HE BOUSE OP UfE. 

SONNET UX. 

LOVE'S LAST GIFT. 

Love to his singer held a glistening leaf, 
And said : " The rose-tree and the apple-tree 
Have fruits to vaunt or flowers to lure the bee ; 

And golden shafbs are in the feathered sheaf 

Of the great harvest-marshal, the year's chief, 
Victorious Summer ; aye, and 'neath warm sea 
Strange secret grasses lurk inviolably 

Between the filtering channels of sunk reef. 

All are my blooms ; and all sweet blooms of love 
To thee I gave while Spring and Summer sang ; 
But Autumn stops to listen, with some pang 
From those worse things the wind is moaning of 
Only this laurel dreads no winter days : 
Take my last gifl ; thy heart hath sung my praise. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 2C7 



Part IL— CHANGE AND FATE. 

SONNET UL 

TRANSFIGURED LIFE. 

As growth of form or momentary glance 
In a child's features will recall to mind 
The father's with the mother's face combin'd, — 

Sweet interchange that memories still enhance : 

And yet, as childhood's years and youth's advance. 
The gradual mouldings leave one stamp behind, 
Till in the blended likeness now we find 

A separate man's or woman's countenance : — 

So in the Song, the singer's Joy and Pain, 

Its very parents, evermore expand 
To bid the passion's fullgrown birth remain, 

By Art's transfiguring essence subtly spann'd ; 

And from that song-cloud shaped as a man's hand 
There comes the sound as of abundant rain. 

SONNET LXI. 

THE SONG-THROE. 

By thine own tears thy song must tears beget, 
O Singer I Magic mirror thou hast none 
Except thy manifest heart ; and save thine own 

Anguish or ardour, else no amulet. 

Cisterned in Pride, verse is the feathery jet 
Of soulless air-flung fountains ; nay, more dry 
Than the Dead Sea for throats that thirst and sigh, 

That song o'er which no singer's lids grew wet. 

The Song-god — He the Sun-god — is no slave 
Of thine : thy Hunter he, who for thy soul 
Fledges his shaft : to no august control 
Of thy skilled hand his quivered store he gave : 
But if thy lips' loud cry leap to his smart> 
The inspir'd recoil shall pierce thy brother's heart 



Digitized 



by Google 



2o8 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET LXII. 

THE SOUL'S SPHERE. 

Some prisoned moon in steep cloud-fastnesses, — 

Throned queen and thralled ; some dying sun whose 

pyre 
Blazed with momentous memorable fire ; — 

Who hath not yearned and fed his heart with these ? 

Who, sleepless, hath not anguished to appease 
Tragical shadow's realm of sound and sight 
Conjectured in the lamentable night ? 

Lo I the soul's sphere of infinite images I 

What sense shall count them ? Whether it forecast 
The rose-winged hours that flutter in the van 
Of Love's unquestioning unrevealM span, — 

Visions of golden futures : or that last 

Wild pageant of the accumulated past 

That clangs and flashes for a drowning man. 

SONNET LXIII. 

INCLUSIVENESS. 

The changing guests, each in a difierent mood, 

Sit at the roadside table and arise : 

And every life among them in likewise 
Is a soul's board set daily with new food. . 
What man has bent o'er his son's sleep, to brood 

How that face shall watch his when cold it lies ?— 

Or thought, as his own mother kissed his eyes, 
Of what her kiss was when his father wooed ? 

May not this ancient room thou sitt'st in dwell 

In separate living souls for joy or pain ? 

Nay, all its corners may be painted plain 
Where Heaven shows pictures of some life spent well, 

And may be stamped, a memory all in vain, 
Upon the sight of lidless eyes in Hell. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OP LIFE. 2091 

SONNET LXIV. 

ARDOUR AND MEMORY. 

The cuckoo-throb, the heartbeat of the Spring ; 

The rosebud's blush that leaves it as it grows 

Into the full-eyed fair unblushing rose ; 
The summer clouds that visit every wing 
With fires of sunrise and of sunsetting ; 

The furtive flickering streams to light re-bom 

*Mid airs new-fledged and valorous lusts of mom, 
While all the daughters of the daybreak sing : — 

These ardour loves, and memory : and when flown 
All joys, and through dark forest-boughs in flight 
The wind swoops onward brandishing the light. 
Even yet the rose-tree's verdure left alone 
Will flush all ruddy though the rose be gone ; 
With ditties and with dirges infinite. 



SONNET LXV. 

KNOWN IN VAIN. 

As two whose love^ first foolish, widening scope, 
Knows suddenly, to music high and soft, 
The Holy of holies ; who because they scoflfd 

Are now amazed with shame, nor dare to cope 

With the whole truth aloud, lest heaven should ope ; 
Yet, at their meetings, laugh not as they laugh'd 
In speech ; nor speak, at length ; but sitting oft 

Together, within hopeless sight of hope 

For hours are silent : — So it happeneth 

When Work and Will awake too late, to gaze 

After their life sailed by, and hold their breath. 
Ah ! who shall dare to search through what sad maze 
Thenceforth their incommunicable ways 

Follow the desultory feet of Death ? 

14 



Digitized 



by Google 



2IO 7H£ HOUSE OF UFE, 

SONNET LXVI. 

THE HEART OF THE NIGHT. 

From child to youth ; from youth to arduous man ; 

From lethargy to fever of the heart ; 

From faithful life to dream-dowered days apart ; 
From trust to doubt ; from doubt to brink of ban ; — 
Thus much of change in one swifl cycle ran 

Till now. Alas, the soul I — how soon must she 

Accept her primal immortality, — 
The flesh resume its dust whence it b^an ? 

O Lord of work and peace I O Lord of life ! 
O Lord, the awful Lord of will I though late, 
Even yet renew this soul with duteous breath : 
That when the peace is garnered in from strife, 
The work retrieved, the will regenerate. 
This soul may see thy face^ O Lord of death 1 

SONNET LXVII. 

THE LANDMARK 

Was that the landmark ? What,— the foolish well 
Whose wave, low down, I did not stoop to drinl^ 
But sat and flung the pebbles from its brink 

In sport to send its imaged skies pell-mell, 

(And mine own image, had I noted well I)— 
Was that my point of turning ? — I had thought 
The stations of my course should rise unsought, 

As altar-stone or ensigned dtadeL 

But lo I the path is missed, I must go back, 
And thirst to drink when next I reach the spring 

Which once I stained, which since may have grown 
black. 
Yet though no light be lefl nor bird now sing 
As here I turn, Fll thank God, hastening. 

That the same goal is still on the same track. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE 211 

SONNET LXVin. 

A DARK DAY. 

The gloom that breathes upon me with these airs 
Is like the drops which strike the traveller's brow 
Who knows not, darkling, if they bring him now 

Fresh storm, or be old rain the covert bears. 

Ah I bodes this hour some harvest of new tares, 

Or hath but memory of the day whose plough ^ ^ 

Sowed hunger once, — the night at length when thou, 

O prayer found vain, didst fall from out my prayers ? 

How prickly were the growths which yet how smooth. 
Along the hedgerows of this journey shed. 

Lie by Time's grace till night and sleep may soothe I 
Even as the thistledown from pathsides dead 

Gleaned by a girl in autumns of her youth. 

Which one new year makes soft her marriage-bed. 



SONNET LXIX. 

AUTUMN IDLENESS. 

This sunlight shames November where he grieves 
In dead red leaves, and will not let him shun 
The day, though bough with bough be over-run. 

But with a blessing every glade receives 

High salutation ; while from hillock-eaves ^ 

The deer gaze calling, dappled white and dun, 
As if, being foresters of old, the sun 

Had marked them with the shade of forest-leaves. 

Here dawn to-day imveiled her magic glass ; ' 
Here noon now gives the thirst and takes the dew ; 

Till eve bring rest when other good things pass. 
And here the lost hours the lost hours renew 

While I still lead my shadow o'er the grass. 
Nor know, for longing, that which I should do. 



Digitized 



by Google 



2ia THE HOUSE OF UFE. 

SONNET UCX. 

THE HILL SUMMIT. 

This feast-day of the sun, his altar there 

In the broad west has blazed for vesper-song ; 
And I have loitered in the vale too long 

And gaze now a belated worshiper. 

Yet may I not forget that I was 'ware, 
So journeying, of his face at intervals 
Transfigured where the fringed horizon falls,— 

A fiery bush with coruscating hair. 

And now that I have climbed and won this height, 
I must tread downward through the sloping shade 

And travel the bewildered tracks till night. 
Yet for this hour I still may here be stayed 
And see the gold air and the silver fade 

And the last bird fly into the last light 

SONNETS LXXI, LXXII, LXXIII. 

THE CHOICE. 

I. 

Eat thou and drink ; to-morrow thou shalt die. 

Surely the earth, that's wise being very old, 

Needs not our help. Then loose me, love, and hold 
Thy sultry hair up from my face \ that I 
May pour for thee this golden wine, brim-high. 

Till round the glass thy fingers glow like gold. 

We'll drown all hours : thy song, while hours are toll'd, 
Shall leap, as fountains veil. the changing sky. 

Now kiss, and think that there are really those. 
My own high-bosomed beauty, who increase 
Vain gold, vain lore, and yet might choose our way I 
Through many years they toil ; then on a day 
They die not, — for their life was death, — but cease ; 
And round their narrow lips the mould falls close. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 213 

n. 

Watch thou and fear ; to-morrow thou shalt die. 

Or art thou sure thou shalt have time for death ? 

Is not the day which God's word promiseth 
To come man knows not when ? In yonder sky, 
Now while we speak, the sun speeds forth : can I 

Or thou assure him of his goal ? God's breath ^ 

Even at this moment haply quickeneth 
The air to a flame ; till spirits, always nigh 
Though screened and hid, shall walk the daylight here. 

And dost thou prate of all that man shall do ? 
Canst thou, who hast but plagues, presume to be 
Glad in his gladness that comes after thee ? 

Will his strength slay thy worm in Hell ? Go to : 
Cover thy countenance, and watch, and fear. 



III. 

Think thou and act; to-morrow thou shalt die. 
Outstretched in the sun's warmth upon the shore. 
Thou say^st : " Mto's measured path is all gone o'er : 

Up all his years, steeply, with strain and sigh, 

Man clomb until he touched the truth ; and I, 
Even I, am he whom it was destined for." 
How should this be ? Art thou then so much more 

Than they who sowed, that thou shouldst reap thereby ? 

Nay, come up hither. From this wave-washed mound 
Unto the ftirdiest flood-brim look with me ; 

Then reach on with thy thought till it be drown'd. 
Miles and miles distant though the last line be. 

And though thy soul sail leagues and leagues beyond,^- 
Still, leagues beyond those leagues, there is more sea. 



Digitized 



by Google 



ai4 THE HOUSE OF LIFE, 

SONNETS LXXIV, LXXV, LXXVI. 

OLD AND NEW ART. 

I. ST. LUKE THE PAINTER. 

Give honour unto Luke Evangelist ; 
For he it was (the aged legends say) 
Who first taught Art to fold her hands and pray. 

Scarcely at once she dared to rend the mist 

Of devious symbols : but soon having wist 
How sky-breadth and field-silence and this day 
Are symbols also in some deeper way, 

She looked through these to God and was God's priest. 

And if, past noon, her toil began to irk, 

And she sought talismans, and turned in vain 
To soulless self-reflections of man's skiU, — 
Yet now, in this the twilight, she might still 
Kneel in the latter grass to pray again. 
Ere the night cometh and she may not work. 

n. NOT its THESE. 

'' I AM not as these are," the poet saith 

In youth's pride, and the painter, among men 
At bay, where never pencil comes nor pen. 

And shut about with his own frozen breath. 

To others, for whom only rhyme wins faith 
As poets, — only paint as painters, — then 
He turns in the cold silence ; and again 

Shrinking, " I am not as these are," he saith. v 

And say that this is so, what follows it ? 

For were thine eyes set backwards in thine head, 
Such words were well ; but they see on, and far. 
Unto the lights of the great Past, new-lit 

Fair for the Future's track, look thou insteiad, — 
Say thou instead, " I am not as thtse are." 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 215 

m. THE HUSBANDMEN. 

Though God, as one that is an householder, 
Called these to labour in His vineyard first. 
Before the husk of darkness was well burst 
Bidding them grope their way out and bestir, 
(Who, questioned of their wages, answered, " Sir, 
Unto each man a penny":) though the worst 
Burtiien of heat was theirs and the dry thirst : 
Though God has since found none such as these were 
To do their work like them : — Because of this 
Stand not ye idle in the market-place. 
Which of ye knoweth he is not that last 
Who may be first by faith and will ? — yea, his 
The hand which after the appointed days 
And hours shall give a Future to their Past ? 



SONNET LXXVn. 

SOUL'S BEAUTY. 

Under the arch of Life, where love and death. 
Terror and mystery, guard her shrine, I saw 
Beauty enthroned ; and though her gaze struck awe, 

I drew it in as simply as my breath. 

Hers are the eyes which, over and beneath. 
The sky and sea bend on thee, — ^which can draw, 
By sea or sky or woman, to one law. 

The allotted bondman of her palm and wreath. 

This is that Lady Beauty, in whose praise 

Thy voice and hand shake still, — long known to thee 
By flying hair and fluttering hem, — the beat 
Following her daily of thy heart and feet, 
How passionately and irretrievably, 
In what fond flight, how many wa3rs and days I 



Digitized 



by Google 



2i6 THE HOUSE OF LIfE. 

SONNET LXXVIII. 

BODY'S BEAUTY. 

Of Adam's first wife, Lilith, it is told 

(The witch he loved before the gift of Eve,) 

That, ere the snake's, her sweet tongue could deceive. 

And her enchanted hair was the first gold. 

And still she sits, young while the earth is old, 
And, subtly of herself contemplative, 
Draws men to watch the bright web she can weave, 

fill heart and body and life are in its hold 

The rose and poppy are her flowers ; for where 
Is he not found, O Lilith, whom shed scent 

And soft-shed kisses and soft sleep shall snare ? 
Lo ! as that youth's eyes burned at thine, so went 
Thy sp>ell through him, and left his straight neck bent 

And round his heart one strangling golden hair 



SONNET LXXIX. 

THE MONOCHORD. 

Is it this sky's vast vault or ocean's sound 
That is Life's self and draws my life from me. 
And by instinct ineffable decree 

Holds my breath quailing on the bitter bound ? 

Nay, is it Life or Death, thus thunder-crown'd. 
That 'mid the tide of all emergency 
Now notes my separate wave, and to what sea 

Its difficult eddies labour in the ground ? 

Oh t what is this that knows the road I came, 

The flame turned cloud, the cloud returned to flame. 

The lifted shifted steeps and all the way ? — 
That draws round me at last this wind-warm space, 
And in regenerate rapture turns my face 

Upon the devious coverts of dismay ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF UFE. 217 

S(»fNET LXXX. 

FROM DAWN TO NOON. 

As the child knows not if his mother's face 
Be fair ; nor of his elders yet can deem 
What eadi most is ; but as of hill or stream 

At dawn, all glimmering life surrounds his place • 

Who ye^ tow'rd noon of his half-weary race, 
Pausing awhile beneath the high sun-beam 
And gazing steadily back, — as through a dream, 

In things long past new features now can trace : — 

Even so the thought that is at length fiiUgrown 
Turns back to note the sun-smit paths, all grey 

And marvellous once, where first it walked alone ; 
And haply doubts, amid the unblenching day, 
Which most or least impelled its onward way, — 

Those unknown things or these thins^s overknown. 



SONNET LXXSI. 

MEMORIAL THRESHOLDS. 

What place so strange, — though unrevealfed snow 

With unimaginable fires arise 

At the earth's end, — what passion of surprise 
Like frost-bound fire-girt scenes of long ago ? 
Lo I this is none but I this hour ; and lo ! 

This is the very place which to mine eyes 

Those mortal hours in vain immortalize, 
'Mid hurrying crowds, with what alone I know. 

City, of thine a single simple door, 

By some new Power reduplicate, must be 
Even yet my life-porch in eternity. 
Even with one presen4;p filled, as once of yore : 
Or mocking winds whirl/ound a chaff'-strown floor 
Thee and thy years and these my words and me. 



Digitized 



by Google 



2i8 THE SOVSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET LXXXII. 

HOARDED JOY. 

I SAID : '* Nay, pluck not, — let the first fruit be : 
Even as thou sayest, it is sweet and red, 
But let it ripen still. The tree's bent head 

Sees in the stream its own fecundity 

And bides the day of fulness. Shall not we 
At the sun's hour that day possess the shad^ 
And claim our fruit before its ripeness fade, 

And eat it from the branch and praise the tree ? ** 

I say : ** Alas ! our fruit hath wooed the sun 
Too long, — 'tis faUen and floats adown the stream. 

Lo, the last clusters ! Pluck them every one. 
And let us sup with summer ; ere the gleam 

Of autumn set the year's pent sorrow free, 

And the woods wail like echoes from the sea,** 



SONNET LXXXni. 

BARREN SPRING. 

Once more the changed year's turning wheel returns : 
And as a girl sails balanced in the wind. 
And now before and now again behind 

Stoops as it swoops, with cheek that laughs and bums, — 

So Spring comes merry towards me here, but earns 
No answering smile from me, whose life is twin'd 
With the dead boughs that winter still must bind, 

And whom to-day the Spring no more concerns. 

Behold, this crocus is a withering flame ; 
This snowdrop, snow ; this apple-blossom's part 
To breed the fruit that breeds the serpent's art 

Nay, for these Spring-flowers, turn thy face from them, 

Nor stay till on the year's last lily-stem 

The white cup shrivels round the golden heart 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 219 

SONNET LXXXrV. 

FAREWELL TO THE GLEN. 

Sweet stream-fed glen, why say "farewell" to thee 
Who far'st so well and find'st for ever smooth 
The brow of Time where man may read no ruth ? 

Nay, do thou rather say " farewell " to me, 

Who now fare forth in bitterer fantasy 

Than erst was mine where other shade might soothe 
By other streams, what while in fragrant youth 

The bliss of being sad made melancholy. 

And yet, farewell ! For better shalt thou fare 
When children bathe sweet faces in thy flow 

And happy lovers blend sweet shadows there 
In hours to come, than when an hour ago 

Thine echoes had but one man's sighs to bear 
And thy trees whispered what he feared to know. 



SONNET LXXXV. 

VAIN VIRTUES. 

What is the sorriest thing that enters Hell ? 
None of the sins, — but this and that fair deed 
Which a soul's sin at length could supersede. 

These yet are virgins, whom death's timely knell 

Might once have sainted ; whom the fiends compel 
Together now, in snake-bound shuddering sheaves 
Of anguish, while the pit's pollution leaves 

Their refuse maidenhood abominable. 

Night sucks them down, the tribute of the pit. 
Whose names, half entered in the book of Life, 
Were God's desire at noon. And as their hair 
And eyes sink last, the Torturer deigns no whit 
To gaze, but, yearning, waits his destined wife, 
The Sin still blithe on earth that sent them there. 



Digitized 



by Google 



220 THE BOUSE OF LIFE. 

80NNBT LXXXVL 

LOST DAYS. 

The lost days of my life until to-day, 

What were tfiey, could I see them on the street 

Lie as they fell ? Would they be ears of wheat 
Sown once for food but trodden into clay ? 
Or golden coins squandered and still to pay ? 

Or drops of blood dabbling the guilty feet ? 

Or such spilt water as in dreams must cheat 
The undying throats of Hell, athirst alway ? 

I do not see them here ; but after death 
God knows I know the faces I shall see. 

Each one a murdered self, with low last breath. 
" I am thyself, — ^what hast thou done to me ? " 

"And I — and I — thyself," (lo ! each one saith,) 
'* And thou thyself to all eternity I " 



SONNET LXXXVII. 

DEATH'S SONGSTERS. 

When first that horse, within whose populous womb 

( The birth was death, o'ershadowed Troy with fate, 
Her elders, dubious of its Grecian freight. 

Brought Helen there to sing the songs of home ; 

She whispered, " Friends, I am alone ; come, come I " 
Then, crouched within, Ulysses waxed afraid, 
And on his comrades* quivering mouths he laid 

His hands, and held them till the voice was dumb. 

The same was he who, lashed to his own mast, 
There where the sea-flowers screen the chamel-caves 

Beside the sirens' singing island pass'd. 

Till sweetness failed along the inveterate waves. . . 

Say, soul, — are songs of Death no heaven to thee. 

Nor shames her lip the cheek of Victory ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. a2i 

SONNET LXXXVUI. 

HERO'S LAMP.! 

That lamp thou fill'st in Eros' name to-night, 
O Hero, shall the Sestian augurs take 
To-morrow, and for drowned Leander's sake 

To Anteros its tireless lip shall plight. 

Aye, waft the unspoken vow : yet dawn's first light 
On ebbing storm and life twice ebb'd must break ; 
While 'neath no sunrise, by the Avemian Lake, 

Lo where Love walks. Death's pallid neophyte. 

That lamp within Anteros' shadowy shrine 
Shall stand unlit (for so the gods decree) 
Till some one man the happy issue see 
Of a life's love, and bid its flame to shine : 
Which still may rest unfir'd ; for, theirs or thine, 
O brother, what brought love to them or thee ? 

SONNET LXXXDL 

THE TREES OF THE GARDEN. 

Ye who have passed Death's haggard hills ; andfye 
Whom trees that knew your sires shall cease to know 
And still stand silent : — is it all a show, — 

A wisp that laughs upon the wall ?— decree 

Of some inexorable supremacy 

Which ever, as man strains his blind surmise 
From depth to ominous depth, looks past his eyes. 

Sphinx-faced with unabash^ augury ? 

Nay, rather question the Earth's self. Invoke 
The storm-felled forest-trees moss-grown to-day 
Whose roots are hillocks where the children play ; 
Or ask the silver sapling 'neath what yoke [wage 

Those stars, his spray-crown's clustering gems, shall 
Theur journey still when his boughs shrink with age. 

' After the deaths of Leander and of Hero, the signal-lamp was 
dedicated to Anteros, with the edict that no man should light it 
unless his love had proved fortunate. 



Digitized 



by Google 



22a THE HOUSE OF LII'E. 

SONNET ZC 

"RETRO ME, SATHANA!" 

Get thee behind me. Even as, heavy-curled, 
Stooping against the wind, a charioteer 
Is snatched from out his chariot by the hair. 
So shall Time be ; and as the void car, hurled 
Abroad by reinless steeds, even so the world : 
Yea, even as chariot-dust upon the air. 
It shall be sought and not found anywhere. 
Get thee behind me, Satan. Oft unfurled, 
Thy perilous wings can beat and break like lath 
Much mightiness of men to win thee praise. 
Leave these weak feet to tread in narrow ways. 
Thou still, upon the broad vine-sheltered path, 
Mayst wait the turning of the phials of wrath 
For certain years, for certain months and days. 



SONNET xci. 
LOST ON BOTH SIDES. 

As when two men have loved a woman well, 

Each hating each, through Love's and Death's deceit ; 
Since not for either this stark marriage-sheet 

And the long pauses of this wedding-bell ; 
Yet o'er her grave the night and day dispel 
At last their feud forlorn, with cold and heat ; 
Nor other than dear friends to death may fleet 

The two lives left that most of her can tell : — 

So separate hopes, which in a soul had wooed 
The one same Peace, strove with each other long, 
And Peace before their faces perished since : 
So through that soul, in restless brotherhood. 
They roam together now, and wind among 
Its bye-streets, knocking at the dusty inns. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 223 

SONNETS Xai, XCIII. 

THE SUN'S SHAME. 



Beholding youth and hope in mockery caught 
From life ; and mocking pulses that remain 
When the soul's death of bodily death is fain ; 

Honour imknown, and honour known unsought; 

And penury's sedulous self-torturing thought 
On gold, whose master therewith buys his tane ; 
And longed-for woman longing all in vain 

For lonely man with love's desire distraught ; 

And wealth, and strength, and power, and pleasantness, 
Given unto bodies of whose souls men say, 
None poor and weak, slavish and foul, as they : — 

Beholding these things, I behold no less 

The blushing mom and blushing eve confess 
The shame that loads the intolerable day. 



II. 

As some true chief of men, bowed down with stress 
Of life's disastrous eld,, on blossoming youth 
May gaze, and murmur with self-pity and ruth, — 

" Might I thy fruitless treasure but possess, 

Such blessing of mine all coming years should bless ;" — 
Then sends one sigh forth to the unknown goal, 
And bitterly feels breathe against his soul 

The hour swift-winged of nearer nothingness : — 

Even so thcf World's grey Soul to the green World 
Perchance one hour must cry : " Woe's me, for whom 
Inveteracy of ill portends the doom, — 
Whose heart's old fire in shadow of shame is furl'd : 
While thou even as of yore art journeying, 
All soulless now, yet merry with the Spring I " 



Digitized 



by Google 



224 THE HOUSE OF LIFE. 

SONNET XCIV. 

MICHELANGELO'S KISS. 

Great Michelangelo, with age grown bleak 
And uttermost labours, having once o'ersaid 
All grievous memories on his long life shed, 

This worst regret to one true heart could speak : — 

That when, with sorrowing love and reverence meek. 
He stooped o'er sweet Colonna's dying bed, 
His Muse and dominant Lady, spirit-wed, — 

Her hand he kissed, but not her brow or cheek. 

O Buonarruoti, — good at Art's fire-wheels 
To urge her chariot I — even thus the Soul, 
Touching at length some sorely-chastened goal, 
Earns oftenest but a little : her appeals 
Were deep and mute, — lowly her claim. Let be : 
What holds for her Death's garner ? And for thee ? 

SONNET xcv. 

THE VASE OF LIFE, 

Around the vase of Life at your slow pace 

He has not crept, but turned it vdth his hands^ 

And all its sides already understands. 
There, girt, one breathes alert for some great race ; 
Whose road runs far by sands and fruitful space ; 

Who laughs, yet through the jolly throng has pass'd ; 

Who weeps, nor stays for weeping ; who at last, 
A youth, stands somewhere crowned, with silent iace. 

And he has filled this vase with wine for blood. 
With blood for tears, with spice for burning vow. 
With watered flowers for buried love most fit ; 
And would have cast it shattered to the flood, 

Yet in Fate's name has kept it whole ; which now 
Stands empty till his ashes fall in it 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE HOUSE OP UFE. 22$ 

SONNET XCVL 

LIFE THE BELOVED. 

As thy friend's face, with shadow of soul o'erspread, 
Somewhile unto thy sight perchance hath been 
Ghastly and strange, yet never so is seen 

In thought, but to all fortunate fovour wed ; 

As thy love's death-bound features never dead 
To memory's glass return, but contravene 
Frail fugitive days, and alway keep, I ween. 

Than all new life a livelier lovelihead : — 

So Life herself, thy spirit's friend and love. 
Even still as Spring's authentic harbinger 
Glows with fresh hours for hope to glorify ; 
Though pale she lay when in the winter grove 
Her funeral flowers were snow-flakes shed on her 
And the red wings of frost-fire rent the sky. 

SONNET XCVIL 

A SUPERSCRIPTION. 

Look in my face ; my name is Might-have-been ; 

I am also called No-more, Too-late, Farewell ; 

Unto thine ear I hold the dead-sea shell 
Cast up thy Life's foam-fretted feet between ; 
Unto thine eyes the glass where that is seen 

Which had Life's form and Love's, but by my spcU 

Is now a shaken shadow intolerable. 
Of ultimate things unuttered the frail screen* 

Mark me, how still I am ! But should there dart 
One moment through thy soul the soft surprise 
Of that winged Peace which lulls the breath of 
sighs, — 

Then shalt liiou see me smile, and turn apart 

Thy visage to mine ambush at thy heart 
Sleepless with cold commemorative eyes. 

IS 



Digitized 



by Google 



226 THE HOUSE OP LIFE. 

SONNET XCVm. 

HE AND I. 

Whence came his feet into my field, and why ? 

How is it that he sees it all so drear ? 

How do I see his seeing, and how hear 
The name his bitter silence knows it by ? 
This was the little fold of separate sky 

Whose pasturing clouds in the soul's atmosphere 

Drew living light from one continual year : 
How should he find it lifeless ? He, or I ? 

Lo ! this new Self now wanders round my field, 
With plaints for every flower, and for each tree 
A moan, the sighing wind's auxiliary: 
And o'er sweet waters of my life, that yield 
Unto his lips no draught but tears unseal'd. 
Even in my place he weeps. Even I, not he. 

sonnets xax, c. 
NEWBORN DEATH, 

I. 

To-DAT Death seems to me an infant child 
Which her worn mother Life upon my knee 
Has set to grow my friend and play with me ; 

If haply so my heart might be beguil'd 

To find no terrors in a face so mild,— 
If haply so my weary heart might be 
Unto the newborn milky ejres of thee, 

O Death, before resentment reconcil'd. 

How long, O Death ? And shall thy feet depart 
Still a young child's with min^ or wilt thou stand 

]<ullgrown the helpfiil daughter of my heart, 
Wliat time with thee indeed I reach the strand 

Of the pale wave which knows thee what thou art, 
And drink it in the hollow of thy hand ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



IHE HOUSE OF LIFE, 227 

IL 

And thou, O Life, the lady of all bliss, 

With whom, when our first heart beat full and fSast, 
I wandered till the haunts of men were pass'd, 

And in fair places found all bowers amiss 

Till only woods and waves might hear our kiss, 
While to the winds all thought of Death we cast : — 
Ah, Life ! and must I have from thee at last 

No smile to greet me and no babe but this ? 

Lo ! Love, the child once ours ; and Song, whose hair 
Blew like a flame and blossomed like a wreath ; 

And Art, whose eyes were worlds by God found fair : 
These o'er the book of Nature mixed their breath 

With neck-twined arms, as oft we watched them there; 
And did these die that thou mightst bear me Death? 



SONNET CI. 

THE ONE HOPE. 

When vain desire at last and vain regret 
Go hand in hand to death, and all is vain, 
What shall assuage the unforgotten pain 

And teach the unforgetful to forget ? 

Shall Peace be still a sunk stream long unmet,-^ 
Or may the soul at once in a green plain 
Stoop through the spray of some sweet life-fountain 

And cull the dew-drenched flowering amulet ? 

Ah t when the wan soul in that golden air 
Between the scriptured petals softly blown 
Peers breathless for the gift of grace unknown,— 
Ah I let none other alien spell soe'er 
But only the one Hope's one name be there,— 
Not less nor more, but even that word alone. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



229 



IL— MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. 



MY SISTER'S StEEP. 

She fell asleep on Christmas Eve . 

At length the long-ungranted shade 

Of weary eyelids overweigh'd 
The pain nought else might yet relieve. 

Our mother, who had leaned all day 
Over the bed from chime to chime. 
Then raised herself for the first time. 

And as she sat her down, did pray. 

Her little work-itable was spread 
With work to finish. For the glare 
Made by her candle, she had care 

To work some distance from the bed. 

Without, there was a cold moon up. 
Of winter radiance sheer and thin y 
The hollow halo it was in 

Was like an icy crystal cup. 

Through the small room, with subtle sound 
Of flame, by vents the fireshine drove 
And reddened. In its dim alcove 

The mirror shed a clearness rounds 

I had been sitting up some nights, 
And my tired mind felt weak and blank; 
Like a sharp strengthening wine it drank 

The stillness and the broken lights. 



Digitized 



by Google 



230 MY SISTER'S SLEEP. 

Twelve struck. That sound, by dwindling years 
Heard in each hour, crept off; and then 
The ruffled silence spread again, 

Like water that a pebble stirs. 



Our mother rose from where she sat : 
Her needles, as she laid them down, 
Met lightly, and her silken gown 

Settled : no other noise than that. 



<« Glory unto die Newly Bom I • 
So^ as said angels, she did say ; 
Because we were in Christmas Djiy, 

Though it would still be long till m^m. 

Just then in the room over us 
There was a pushing back of chairs^ 
As some who had sat unawares 

So late, now heard the hour, and rose. 

With anxious softly-stepping haste 
Our mother went where Maigaret lay. 
Fearing the sounds o'erhead — should they 

Have broken her long watched-for rest I 



She stopped an instant, calm, and turned ; 

But suddenly turned back again ; 

And all her features seemed in pain 
With woe, and her eyes gazed and yearned. 

For my part, I but hid my face. 
And held my breath, and spoke no word : 
There was none spoken ; but I heard 

The silence for a little space. 



Digitized 



by Google 



MY SISTERS SLEEP. 331 

Our mother bowed herself and wept : 
And both my arms fell, and I said, 
''God knows I knew that she was dead." 

And there, all white, my sister slept 

Then kneeling, upon Christmas mom 
A little after twelve o'clock. 
We said, ere the first quarter struck, 

'* Christ's blessing on the newly bom I" 



Digitized 



by Google 



232 THE BLESSED DAMOZEL. 



THE BLESSED DAMOZEU 



The blessed damozel leaned out 
From the gold bar of Heaven ; 

Her eyes were deeper than the depth 
Of waters stilled at even ; 

She had three, lilies in her hand, 
And the stars in her hair were seven. 

Her robe, ungirt from clasp to hem. 
No wrought flowers did adorn, 

But a white rose of Mary's gift, 
For service meetly worn ; 

Her hair that lay along her back 
Was yellow like ripe com. 



Herseemed she scarce had been a day 

One of God's choristers ; 
The wonder was not yet quite gone 

From that still look of hers ; 
Albeit, to them she left, her day 

Had coimted as ten years. 

(To one, it is ten years of years. 

. . . Yet now, and in this place, 
Surely she leaned o'er me — her hair 

Fell all about my face. . . . 
Nothing : the autumn-fall of leaves. 

The whole year sets apace.) 



Digitized 



by Google 



THB BLESSED DAMOZEL. 233 

It was the rampart of God's house 

That she was standing on ; 
By God built over the sheer depth 

The which is Space begun ; 
So high, that looking downward thence 

She scarce could see the sum 



It lies in Heaven, across the flood 

Of ether, as a bridge. 
Beneath, the tides of day and night 

With flame and darkness ridge 
The void, as low as where this earth 

Spins like a fretful midge. 



Around her, lovers, newly met 
'Mid deathless love's acclaims, 

Spoke evermore among themselves 
Their heart-remembered names ; 

And the souls mounting up to God 
Went by her like thin fUmes. 



And still she bowed herself and stooped 

Out of the circling charm ; 
Until her bosom must have made 

The bar she leaned on warm, 
And the lilies lay as if asleep 

Along her bended arm. 



From the fixed place of Heaven she saw 

Time like a pulse shake fierce 
Through all the worlds. Her gaze still strove 

Within the gulf to pierce 
Its path ; and now she spoke as when 

The stars sang in their spheres. 



Digitized 



by Google 



«34 THE BLESSED DAMOZEL. 

The sun was gone now ; the curled igpon 

Was like a little feather 
Fluttering far down the gulf; and now 

She spoke through the still weather. 
Her voice was like the voice the stars 

Had when they sang together. 



(Ah sweet I Even now, in that bird's song, 

Strove not her accents there, 
Fain to be hearkened ? When those bells 

Possessed the mid-day air, 
Strove not her steps to reach my side 

Down all the echoing stair ?) 



'' I wish that he were come to me. 

For he will come," she said. 
" Have I not prayed in Heaven ? — on earth, 

Lord, Lord, has he not pray'd ? 
Are not two prayers a perfect strength? 

And shall I feel afraid ? 



'' When round his head the aureole dings, 

And he is clothed in white, 
I'll take his hand and go with him 

To the deep wells of light ; 
As unto a stream we will step down, 

And bathe there in God's sight. 



** We two will stand beside that shrine, 

Occult, withheld, untrod. 
Whose lamps are stirred continually 

With prayer sent up to God ; 
And see our old prayers, granted, melt 

Each like a little doud. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BLESSED DAMOZEL. 235 

''We two will lie i* the shadow of 

That living mystic tree 
Within whose secret growth the Dove 

Is sometimes felt to be, 
While every leaf that His plumes touch 

Saith His Name audibly. 



''And I myself will teach to him, 

I myself, lying so. 
The songs I sing here ; which his voice 

Shall pause in, hushed and slow, 
And find some Imowledge at each pause, 

Or some new thing to know." 



(Alas ! we two, we two, thou sa/st I 

Yea, one wast thou with me 
That once of old. But shall God lift 

To endless unity 
The soul whose likeness with thy soul 

Was but its love for thee ?) 

"We two," she said, "will seek the groves 

Where the lady Mary is, 
With her five handmaidens, whose names 

Are five sweet symphonies, 
Cecily, Gertrude, Magdalen, 

Margar^ and Rosalys. 



•'Cirdewise sit they, with bound locks 

And foreheads garlanded ; 
Into the fine cloth white like flame 

Weaving the golden thread. 
To fashion the birth-robes for them 

Who are just bom, being dead. 



Digitized 



by Google 



236 THE BLESSED DAMOZEL. 

"He shall fear, haply, and be dumb • 
Then will I lay my cheek 

To his, and tell about our love, 
Not once abashed or weak : 

And the dear Mother will approve 
My pride, and let me speak. 



" Herself shall bring us, hand in hand, 
To Him round whom all souls 

Kneel, the clear-ranged unnumbered heads 
Bowed with their aureoles : 

And angels meeting us shall sing 
To their dthems and citoles. 



^' There will I ask of Christ the Lord 
' Thus much for him and me : — 
Only to live as once on earth 

With Love, — only to be, 
As then awhile, for ever now 

Together, I and he." 



She gazed and listened and then said, 
Less sad of speech than mild, — 

** All this is when he comes." She ceased. 
The light thrilled towards her, fill'd 

With angels in strong level flight. 
Her eyes prayed, and she smil'd. 



(I saw her smile.) But soon their path 
Was vague in distant spheres : 

And then she cast her arms along 
The golden barriers, 

And laid her face between her hands. 
And wept (I heard her tears.) 



Digitized 



by Google 



237 



AT THE SUN-RISE IN 1848. 

God said, Let there be light; and there was light. 

Then heard we sounds as though the Earth did sing 

And the Earth's angel cried upon the wing : 
We saw priests fail together and turn white : 
And covered in the dust from the sun's sight, 

A king was spied, and yet another king. 

We said : "The round world keeps its balancing; 
On this globe, they and we are opposite, — 
If it is day with us, with them 'tis night. 

Still, Man, in thy just pride, remember this : — 
Thou hadst not made that thy sons' sons shall ask 
What the word king may mean in their day's task, 

But for the light that led : and if light is, 
It is because God said, Let there be light 



AUTUMN SONG. 

Know'st thou not at the' fall of the leaf 
How the heart feels a languid grief 

Laid on it for a covering. 

And how sleep seems a goodly thing 
In Autumn at the fell of the leaf? 

And how the swift beat of the brain 

Falters because it is in vain. 

In Autumn at the fall of the leaf 
Knowest thou not ? and how the chief 

Of joys seems — not to suffer pain ? 

KnoVst thou not at the fall of the leaf 
How the soul feels like a dried sheaf 
Bound up at length for harvesting. 
And how death seems a comely thing 
In Autumn at the fell of the leaf? 



Digitized 



by Google 



^38 



THE LADY'S LAMENT. 

Never happy any more I 
Aye, turn the saying o'er and o'er, 
It says but what it said before, 
And heart and life are just as sore. 
The wet leaves blow aslant the floor 
In the rain throifgh the open door. 
No, no more. 

Never happy any more I 
The eyes are weary and give o'er, 
But still the soul weeps as before. 
And always must each one deplore 
Each once, nor bear what others bore ? 
This is now as it was of yore. 
No, no more. 

Never happy any more I 
Is it not but a sorry lore 
That says, "Take strength, the worst is o'er"? 
Shall the stars seem as heretofore ? 
The day wears on more and more- 
While I was weeping the day wore. 
No, no more; 

Never happy any more 1 
In the cold behind the door 
That was the dial striking four: 
One for joy the past hours bore, 
Two for hope and will cast o'er, 
One for the naked dark before. 
No, no more. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE LADY'S LAMENT. 239 

Never happy any more I 
Put the light out, shut the door, 
Sweep the wet leaves from the floor. 
Even thus Fate's hand has swept her floor. 
Even thus Love's hand has shut the door 
Through which his warm feet passed of yore.' 
Shall it be opened any more ? 
No, no, no more. 



Digitized 



by Google 



240 



THE PORTRAIT. 

This is her picture as she was : 

It seems a thing to wonder on. 
As though mine image in the glass 

Should tarry when myself am gone. 
I gaze xmtil she seems to stir, — 
Until mine eyes almost aver 

That now, even now, the sweet lips part 

To breathe the words of the sweet heart : — 
And yet the earth is over her. 



Alas I even such the thin-drawn ray 

That makes the prison-depths more rude,- 

The drip of water night and day 
Giving a tongue to solitude. 

Yet only this, of love's whole prize, 

Remains ; save what in mournful guise 
Takes counsel with my soul alone,— 
Save what is secret and unknown. 

Below the earth, above the skies. 



In painting her I shrined her face 
'Mid mystic trees, where light falls in 

Hardly at all ; a covert place > 

Where you might think to find a din 

Of doubtful talk, and a live flame 

Wandering, and many a shape whose name 
Not itself knoweth, and old dew. 
And your own footsteps meeting you, 

And all things going as they came. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE PORTRAIT. 241 

A deep dim wood ; and there she stands 

As in that wood that day : for so 
Was the still movement of her hands 

And such the pure line's gracious flow. 
And passing fair the type must seem, 
Unknown the presence and the dream. 

Tis she : though of herself, alas ! 

Less than her shadow on the grass 
Or than her image in the stream. 

That day we met there, I and she 

One with the other all alone ; 
And we were blithe ; yet memory 

Saddens those hours, as when the moon 
Looks upon daylight. And with her 
I stooped to drink the spring-water, 

Athirst where other waters sprang : 

And where the echo is, she sang, — 
My soul another echo there. 

But when that hour my soul won strength 

For words whose silence wastes and kills, 
Dull raindrops smote us, and at length 

Thundered the heat within the hills. 
That eve I spoke those words again 
Beside .the pelted window-pane ; 

And there she hearkened what I said. 

With under-glances that surveyed 
The empty pastures blind with rain. 

Next day the memories of these things, 

Like leaves through which a bird has flown. 
Still vibrated with Love's warm wings ; 

Till I must make them all my own 
And paint this picture. So, 't^^^t ease 
Of talk and sweet long silences, 

She stood among the plants in bloom 

At windows of a summer room. 
To fdgn the shadow of the trees. 

16 



Digitized 



by Google 



243 THE PORTRAIT. 

And as I wrought, while all above 
And all around was fragrant air, 

In the sick burthen of my love 

It seemed each sun-thrilled blossom there 

Beat like a heart among the leaves. 

O heart t^^^ "^v^r K^ata nnr \\^m^^ 

In that one darkness Ijing still, 
WhSF now to IHee my Kve's great will 
Or the fine web the sunshine weaves ? 

For now doth daylight disavow 

Those days — nought left to see or hear. 
Only in solemn whispers now 

At night-time these things reach mine ear ; 
When the leaf-shadows at a breath 
Shrink in the road, and all the heath, 

Forest and water, far and wide. 

In limpid starlight glorified. 
Lie like the mystery of death. 

Last night at last I could have slept^ 
And yet delayed my sleep till dawn. 

Still wandering. Then it was I wept : 
For unawares I came upon 

Those glades where once she walked with me • 

And as I stood there suddenly. 
All wan with traversing the night. 
Upon the desolate verge of light 

Yearned loud the iron-bosomed sea. 

Even so, where Heaven holds breath and hears 

The beating heart of Love's own breast,— 
Where round the secret of all spheres 

All angels lay their wings to rest, — 
How shall my soul stand rapt and awed. 
When, by the new birth borne abroad 

Throughout the music of the suns, 

It enters in her soul at once 
And knows the silence there for God t 



Digitized 



by Google 



THB PORTRAIT. 243 

Here with her face doth memory sit 
Meanwhile, and wait the day's decline. 

Till other eyes shall look from it, 
Eyes of the spirit's Palestine, 

Even than the old gaze tenderer : 

While hopes and aims long lost with her 
Stand round her image side by side, 
Like tombs of pilgrims that have died 

About the Holy Sepulchre. 



Digitized 



by Google 



244 



AVE. 

Mother of the Fair Delight^ 
Thou handmaid perfect in God's sight^ 
Now sitting fourth beside the Three, 
Thyself a woman-Trinity, — 
Being a daughter bom to God, 
Mother of Christ from stall to rood, 
And wife unto the Holy Ghost : — 
Oh when our need is uttermost, 
Think that to such as death may strike 
Thou once wert sister sisterlike I 
Thou headstone of humanity, 
Groundstone of the great Mystery, 
Fashioned like us, yet more than we f 

Mind'st thou not (when June's heavy breath 
Warmed the long days in Nazareth,) 
That eve thou didst go forth to give 
Thy flowers some drink that they might live 
One faint night more amid the sands ? 
Far off the trees were as pale wands 
Against the fervid sky : the sea 
Sighed further off eternally 
As human sorrow sighs in sleep. 
Then suddenly the awe grew deep. 
As of a day to which all days 
Were footsteps in God's secret ways : 
Until a folding sense, like prayer. 
Which is, as God is, everywhere. 
Gathered about thee ; and a voice 
Spake to thee without any noise. 



Digitized 



by Google 



AVE. MS 



Being of the silence : — " Hail/' it said, 
" Thou that art highly favour^ ; 
The Lord is with thee here and now; 
Blessed among all women thou." 



Ah ! knew'st thou of the end, when first 
That Babe was on thy bosom nurs'd ? — 
Or when He tottered round thy knee 
Did thy great sorrow dawn on thee ? — 
And through His boyhood, year by year 
Eating with Him the Passover, 
Didst thou discern confusedly 
That holier sacrament, when He, 
The bitter cup about to quaff. 
Should break the bread and eat thereof? — 
Or came not yet the knowledge, even 
Till on some day forecast in Heaven 
His feet passed through thy door to press 
Upon His Father's business ? — 
Or still was God's high secret kept ? 



Nay, but I think the whisper crept 
Like growth through childhood. Work and play, 
Things common to the course of day, 
Awed thee with meanings unfulfill'd ; 
And all through girlhood, something still'd 
Thy senses like the birth of light, 
When thou hast trimmed thy lamp at night 
Or washed thy garments in the stream ; 
To whose white bed had come the dream 
That He was thine and thou wast His 
Who feeds among the field-lilies. 
O solemn shadow of the end 
In that wise spirit long contain'd I 
O awful end I and those unsaid 
Long years when It was FlnishM 1 



Digitized 



by Google 



346 AVB. 

Mind'st thou not (when the twilight gone 
Left darkness in the house of John,) 
Between the naked window-bars 
That spacious vigil of the stars? — 
For thou, a watcher even as they, 
Wouldst rise from where throughout the day 
Thou wroughtest raiment for His poor ; 
And, finding the fixed terms endure 
Of day and night which never brought 
Sounds of His coming chariot, 
Wouldst lift through cloud-waste unexplored 
Those eyes which said, ** How long, O Lord ? ' 
Then that disciple whom He loved. 
Well heeding, haply would be moved 
To ask thy blessing in His name ; 
^d that one thought in both, the same 
Though silent, then would clasp ye round 
To weep together, — tears long bound, 
Sick tears of patience, dumb and slow. 
Yet, " Surely 1 come quickly," — ^so 
He said, from life and death gone home. 
Amen : even so. Lord Jesus, come 1 

But oh ! what human tongue can ^)eak 
That day when Michael came * to br^ 
From the tired spirit, like a veil, 
Its covenant with Gabriel 
Endured at length unto the end ? 
What human thought can apprehend 
That mystery of motherhood 
When thy Beloved at length renewed 
The sweet communicm severe, — 
His left hand underneath thine head 
And His'right hand embracing thee ? — 
Lo ! He was thine, and this is He 1 

* A Church legend of the Blessed Virgin's death. 



Digitized 



by Google 



AVS. 247 

Soul, is it Faith, or Love, or Hope, 
That lets me see her standing up 
Where the light of the Throne is bright ? 
Unto the left, unto the right. 
The cherubim, succinct, conjoint. 
Float inward to a golden point. 
And from between the seraphim 
The glory issues for a hymn. 
O Mary Mother, be not loth 
To listen, — thou whom the stars clothe, 
Who seCst and mayst not be seen ! 
Hear us. at last, O Mary Queen 1 
Into our shadow bend thy face. 
Bowing thee from the secret place 
O Mary Viigin, full of grace I 



Digitized 



by Google 



248 



THE CARD-DEALER. 

Could you not drink her gaze like wine ? 

Yet though its splendour swoon 
Ii t) the silence languidly 

As a tune into a tune, 
ThDse eyes unravel the coiled night 

And know the stars at noon. 



Ihe gold that's heaped beside her hand, 

In truth rich prize it were ; 
And rich the dreams that wreathe her brows 

With magic stillness there ; 
And he were rich who should unwind 

That woven golden hair. 



Around her, where she sits, the dance 
Now breathes its eager heat ; 

And not more lightly or more true 
Fall there the dancers' feet 

Than fall her cards on the bright board 
As 'twere a heart that beat. 



Her fingers let them softly through, 
Smooth polished silent things ; 

And each one as it falls reflects 
In swift light-shadowlngs. 

Blood-red and purple, green and blue^ 
The great eyes of her rings. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE CARD-DEALER. 249 

Whom plays she with ? With thee, who 107*31 

Those gems upon her hand ; 
With me, who search her secret brows ; 

With all men, bless'd or bann'd. 
We play together, she and we. 

Within a vain strange land : 

A land without any order, — 

Day even as night, (one saith,)— 
Where who lieth down ariseth not 

Nor the sleeper awakeneth ; 
A land of darkness as darkness itself 

And of the shadow of death. 

What be her cards, you ask ? Even these : — 

The heart, that doth but crave 
More, having fed ; the diamond. 

Skilled to make base seem brave ; 
The club, for smiting in the dark ; 

The spade, to dig a grave. 

And do you ask what game she plays ? 

With me 'tis lost or won ; 
With thee it is playing still ; with him 

It b not well begun ; 
But 'tis a game she plays with all 

Beneath the sway o' the sun. 

Thou seest the card that falls, — she knows 

The card that foUoweth : 
Her game in thy tongue is called Life, 

As ebbs thy daily breath : 
When she shall speak, thou'lt learn her tongue 

And know she calls it Death, 



Digitized 



by Google 



aso 



WORLD'S WORTH. 

Tis of the Father Hilary. 

He strove, but could not pray ; so took 

The steep-coiled stair, where his feet shook 
A sad blind echo. Ever up 

He toiled. Twas a sick sway of air 

That autumn noon within the stair, 
As dizzy as a turning cup. 

His brain benumbed him, void and thin ; 

He shut his eyes and felt it spin ; 

The obscure deafness hemmed him in. 
He said : " O world, what world for me ? " 



He leaned unto the balcony 

Where the chime keeps the night and day ; 

It hurt his brain, he could not pray. 
He had his face upon the stone : 

Deep 't\?inxt the narrow shafts, his eye 

Passed all the roofs to the stark sky. 
Swept with no wing, with wind alone. 

Close to his feet the sky did shake 

With wind in pools that the rains make : 

The ripple set his eyes to ache. 
He said : " O world, what world for me ? " 



Digitized 



by Google 



WORLITS WORTH. 251 

He stood within the mystery 

Girding God's blessed Eucharist : 

The organ and the chaunt had ceas'd. 
The last words paused against his ear 

Said from the altar : drawn round him 

The gathering rest was dumb and dim. 
And now the sacring-bell rang dear 

And ceased ; and all was awe, — the breath 

Of God in man that warranted 

The inmost utmost things of faith. 
He said : " O God, my world in Thee I * 



Digitized 



by Google 



^'^yMiPCt^\j^^ 



252 

ON REFUSAL OF AID BETWEEN 
NATIONS. 

Not that the earth is changing, O my God I 
Nor that the seasons totter in their walk, — 
Not that the virulent ill of act and talk 

Seethes ever as a winepress ever trod, — 

Not therefore are we certain that the rod 
Weighs in thine hand to smite thy world; though now 
Beneath thine hand so many nations bow, 

So many kings : — ^not therefore, O my God I — 

But because Man is parcelled out in men 
To-day ; because, for any wrongful blow 
No man not stricken asks, *' I would be told 
Why thou dost thus ; " but his heart whispers then, 
" He is h^ I am I." By this we know 
That our earth falls asunder, being old. 



ON THE VITA NUOVA OF DANTE. 

As he that loves oft looks on the dear form 
And guesses how it grew to womanhood, 
And gladly would have watched the beauties bud 

And the mild fire of precious life wax warm : 

So I, long bound within the threefold charm 
Of Dante's love sublimed to heavenly mood. 
Had marvelled, touching his Beatitude, 

How grew such presence from man's shameful swarm. 

At length within this book I found pourtrayed 

Newborn that Paradisal Love of his. 
And simple like a child ; with whose clear aid 

I understood. To such a child as thi^ "* 
Christ, charging well His chosen ones, forbade 

Offence : " for lo I of such my kingdom is."^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



aS3 



SONG AND MUSIC 

O LEAVE your hand where it lies cool 
Upon the eyes whose lids are hot : 

Its rosy shade is bountiful 

Of silence, and assuages thought 

O lay your hps against your hand 

And let me feel your breath through it, 

While through the sense your song shall fit 
The soul to understand. 

The music lives upon my brain 

Between your hands within mine eyes ; 

It stirs your lifted throat like pain, 
An aching pulse of melodies. 

Lean nearer, let the music pause : 
The soul may better understand 

Your music, shadowed in your hand, 
Now while the song withdraws. 



Digitized 



by Google 



aS4 



THE SEA-LIMITa 

Consider the sea's listless chime : 
Time's self it is, made audible, — 
The murmur of the earth's own shell 

Secret continuance sublime 

Is the sea's end : our sight may pass 
No furlong further. Since time was, 

This sound hath told the lapse of time. 

No quiet, which is death's, — it hath 

Hie moumfulness of ancient life, 

Enduring always at dull strife. 
As the world's heart of rest and wrath, 

Its painful pulse is in the sands. 

Last utterly, the whole sky stands, 
Grey and not known, along its path. 

Listen alone beside the sea. 

Listen alone among the woods ; 

Those voices of twin solitudes 
Shall have one sound alike to thee : 

Hark where the murmurs of thronged men 

Surge and sink back and surge again, — 
Still the one voice of wave and tree. 

Gather a shell from the strown beach 
And listen at its lips : they sigh 
The same desire and mystery. 

The echo of the whole sea's speech. 
And all mankind is thus at heart 
Not anything but what thou art : 

And Earth, Sea, Man, are all in each. 



Digitized 



by Google 



255 



A TRIP TO PARIS AND BELGIUM. 

z. 

LONDON TO FOLKESTONE. 

A CONSTANT keeping-past of shaken tree% 
And a bewildered glitter of loose road ; 
Banks of bright growth, with single blades atop 
Against white sky : and wires — a constant chain — 
That seem to draw the clouds along with them 
(Things which one stoops against the light to see 
Through the low window ; shaking by at rest, 
Or fierce like water as the swiftness grows) ; 
And, seen through fences or a bridge far off. 
Trees that in moving keep their intervals 
Still one 'twixt bar and bar ; and then at times 
Long reaches of green level, where one cow. 
Feeding among her fellows that feed on, 
Lifts her slow neck, and gazes for the sound. 

Fields mown in ridgfes ; and close garden-crops 
Of the earth's increase ; and a constant sky 
Still with clear trees that let you see the wind ; 
And snatches of the engine-smoke, by fits 
Tossed to the wind against the landscape, where 
Rooks stooping heave their wings upon the day. 

Brick walls we pass between, passed so at once 
That for the suddenness I cannot know 
Or what, or where begun, or where at end. 
Sometimes a station in grey quiet ; whence. 
With a short gathered champing of pent sound, 
We are let out upon the air again. 
Pauses of water soon, at intervals. 
That has the sky in it ; — the reflexes 



Digitized 



by Google 



256 A TRIP TO PARIS AND BELGIUM. 

O' the trees move towards the bank as we go by, 
Leavmg the water's surface plain. I now 
lie back and dose my eyes a space ; for they 
Smart from the open forwardness of thought 
Fronting the wind. 

« * • • • 

I did not scribble more, 
Be certain, after this ; but yawned, and reac^ 
And nearly dozed a little, I believe ; 
Till, stretching up against the carriage-back, 
I was roused altogether, and looked out 
To where the pale sea brooded murmuring. 



BOULOGNE TO AMIENS AND PARIS. 

Strong extreme speed, that the brain hurries with, 
Further than trees, and hedges, and green grass 
Whitened by distance, — further than small pools 
Held among fields and gardens, further than 
Haystacks, and wind-mill-sails, and roofe and herds,*-^ 
The sea's last margin ceases at the sun. 

The sea has left us, but the sun remains. 
Sometimes the country spreads aloof in tracts 
Smooth from the harvest ; sometimes sky and land 
Are shut from the square space the window leaves 
By a dense crowd of trees, stem behind stem 
Passing across each other as we pass : 
Sometimes tall poplar-wands stand white, their heads 
Outmeasuring the distant hills. Sometimes 
The ground has a deep greenness ; sometimes brown 
In stubble ; and sometimes no ground at all, 
For the close strength of crops that stand unreaped. 
The water-plots are sometimes all the sun's, — 
Sometimes quite green through shadows filling them, 
Or islanded with growths of reeds, — or else 
Masked in grey dust like the wide face o* the fields. 



Digitized 



by Google 



A TRIP TO PARIS AND BELGIUM, 257 

And still the swiftness lasts ; that to our speed 
The trees seem shaken like a press of spears. 

There is some count of us : — folks travelling capped, 
Priesthood, and lank hard-featured soldiery, 
Females (no women), blouses, Hunt, and I. 

We are delayed at Amiens. The steam 
Snorts, chafes, and bridles, like three hundred horse. 
And flings its dusky mane upon the air. 
Our company is thinned, and lamps alight 
But still there are the folks in travelling-caps, 
No priesthood now, but always soldiery. 
And babies to make up for show in noise ; 
Females (no women), blouses. Hunt, and I. 

Our windows at one side are shut for warmth ; 
Upon the other side, a leaden sky. 
Hung in blank glare, makes all the country dim. 
Which too seems bald and meagre, — be it truth, 
Or of the waxing darkness. Here and there 
The shade takes light, where in thin patches stand 
The unstirred dregs of water. 



III. 
THE PARIS RAILWAY-STATION. 

In France, (to bafile thieves and murderers) 
A journey takes two days of passport work 
At least The plan's sometimes a tedious one. 
But bears its fruit Because, the other day. 
In passing by the Morgue, we saw a man 
(The thing is common, and we never should 
Have known of it, only we passed that way) 

17 



Digitized 



by Google 



f58 A TRIP TO PARIS AND BELGIUM, 

Who had been stabbed and tumbled in the Seine, 
Where he had stayed some days. The face was black, 
And, like a negro's, swollen ; all the flesh 
Had furr edi^ and b roken into a^^een mould . 

Now, very likely, he who did the job 
Was standing among those who stood with us, 
To look upon the corpse. You fancy him — 
Smoking an early pipe, and watching, as 
An artist, the effect of his last work. 
This always if it had not struck him that 
Twere best to leave while yet the body took 
Its crust of rot beneath the Seine. It may : 
But, if it did not, he can now remain 
Without much fear. Only^ if he should want 
To travel, and have not his passport yet, 
(Deep dogs these French police I) he may be caught 

Therefore you see (lest, being murderers. 
We should not have the sense to go before 
The thing were known, or to stay afterwards) 
There is good reason why — having resolved 
To start for Belgium — we were kept three days 
To learn about the passports first, then do 
As we had learned. This notwithstanding, in 
The fulness of the time 'tis come to pass. 



IV, 

REACHING BRUSSELS. 

There is small change of country ; but the sun 
Is out, and it seems shame this were not said. 
For upon all the grass the warmth has caught ; 
And betwixt distant whitened poplar-stems 
Makes greener darkness ; and in dells of trees 
Shows spaces of a verdure that was hid ; 



Digitized 



by Google 



A TRIP TO PARIS AND BELGIUM. 259 

And the sky has its blue floated with white, 
And crossed with falls of the sun's glory aslant 
To lay upon the waters of the world ; 
And from the road men stand with shaded eyes 
To look ; and flowers in gardens have grown strong ; 
And our own shadows here within the coach 
Are brighter ; and all colour has more bloom. 

So, after the sore torments of the route ; — 
Toothache, and headache, and the ache of wind, 
And huddled sleep, and smarting wakefulness. 
And night, and day, and hunger sick at food. 
And twenty-fold relays, and packages 
To be unlocked, and passports to be found. 
And heavy well-kept landscape ; — we were glad 
Because we entered Brussels in the sun. 



V. 

ANTWERP TO GHENT. 

We are upon the Scheldt. We know we move 
Because there is a floating at our eyes 
Whatso they seek ; and because all the things 
Which on our outset were distinct and large 
Are smaller and much weaker and quite grey, 
And at last gone from us. No motion else. 

We are upon the road. The thin swift moon 
Runs with the running clouds that are the sky. 
And with the running water runs — at whiles 
Weak 'neath the film and heavy growth of reeds. 
The country swims with motion. Time itself 
Is consciously beside us, and perceived 
Our speed is such the sparks our engine leaves 
Are burning after the whole train has passed. 



Digitized 



by Google 



26o A TRIP TO PARIS AND BELGIUM, 

The darkness is a tumult. We tear on, 
The roll behind us and the cry before, 
Constantly, in a lull of intense speed 
And thunder. Any other sound is known 
Merely by sight. The shrubs, the trees your eye 
Scans for their growth, are far along in haze. 
The sky has lost its clouds, and lies away 
Oppressively at calm : the moon has failed : 
Our speed has set the wind against us. Now 
Our engine's heat is fiercer, and flings up 
Great glares alongside. Wind and steam and speed 
And clamour and the night We are in Ghent 



Digitized 



by Google 



aCi 



THE STAIRCASE OF NOTRE DAME, PARIS. 

As one who, groping in a narrow stair, 
Hath a strong sound of bells upon his ears, 
Which, being at a distance off, appears 

Quite close to him because of the pent air : 

So with this France. She stumbles file and square 
Darkling and without space for breath : each one 
Who hears the thunder says : " It shall anon 

Be in among her ranks to scatter her." 

This may be ; and it may be that the storm 
Is spent in rain upon the unscathed seas, 
Or wasteth other countries ere it die : 
Till she, — having climbed always through the swarm 
Of darkness and of hurtling sound, — from these 
Shall step forth on the light in a still sky. 



PLACE DE LA BASTILLE, PARIS. 

How dear the sky has been above this place I 
Small treasures of this sky that we see here 
Seen weak through prison-bars from year to year ; 

Eyed with a painful prayer upon God's grace 

To save, and tears that stayed along the face 
Lifted at sunset Yea, how passing dear, 
Those nights when through the bars a wind left 
clear 

The heaven, and moonlight soothed the limpid space ! 

So was it, till one night the secret kept 
Safe in low vault and stealthy corridor 

Was blown abroad on gospel-tongues of flame. 
O ways of God, mysterious evermore I 
How many on this spot have cursed and wept 

That all might stand here now and own Thy 
Name. 



Digitized 



by Google 



262 



NEAR BRUSSELS— A HALF-WAY PAUSE. 

The turn of noontide has begun. 

In the weak breeze the sunshine yields. 

There is a bell upon the fields. 
On the long hedgerow's tangled run 

A low white cottage intervenes : 

A gainst ti Tewall_a_biind man leans, 
And, sways his face to have the sun. 

Our horses' hoofs stir in the road, 
Quiet and sharp. Light hath a song 
Whose silence, being heard, seems long. 

The point of noon maketh abode, 

And will not be at once gone through. 
The sky's deep colour saddens you^ 

And the heat weighs a dreamy load. 



Digitized 



by Google 



263 



ANTWERP AND BRUGES. 

I cxiMBED the stair in Antwerp church, 
What time the circling thews of sound 
At sunset seem to heave it round. 
Far up, the carillon did search 
The wind, and the birds came to perch 
Far imder, where the gables wound 



In Antwerp harbour on the Scheldt 

I stood along, a certain space 

Of night The mist was near my face ; 
Deep on, the flow was heard and felt 
The carillon kept pause, and dwelt 

In music through the silent place. 



John Menmieling and John van Eyck 
Hold state at Bruges. In sore shame 
I scanned the works that keep their name. 
The carillon, which then did strike 
Mine ears, was heard of theirs alike : 
It set me closer unto them. 



I climbed at Bruges all the flight 
TTie belfry has of ancient stone. 
For leagues I saw the east wind blown ; 

The earth was grey, the sky v^^s white. 

I stood so near upon the height 
That my flesh felt the carillon. 



Digitized 



by Google 



264 



ON LEAVING BRUGES. 

The city's steeple-towers remove away, 
Each singly ; as each vain infatuate Faith 
Leaves God in heaven, and passes. A mere breadi 

Each soon appears, so far. Yet that which lay 

The first is now scarce further or more grey 
Than the last is. Now all are wholly gone. 
The sunless sky has not once had the sun 

Since the first weak beginning of the day. 

The air falls back as the wind finisl^eg,. 

And the clouds stagnate. On the water's face 
The current breathes along, but is not stirred. 
There is no branch that thrills with any bird. 
Winter is to possess the earth a space. 
And have its will upon the extreme sea§* 



Digitized 



by Google 



265 



VOX ECCLESI^, VOX CHRISTI. 

I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for 
the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; and 
they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy 
and true, dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them 
that dwell on the earth ?— Rev. vi. 9, 10. 

Not 'neath the altar only, — yet, in sooth, 

There more than elsewhere, — is the cry, ''How long?" 
The right sown there hath still borne fruit in wrong — 

The wrong waxed fourfold. Thence, (in hate of truth) 

O'er weapons blessed for carnage, to fierce youth 
From evil age, the word hath hissed along : — 
" Ye are the Lord's : go forth, destroy, be strong : 

Christ's Church absolves ye from Christ's law of ruth." 

Therefore the wine-cup at the altat is 

As Christ's own blood indeed, and as the blood 
Of Christ's elect, at divers seasons spilt 
On the altar-stone, that to man's church, for this, 
Shall prove a stone of stumbling, — whence it stood 
To be rent up ere the true Church be built. 



Digitized 



by Google 



266 



THE BURDEN OF NINEVEH. 

In our Museum galleries 

To-day I lingered o'er the prize 

Dead Greece vouchsafes to living eyes, — 

Her Art for ever in fresh wise 

From hour to hour rejoicing me. 
Sighing I turned at last to win 
Once more the London dirt and din ; 
And as I made the swing-door spin 
And issued, they were hoisting in 

A wing^ beast from Nineveh. 

A human face the creature wore, 
And hoofs behind and hoofs before. 
And flanks with dark runes fretted o'er 
Twas bull, 'twas mitred Minotaur, 

A dead disbowelled mystery : 
The mummy of a buried faith 
Stark from the chamel without scathe. 
Its wings stood for the light to bathe, — 
Sudi fossil cerements as might swathe 

The very corpse of Nineveh. 

The print of its first rush-wrapping, 
Wound ere it dried, still ribbed the thing. 
What song did the brown maidens sing, 
From purple mouths alternating, 

When that was woven languidly ? 
What vows, what rites, what prayers preferr'd^ 
What songs has the strange image heard ? 
In what blind vigil stood interred 
For ages, till an English word 

Broke silence first at Nineveh ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BURDEN OF NINEVEH. 267 

Oh when upon each sculptured court. 
Where even the wind might not resort, — 
O'er which Time passed, of like import 
With the wild Arab boys at sport, — 

A living face looked in to see : — 
Oh seemed it not — the spell once broke — 
As though the carven warriors woke. 
As though the shaft the string forsook, 
The cymbals clashed, the chariots shook, 

And there was life in Nineveh ? 

On London stones our sun anew 
The beast's recovered shadow threw. 
(No shade that plague of darkness knew, 
No light, no shade, while older grew 

By ages the old earth and sea) 
Lo thou I could all thy priests have shown 
Such proof to make thy godhead known ? 
From their dead Past thou liVst alone ; 
And still thy shadow is thine own, 

Even as of yore in Nineveh. 

That day whereof we keep record, 
When near thy city-gates the Lord 
Sheltered His Jonah with a gourd, 
This sun, (I said) here present, pour'd 

Even thus this shadow that I see. 
This shadow has been shed the same 
From sun and moon, — from lamps which came 
For prayer, — from fifteen days of flame, 
The last, while smouldered to a name 

Sardanapalus' Nineveh. 

Within thy shadow, haply, once 
Sennacherib has knelt, whose sons 
Smote him between the altar-stones : 
Or pale Semiramis her zones 

Of gold, her incense brought to thee. 



Digitized 



by Google 



268 THE BURDEN OF NINEVEH. 

In love for grace, in war for aid : . . . . 
Ay, and who else ? .... till 'neath thy shade 
Within his trenches newly made 
Last year the Christian knelt and pray'd — 
Not to thy strength — in Nineveh.* 

Now, thou poor god, within this hall 
Where the blank windows blind the wall 
From pedestal to pedestal. 
The kind of light shall on thee fall 

Which London takes the day to be : 
While school-foundations in the act 
Of holiday, three files compact. 
Shall learn to view thee as a fact 
Connected with that zealous tract : 

" Rome, — Babylon and Nineveh." 

Deemed they of this, those worshipers, 
When, in some mythic chain of verse 
Which man shall not again rehearse, 
The faces of thy ministers 

Yearned pale with bitter ecstasy ? 
Greece, Egypt, Rome, — did any god 
Before whose feet men knelt unshod 
Deem that in this unblest abode 
Another scarce more unknown god 

Should house with him, from Nineveh ? 

Ah ! in what quarries lay the stone 
From which this pillared pile has grown. 
Unto man's need how long unknown, 
Since those thy temples, court and cone, 
Rose far in desert history ? 

• During the excavations, theXiyari workmen held their services 
in the shadow of the great bulls.— (La^^onTs " Ninwk^ ch. ix.) 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE BURDEN OF NINEVEH. 269 

Ah I what is here that does not lie 
All strange to thine awakened eye ? 
Ah ! what is here can testify 
(Save that dumb presence of the sky) 
Unto thy day and Nineveh ? 

Why, of those mummies in the room 
Above, there might indeed have come 
One out of Egypt to thy home, 
An alien. Nay, but were not some 

Of these thine own " antiquity " ? 
And now, — they and their gods and thou 
All relics here together, — now 
Whose profit ? whether bull or cow, 
Isis or Ibis, who or how. 

Whether of Thebes or Nineveh ? 

The consecrated metals found. 
And ivory tablets, underground, 
Winged teraphim and creatures crown'd, 
When air and daylight filled the mound. 

Fell into dust immediately. 
And even as these, the images 
Of awe and worship,— even as these, — 
So, smitten with the sun's increase. 
Her glory mouldered and did cease 

From immemorial Nineveh. 

The day her builders made their halt, 
Those cities of the lake of salt 
Stood firmly 'stablished without fault. 
Made proud with pillars of basalt, 

With sardonyx and porphyry. 
The day that Jonah bore abroad 
To Nineveh the voice of God, 
A brackish lake lay in his road, 
Where erst Pride fixed her sure abode. 

As then in royal Nineveh. 



Digitized 



by Google 



270 THE BURDEN OF NINEVEH, 

The day when he, Pride's lord and Man's, 
Showed all the kingdoms at a glance 
To Him before whose countenance 
The years recede, the years advance, 

And said, Fall down and worship me : — 
'Mid all the pomp beneath that look, 
Then stirred there, haply, some rebuke. 
Where to the wind the Salt Pools shook, 
And in those tracts, of life forsook. 

That knew thee not, O Nineveh I 

Delicate harlot I On thy throne 
Thou with a world beneath thee prone 
In state for ages saf st alone ; 
And needs were years and lustres flown 

Ere strength of man could vanquish thee : 
Whom even thy victor foes must bring, 
Still royal, among maids that sing 
As with doves' voices, taboring 
Upon their breasts, unto the King, — 

A kingly conquest, Nineveh I 

. . . Here woke my thought. The wind's slow sway 
Had waxed ; and like the human play 
Of scorn that smiling spreads away, 
The sunshine shivered oflf the day : 

The callous wind, it seemed to me. 
Swept up the shadow from the ground : 
And pale as whom the Fates astound, 
The god forlorn stood winged and crown'd : 
Within I knew the cry lay bound 

Of the dumb soul of Nineveh. 

And as I turned, my sense half shut 
Still saw the crowds of kerb and rut 
Go past as marshalled to the strut 
Of ranks in g3rpsum quaintly cut 
It seemed in one same pageantry 



Digitized 



by Google 



7 HE BURDEN OF NINEVEH. 271 

They followed forms which had been erst ; 
To pass, till on my sight should burst 
That future of the best or worst 
When some may question which was first. 
Of London or of Nineveh. 

For as that Bull-god once did stand 
And watched the burial-clouds of sand. 
Till these at last without a hand 
Rose o'er his eyes, another land, 

And blinded him with destiny :— 
So may he stand again ; till now, 
In ships of unknbwn sail and prow. 
Some tribe of the Australian plough 
Bear him afar, — a relic now 

Of London, not of Nineveh ! 

Or it may chance indeed that when 
Man's age is hoary among men, — 
His centuries threescore and ten, — 
His furthest childhood shall seem then 

More clear than later times may be : 
Who, finding in this desert place 
This form, shall hold us for some race 
That walked not in Christ's lowly ways. 
But bowed its pride and vowed its praise 

Unto the God of Nineveh. 

The smile rose first, — anon drew nigh 

The thought : . . Those heavy wings spread high, 

So sure of flight, which do not fly ; 

That set gaze never on the sky ; 

Those scriptured flanks it cannot see ; 
Its crown, a brow-contracting load ; 
Its planted feet which trust the sod : . • . 
So grew the image as I trod :) 
^ Nineveh, was this thy God, — 

Thine also, mighty Nineveh ? 



g 



Digitized 



by Google 



272 

THE CHURCH-PORCH. 

Sister, first shake we off the dust we have 
Upon our feet, lest it defile the stones 
Inscriptured, covering their sacred bones 

Who lie i' the aisles which keep the names they gave, 

Their trust abiding round them in the grave ; 
Whom painters paint for visible orisons, 
And to whom sculptors pray in stone and bronze ; ^ 

Their voices echo still like a spent wave. 

Without here, the church -bells are but a tune, 
And on the carven church-door this hot noon 

Lays all its heavy sunshine here without : 
But having entered in, we shall find there 
Silence, and sudden dimness, and deep prayer, 

And faces of crowned angels all about 



THE MIRROR. 

She knew it not : — most perfect pain 
To learn : this too she knew not Strife 
For me, calm hers, as from the first 
Twas but another bubble burst 
Upon the curdling draught of life, — 
My silent patience mine again. 

As who, of forms that crowd unknown 
Within a distant mirror's shade, 

Deems such an one himself, and makes 
Some sign - but when the image shakes 
No whit, he finds his thought betray'd, 
And must seek elsewhere for his own. 



Digitized 



by Google 



273 

A YOUNG FIR-WOOD. 

These little firs to-day are things 
To clasp into a giant's cap^ 
Or fans to suit his lady's lap. 

From many winters many springs 

Shall cherish them in strength and sap 
Till they be marked upon the map, 

A wood for the wind's wanderings. 

All seed is in the sower's hands : 

And what at first was trained to spread 
Its shelter for some single head, — 

Yea, even such fellowship of wands,— 
May hide the sunset, and the shade 
Of its great multitude be laid 

Upon the earth and elder sands. 



DURING MUSIC 

O COOL unto the sense of pain 

That last night's sleep could not destroy ; 

O warm unto the sense of joy, 
That dreams its life within the brain. 

What though I lean o'er thee to scan 
The written music cramped and stiflF; — 
'TIS dark to me, as hieroglyph 

On those weird bulks Egyptian. 

But as from those, dumb now and strange, 
A glory wanders on the earth, 
Even so thy tones can call a birth 

From these, to shake my soul with change. 

O swift, as in melodious haste 

Float o'er the keys thy fingers small ; 
O soft, as is the rise and fall 

Which stirs that shade within thy breast 

i8 



Digitized 



by Google 



274 



STRATTON WATER. 

"O HAVE you seen the Stratton flood 
That* s great with rain to-day ? 

It runs beneath your wall, Lord Sands, 
Full of the new-mown hay. 

"I led your hounds to Hutton bank 

To bathe at early mom : 
They got their bath by Borrowbrake 

Above the standing com." 

Out from the castle-stair Lord Sands 
Looked up the westem lea ; 

The rook was grieving on her nest. 
The flood was roimd her tree. 

Over the castle-wall Lord Sands 
Looked down the eastern hill : 

The stakes swam free among the boats. 
The flood was rising still. 

*' Whafs yonder far below that lies 
So white against the slope ? " 

*'0 it's a sail o' your bonny barks 
The waters have washed up." 

" But I have never a sail so white, 
And the water's not yet there." 

" O it's the swans o* your bonny lake 
The rising flood doth scare." 



Digitized 



by Google 



STRATTON WATER. 275 

"The swans they would not hold so still, 

So high they would not win." 
*' O it's Joyce my wife has spread her smock 

And fears to fetch it in." 

" Nay, knave, it's neither sail nor swans, 

Nor aught that you can say ; 
For though your wife might leave her smock, 

Herself she'd bring away." 

Lord Sands has passed the turret-stair. 

The court, and yard, and all ; 
The kine were in the byre that day. 

The nags were in the stall. 

Lord Sands has won the weltering slope 

Whereon the white shape lay : 
The clouds were still above the hill, 

And the shape was still as they. 

Oh pleasant is the gaze of life 

And sad is death's blind head ; 
But awful are the living eyes 

In the face of one thought dead I 

" In God's name, Janet, is it me 

Thy ghost has come to seek ? " 
*' Nay, wait another hour, Lord Sands,-* 

Be sure my ghost shall speak." 

A moment stood he as a stone, 

Then grovelled to his knee. 
*' O Janet, O my love, my love. 

Rise up and come with me I " 
" O once before you bade me come. 

And it's here you have brought me ! 



Digitized 



by Google 



276 STRATTON WATEJt. 

" O manys the sweet word, Lord Sands, 

You've spoken oft to me ; 
But all that I have from you to-day 

Is the rain on my body. 

" And many's the good gift. Lord Sands, 

You've promised oft to me ; 
But the gift of yours I keep to-day 

Is the babe in my body. 

" O it's not in any earthly bed 

That first my babe I'U see ; 
For I have brought my body here 

That the flood may cover me." 

His face was close against her face, 

His hands of hers were fain : 
O her wet cheeks were hot with tears, 

Her wet hands cold with rain. 

" They told me you were dead, Janet, — 

How could I guess the lie ? " 
''They told me you were false, Lord Sands, - 

What could I do but die ?" 

" Now keep you well, my brother Giles, — 
Through you I deemed her dead I 

As wan as your towers seem to-day, 
To-morrow they'U be red. 

" Look down, look down, my false mother. 

That bade me not to grieve : 
You'll look up when our marriage fires 

Are lit to-morrow eve : 

" O more than one and more than two 

The sorrow of this shall see : 
But it's to-morrow, love, for them, — 

To-day's for thee and me." 



Digitized 



by Google 



STRATTON WATER, 277 

He's drawn her lace between his hands 

And her pale mouth to his : 
No tnrd that was so still that day 

Chirps sweeter than his kiss. 

The flood was creeping round their feet 

" O Janet, come away I 
The hall is warm for the marriage-rite. 

The bed for the birthday." 

" Nay, but I hear your mother cry, 

' Go bring this bride to bed I 
And would she christen her babe unborn, 

So wet she comes to wed ? ' 

" I'll be your wife to cross your door 

And meet your mother's e'e. 
We plighted troth to wed i' the kirk, 

And it's there you'll wed with me," 

He's ta'en her by the short girdle 

And by the dripping sleeve : 
" Go fetch Sir Jock my mother's priest,— 

You'll ask of him no leave. 

" O it's one half-hour to reach the kirk 

And (me for the marriage-rite ; 
And kirk and castle and castle-lands 

Shall be our babe's to-night" 

"The flood's in the kirkyard, Lord Sands, 

And round the belfry-stair." 
" I bade you fetch the priest," he said, 

" Myself shall bring him there. 

" It's for the lilt of wedding bells 

We'll have the hail to pour. 
And for the clink of bridle-reins 

The plashing of the oar." 



Digitized 



by Google 



278 STRATTON WATER. 

Beneath them on the nether hill 

A boat was floating wide : 
Lord. Sands swam out and caught the oars 

And rowed to the hill-side. 

He's wrapped her in a green mantle 

And set her softly in ; 
Her hair was wet upon her face, 

Her face was grey and thin ; 
And " Oh I " she said, " lie still, my babe, 

It's out you must not win I " 

But woe's my heart for Father John 

As hard as he might pray, 
There seemed no help but Noah's ark 

Or Jonah's fish that day. 

The first strokes that the oars struck 

Were over the broad leas ; 
The next strokes that the oars struck 

They pushed beneath the trees ; 

The last stroke that the oars struck. 
The good boat's head was met, 

And there the gate of the kirkyard 
Stood like a ferry-gate. 

He's set his hand upon the bar 

And lightly leaped within : 
He's lifted her to his left shoulder. 

Her knees beside his chin. 

The graves lay deep beneath the flood 

Under the rain alone ; 
And when the foot-stone made him slip. 

He held by the head-stone. 



Digitized 



by Google 



STRATTON WATER. 279 

The empty boat thrawed i' the wind, 

Against the postern tied. 
*' Hold still, you've brought my love with me, 

You shall take back my bride." 

But woe's my heart for Father John 

And the saints he clamoured to ! 
There's never a saint but Christopher 

Might hale such buttocks through I 

And " Oh I " she said, " on men's shoulders 

I well had thought to wend, 
And well to travel with a priest, 

But not to have cared or ken'd. 

" And oh I " she said, "it's well this way 

That I thought to have fared, — 
Not to have lighted at the kirk 

But stopped in the kirkyard. 

^ For it's oh and oh I prayed to God, 

Whose rest I hoped to win. 
That when to-night at your board-head 

You'd bid the feast begin. 
This water past your window-sill 

Might bear my body in." 

Now make the white bed warm and soft 

And greet the merry mom. 
The night the mother should have died, 

The young son shall be born* 



Digitized 



by Google 



280 



WELLINGTON'S FUNERAL. 

i8M November 1852. 

"Victory I" 
So once more the cry must be. 
Duteous mourning we fulfil 
In God's name ; but by God's will, 
Doubt not, the last word b still 

** Victory I" 

Funeral, 
In the music round this pall, 
Solemn grief yields earth to earth ; 
But what tones of solemn mirth 
In the pageant of new birth 

Rise and fall? 



For indeed, 
If our eyes were opened, 
V^o shall say what escort floats 
Here, which breath nor gleam denotes,- 
Fiery horses, chariots 

Fire-footed ? 



Trumpeter, 
Even thy call he may not hear ; 
Long-known voice for ever pas^ 
Till with one more trumpet-blast 
God's assuring word at last 

Reach his ear. 



Digitized 



by Google 



V^ELLINGTOirS FUNERAL. sBf 

Multitude, 
Hold your breath in reverent mood : 
For while earth's whole kindred stand 
Mute even thus on either hand, 
This soul's labour shall be scann'd 

And found good. 



Cherubim, 
Lift ye not even now your hymn ? 
Lo ! once lent for human lack, 
Michael's sword is rendered back. 
Thrills not now the starry track, 

Seraphim ? 



Gabriel, 
Since the gift of thine " All hail I " 
Out of Heaven no time hath brought 
Gift with fuller blessing fraught 
Than the peace which this man wrought 

Passing well. 



Be no word 
Raised of bloodshed Christ-abhorr'd. 
Say : " 'Twas thus in His decrees 
Who Himself, the Prince of Peace, 
For His harvest's high increase 

Sent a sword." 



Veterans, 
He by whom the neck of France 
Then was given imto your heel. 
Timely sought, may lend as well 
To your sons his terrible 

G>untenance. 



Digitized 



by Google 



283 WELLINGTON'S FUNERAL. 

Waterloo I 
As the last grave must renew, 
Ere fresh death, the banshee-strain,— 
So methinks upon thy plain 
Falls some presage in the rain, 

In the dew. 



And O thou, 
Watching with an exile's brow 
Unappeased, o'er death's dumb flood :— 
Lo I the saving strength of God 
In some new heart's English blood 

Slumbers now. 



Emperor, 
Is this all thy work was for ?^ 
Thus to see thy self-sought aim. 
Yea thy titles, yea thy name. 
In another's shame, to shame 

Bandied o'er?* 



Wellington, 
Thy great work is but begun. 
With quick seed his end is rife 
Whose long tale of conquering strife 
Shows no triumph like his life 

Lost and won. 

♦ Date of the Coup d^Eiat : 2nd December 1851. 



Digitized 



by Google 



2S3 



PENUMBRA. 

I DID not look upon her eyes, 
(Though scarcely seen, with no surprise, 
'Mid many eyes a single look,) 
Because they should not gaze rebuke. 
At night, from stars in sky and brook. 

I did not take her by the hand, 
(Though little was to understand 
From touch of hand all friends might take,) 
Because it should not prove a flake 
Burnt in my palm to boil and ache. 

I did not listen to her voice, 
(Though none had noted, where at choice 
All might rejoice in listening,) 
Because no such a thing should cling 
In the wood's moan at evening. 

I did not cross her shadow once, 
(Though from the hollow west the sun's 
Last shadow runs along so far,) 
Because in June it should not bar 
My ways, at noon when fevers are. 

They told me she was sad that day, 
(Though wherefore tell what love's soothsay. 
Sooner than they, did register ?) 
And my heart leapt and wept to her, 
And yet I did not speak nci stin 



Digitized 



by Google 



284 PENUMBRA. 

So shall the tongues of the sea's foam 
(Though many voices therewith come 
From drowned hope's home to cry to me,) 
Bewail one hour die more, when sea 
And wind are one with memory. 



Digitized 



by Google 



TVS 

ON THE SITE OF A MULBERRY-TREE; 
Planted by Wm. Shakspeare; felled by the Rev. K Gastrell. 

This tree, here fall'n, no common birth or death 

Shared with its kind. The world's enfranchised son, 
Who found the trees of Life and Knowledge one, 

Here set it, frailer than his laurel-wreath. 

Shall not the wretch whose hand it fell beneath 
Rank also singly — the supreme unhung ? 
Lo I Sheppard, Turpin, pleading with black tongue 

This viler tfiief s unsufibcated breath I 

We'll search thy glossary, Shakspeare I whence almost, 
And whence alone, some name shall be reveal'd 
For this deaf drudge, to whom no length of ears 
Sufficed to catch the music of the spheres ; 
Whose soul is carrion now, — too mean to yield 
Some Starveling's ninth allotment of a ghost 



ON CERTAIN ELIZABETHAN REVIVALS. 

O RUFF-EMBASTiONED vsst Elizabeth, 

Bush to these bushel-bellied casks of wine. 
Home-growth, 'tis true, but rank as turpentine— 

What would we with such skittle-plays at death ? 

Say, must we watch these brawlers' brandished lathe. 
Or to their reeking wit our ears incline. 
Because all Castaly flowed crystalline 

In gentle Shakspeare's modulated breath ? 

What ! must our drama with the rat-pit vie, 
Nor the scene close while one is left to kill ? 
Shall this be poetry ? And thou — thou man 
Of blood, thou cannibalic Caliban, 
What shall be said of thee ? A poet ?— Fie I 
" An honourable murderer, if you will." 



Digitized 



by Google 



286 

ENGLISH MAY. 

Would God your health were as this month of May 
Should be, were this not England, — and your face 
Abroad, to give the gracious sunshine grace 

And laugh beneath the budding hawthorn-spray. 

But here the hedgerows pine from green to grey 
While yet May's lyre is tuning, and her song 
Is weak in shade that should in sun be strong; 

And your pulse springs not to so faint a lay. 

If in my life be breath of Italy, 
Would God that I might yield it all to you I 
So, when such grafted warmth had burgeoned through 
The languor of your Maytime's hawthorn-tree, 
My spirit at rest should walk unseen and see 
The garland of your beauty bloom anew. 



BEAUTY AND THE BIRD. 

She fluted with her mouth as when one sips. 
And gently waved her golden head, inclin'd 
Outside his cage close to the window-blind ; 

Till her fond bird, with little turns and dips. 

Piped low to her of sweet companionships. 

And when he made an end, some seed took she 
And fed him from her tongue, which rosily 

Peeped as a piercing bud between her lips. 

And like the child in Chaucer, on whose tongue 
The Blessed Mary laid, when he was dead, 

A grain, — ^who straightway praised her name in song : 
Even so, when she, a little lightly red. 

Now turned on me and laughed, I heard the throng 
Of inner voices praise her golden head. 



Digitized 



by Google 



28; 



A MATCH WITH THE MOON. 

Weary already, weary miles tonight 

I walked for bed : and so, to get some ease, 
I dogged the flying moon with similes. 
And like a wisp she doubled on my sight 
In ponds ; and caught in tree-tops like a kite ; 
And in a globe of film all liquorish 
Swam full-faced like a siDy silver fish ; — 
Last like a bubble shot the welkin's height 
Where my road turned, and got behind me, and sent 
My wizened shadow craning round at me, 
And jeered," So, step the measure,— one two three I "- 
And if I faced on her, looked innocent. 
But just at parting, halfway down a dell. 
She kissed me for good-night So you'll not telL 



Digitized 



by Google 



LOVFS NOCTURN. 

Master of the murmuring courts 
Where the shapes of sleep convene I— 

Lo I my spirit here exhorts 
All the powers of thy demesne 
For their aid to woo my queen. 

What reports 
Yield thy jealous courts unseen ? 

Vaporous, unaccountable, 

Dreamworld lies forlorn of light, 

Hollow like a breathing shell. 
Ah ! that from all dreams I might 
Choose one dream and guide its flight ! 

I know well 
What her sleep should tell to-night 

There the dreams are multitudes : 

Some that will not wait for sleep. 
Deep within the August woods ; 

Some that hum while rest may steep 

Weary labour laid a-heap ; 
Interludes, 

Some, of grievous moods that weep. 

Poets' fancies all are there : 
There the elf-girls flood with wings 

Valleys full of plaintive air ; 

There breathe perfumes ; there in rings 
Whirl the foam-bewildered springs ; 

Siren there 
Winds her dizzy hair and sings. 



Digitized 



by Google 



LOVE'S NOCTURN. 289 

Thence the one dream mutually 

Dreamed in bridal unison, 
Less than waking ecstasy ; 

Half-formed visions that make moan 

In the house of birth alone ; 
And what we 
At death's wicket see, unknown. 

But for mine own sleep, it lies 

In one gracious form's control, 
Fair with honourable eyes, 

Lamps of a translucent soul : 

O their glance is loftiest dole. 
Sweet and wise. 
Wherein Love descries his goaL 

Reft of her, my dreams are all 

Clammy trance that fears the sky : 
Changing footpaths shift and fall ; 

From polluted coverts nigh. 

Miserable phantoms sigh ; 
Quakes the pall, 

And the funeral goes by. 

Master, is it soothly said 
That, as echoes of man's speech 

Far in secret clefts are made. 
So do all men's bodies reach 
Shadows o'er thy sunken beach, — 

Shape or shade 
In those halls pourtrayed of each ? 

Ah ! might I, by thy good grace 

Groping in the windy stair, 
(Darkness and the breath of space 

Like loud waters everjrwhere,) 

Meeting mine own image there 
Face to face, 

Send it from that place to her ! 

19 



Digitized 



by Google 



290 LOVERS NOCTURE. 

Nay, not I ; but oh I do thou, 
Master, from thy shadowkind 

Call my body's phantom now : 
Bid it bear its face declined 
Till its flight her slumbers find, 

And her brow 
Feel its presence bow like wind. 

Where in groves the gracile Spring 

Trembles, with mute orison 
Confidently strengthening. 

Water's voice and wind's as one 

Shed an echo in the sun. 
Sofl as Spring, 

Master, bid it sing and moan. 

Song shall tell how glad and strong 
Is the night she soothes alway ; 

Moan shall grieve with that parched tongue 
Of the brazen hours of day : 
Sounds as of the springtide they, 

Moan and song. 
While the chill months long for May. 

Not the prayers which with all leave 

The world's fluent woes prefer, — 
Not the praise the world doth give. 

Dulcet fulsome whisperer; — 

Let it yield my love to her, 
And achieve 

Strength that shall not grieve or err. 

Wheresoe'er my dreams befall. 
Both at night-watch, (let it say,) 

And where round the sundial 
The reluctant hours of day. 
Heartless, hopeless of their way, 

Rest and call ; — 
There her glance doth fall and stay. 



Digitized 



by Google 



LOV£^S NOCTURN. 291 

Suddenly her face is there : 

So do mounting vapours wreathe 
Subtle-scented transports where 

The black firwood sets its teeth. 

Part the boughs and look beneath,— > 

Lilies share 

Secret waters there, and breathe. 

Master, bid my shadow bend 

Whispering thus till birth of light, 
Lest new shapes that sleep may send 

Scatter all its work to flight ; — 

Master, master of the night, 
Bid it spend 

Speech, song, prayer, and end aright 

Yet, ah me ! if at her head 

There another phantom lean 
Murmuring o'er the fragrant bed, — 

Ah I and if my spirit's queen 

Smile those alien prayers between, — 
Ah I poor shade I 

Shall it strive, or fade unseen ? 

How should love's own messenger 

Strive with love and be love's foe ? 
Master, nay I If thus, in her. 

Sleep a wedded heart should show,— 

Silent let mine image go, 
Its old share 

Of thy spell-bound air to know. 

Like a vapour wan and mute, 

Like a flame, so let it pass ; 
One low sigh across her lute. 

One dull breath against her glass; 

And to my sad soul, alas f 
One salute 

Cold as when death's foot shall pass. 



Digitized 



by Google 



J9« LOVERS NOCTURJ/. 

Then, too, let all hopes of mine, 

All vain hopes by night and day. 
Slowly at thy summoning sign 

Rise up pallid and obey. 

Dreams, if this is thus, were they : — 
Be they thine, 

And to dreamworld pine away. 

Yet from old time, life, not death, 

Master, in thy rule is rife : 
Lo ! through thee, with mingling breath, 

Adam woke beside his wife. 

O Love bring me so, for strife, 
Force and faith. 

Bring me so not death but life t 

Yea, to Love himself is pour'd 
Tliis frail song of hope and fear. 

Thou art Love> of one accord 

With kind Sleep to bring her near. 
Still-eyed, deep-eyed, ah how dear! 

Master, Lord, 
In her name implor'd, O hear I 



Digitized 



by Google 



^3 



FIRST LOVE REMEMBERED. 

Peace in her chamber, wheresoever 

It be, a holy place : 
The thought still brings my soul such grace 

As morning meadows wear. 

Whether it still be small and light, 

A maid's who dreams alone, 
As from her orchard-gate the moon 

Its ceiling showed at night : 

Or whether, in a shadow dense 

As nuptial hymns invoke. 
Innocent maidenhood awoke 

To married innocence : 

There still the thanks unheard await 
The unconscious gift bequeathed : 

For there my soul this hour has breathed 
An air inviolate. 



Digitized 



by Google 



294 



PLIGHTED PROMISE. 

In a sofl-complexioned sky, 
Fleeting rose and kindling grey, 

Have you seen Aurora fly 
At the break of day? 
So my maiden, so my plighted may 

Blushing cheek and gleaming eye 
Lifls to look my way. 

Where the inmost leaf is stirred 
With the heart-beat of the grove^ 

Have you heard a hidden bird 
Cast her note above ? 
So my lady, so my lovely love, 

Echoing Cupid's prompted word. 
Makes a tune thereof. 

Have you seen, at heaven's mid-height. 
In the moon-rack's ebb and tide, 

Venus leap forth burning white, 
Dian pale and hide ? 
So my bright breast-jewel, so my bride. 

One sweet night, when fear takes flight. 
Shall leap against my side. 



Digitized 



by Google 



295 



SUDDEN LIGHT. 

I RAVE been here before, 

But when or how I cannot tell : 

I know the grass beyond the door, 
The sweet keen smell, 
The sighing sound, the lights around the shore. 

You have been mine before, — 
How long ago I may not know : 

But just when at that swallow's soar 
Your neck turned so, 
Some veil did fell, — I knew it all of yore. 

Has this been thus before ? 

And shall not thus time's eddying flight 
Still with our lives our love restore 
In death's despite, 
And day and night yield one delight once more ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



296 



A NEW-YEAR'S BURDEN. 

Along the grass sweet airs are blown 

Our way this day in Spring. 
Of all the songs that we have known 
Now which one shall we sing ? 

Not that, my love> ah no I — 
Not this, my love ? why, so I — 
Yet both were ours, but hours will come and go. 

The grove is all a pale frail mist. 

The new year sucks the sun. 
Of all the kisses that we kissed 
Now which shall be the one>? 

Not that, my love, ah no ! — 
Not this, my love ? — heigh-ho 
For all the sweets that all the winds can blow I 

The branches cross above our eyes, 

The skies are in a net : 
And what's the thing beneath the skies 
We two would most forget ? 

Not birth, my love, no, no, — 
Not death, my love> no, no, — 
The love once ours, but ours long hours ago. 



Digitized 



by Google 



297 



EVEN SO. 

So it is, my dear. 
All such things touch secret strings 
For heavy hearts to hear. 
So it is, my dear. 

Very like indeed : 
Sea and sky, afar, on high. 

Sand and strewn seaweed,— 
Very like indeed. 

But the sea stands spread 
As one wall with the flat skies^ 
Where the lean black craft like flies 

Seem well-nigh stagnated. 

Soon to drop off dead. 

Seemed it so to us 
When I was thine and thou wast mine. 
And all these things were thus. 
But all our world in us ? 

Could we be so now ? 
Not if all beneath heaven's pall 
Lay dead but I and thou, 
G>uld we be so now I 



Digitized 



by Google 



89S 

THE WOODSPURGE. 

The wind flapped loose, the wind was still. 
Shaken out dead from tree and hill : 
I had walked on at the wind's will, — 
I sat now, for the wind was stilL 

Between my knees my forehead was, — 
My lips, drawn in, said not Alas I 
My hair was over in tlie grass. 
My naked ears heard the day pass. 

My eyes, wide open, had the run 

Of some ten weeds to fix upon ; 

Among those few, out of the sun. 

The woodspurge flowered, three cups in one. 

From perfect grief there need not be 
Wisdom or even memory : 
One thing then learnt remains to me, — 
The woodspurge has a cup of three. 



THE HONEYSUCKLE. 

I PLUCKED a honeysuckle where 
The hedge on high is quick with thorn. 
And climbing for the prize, was torn. 

And fouled my feet in quag-water ; 
And by the thorns and by the wind 
The blossom that I took was thinn'd, 

And yet I found it sweet and fair. 

Thence to a richer growth I came. 
Where, nursed in mellow intercourse. 
The honeysuckles sprang by scores, 

Not harried like my single stem. 
All virgin lamps of scent and dew. 
So from my hand that first I threw, 

Yet plucked not any more of them. 



Digitized 



by Google 



299 



DANTIS TENEBRiE. 
{In Memory of my Father.) 

And didst thou know indeed, when at the font 
Together with thy name thou gav'st me his, 
That also on thy son must Beatrice 

Decline her eyes according to her wont. 

Accepting me^to be of those that haunt 
The vale of magical dark mysteries 
Where to the hills her poef s foot-track lica 

And wisdom's living fountain to his chaunt 

Trembles in music ? This is that steep land 
Where he that holds his journey stands at gaze 
Tow*rd sunset, when the clouds like a new height 

Seem piled to climb. These things I understand : 

For here, where day still soothes my lifted face, 

On thy bowed head, my father, fell the night. 



WORDS ON THE WINDOW-PANE.* 

Did she in summer write it, or in spring. 
Or with this wail of autumn at her ears. 
Or in some winter left among old years 

Scratched it through tettered cark ? A certain thing 

That round her heart the frost was hardening, 
Not to be thawed of tears, which on this pane 
Channelled the rime, perchance, in fevered rain. 

For false man's sake and love's most bitter sting. 

Howbeit, between this last word and the next 
Unwritten, subtly seasoned was the smart. 
And here at least the grace to weep : if she. 
Rather, midway in her disconsolate text. 

Rebelled not, loathing from the trodden heart 
That thing which she had found man's lo\^ to be. 

* For a woman's fragmentary inscription. 



Digitized 



by Google 



P30 



AN OLD SONG ENDED. 

''How should I your true love know 

From another one?" 
" By his cockle-hat and staff 

And his sandal-shoon" 

'' And what signs have told you now 

That he hastens home ?'' 
'' Lo ! the spring is nearly gone, 

He is neariy come." 

" For a token is there nought, 
Say, that he should bring?" 

** He will bear a ring I gave 
And another ring." 

" How may I, when he shall ask, 
Tell hun who lies there ?" 

*'Nay, but leave my face unveiled 
And unbound my hair." 

*'Can you say to me some word 

I shall say to him?" 
"Say Fm looking in his eyes 

Though my eyes are dim." 



Digitized 



by Google 



301 



THE SONG OF THE BOWER. 

Say, is it day, is it dusk in thy bower, 

Thou whom I long for, who longest for me ? 
Oh I be it light, be it night, 'tis Love's hour, 

Love's that is fettered as Love's that is free. 
Free Love has leaped to that innermost chamber. 

Oh I the last time, and the hundred before : 
Fettered Love, motionless, can but remember. 

Yet something that sighs from him passes ihe door. 

Nay, but my heart when it flies to thy bower. 

What does it find there that knows it again ? 
There it must droop like a shower-beaten fldwer, 

Red at the rent core and dark with the rain. 
Ah I yet what shelter is still shed above it, — 

What waters still image its leaves torn apart ? 
Thy soul is the shade that dings round it to love it, 

And tears are its mirror deep down in thy heart. 

What were my prize, could I enter thy bower, 

This day, to-morrow, at eve or at mom ? 
Large lovely arms and a neck like a tower. 

Bosom then heaving that now lies forlorn. 
Kindled with love-breath, (the sun's kiss is colder I) 

Thy sweetness all near me, so distant to-day ; 
My hand round thy neck and thy hand on my shoulder 

My mouth to thy mouth as the world melts away. 

What is it keeps me afar from thy bower, — 
My spirit, my body, so fain to be there ? 

Waters engulfing or fires that devour ? — 
Earth heaped against me or death in the air ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



302 THE SONG OF THE BOWER. 

Nay, but in day-dreams, for terror, for pity. 

The trees wave their heads with an omen to tell ; 

Nay, but in night-dreams, throughout the dark city, 
The hours, dashed together, lose count in the belL 

Shall I not one day remember thy bower, 

One day when all days are one day to me ? — 
Thinking, " I stirred not, and yet had the power I " — 

Yearning, " Ah God, if again it might be ! " 
Peace, peace! such a small lamp illumes, on this 
highway. 

So dimly so few steps in front of my feet, — 
Yet shows me that her way is parted from my way. . . . 

Out of sight, beyond light, at what goal may we 
meet? 



Digitized 



by Google 



303 



DAWN ON THE NIGHT-JOURNEY. 

Till dawn the wind drove round me. It is past 
And still, and leaves the air to lisp of bird, 
And to the quiet that is almost heard 

Of the new-risen day, as yet bound fast 

In the first warmth of sunrise. When the last 
Of the sun's hours to-day shall be fulfilled, 
There shall another breath of time be stilled 

For me, which now is to my senses cast 

As much beyond me as eternity. 
Unknown, kept secret. On the newborn air 

The moth quivers in silence. It is vast. 

Yea, even beyond the hills upon the sea, 
The day whose end shall give this hour as sheer 

As chaos to the irrevocable Past. 



Digitized 



by Google 



dfH 



A LITTLE WHILE. 

A LITTLE while a little love 

The hour yet bears for thee and me 
Who have not drawn the veil to see 

If still our heaven be lit above. 

Thou merely, at the day's last sigfa| 
Hast felt thy soul prolong the tone ; 

And I have heard the night-wind cry 
And deemed its speech mine own. 

A little while a little love 

The scattering autumn hoards for us 
Whose bower is not yet ruinous 

Nor quite unleaved our songless grove. 

Only across the shaken boughs 

We hear the flood-tides seek the sea, 

And deep in both our hearts they rouse 
One wail for thee and me. 

A little while a little love 

May yet be ours who have not said 
The word it makes our eyes afraid 

To know that each is thinking of. 

Not yet the end : be our lips dumb 
In smiles a little season yet : 

I'll tell thee, when the end is come, 
How we may best forget 



Digitized 



by Google 



305 



TROY TOWN. 

Heavenborn Helen, Sparta's queen, 

{O Troy Town!) 
Had two breasts of heavenly sheen, 
The sun and moon of the heart's desires 
All Love's lordship lay between. 
(O Trq)fs doTJun, 
Tall Troys on Jfirel) 

Helen knelt at Venus' shrine, 
(O Troy Town !) 

Saying, " A little gift is mine, 

A little gift for a heart's desire. 

Hear me speak and make me a sign 1 
(O Trofs down J 
Tall Troy son fire I) 

" Look, I bring thee a carven cup ; 

(O Troy Town!) 
See it here as I hold it up, — 
Shaped it is to the heart's desire. 
Fit to fill when the gods would sup. 
(O Troys down, 
TaH Troys on fire/) 

*' It was moulded like my breast ; 
(O Troy Town !) 

He that sees it may not rest, 

Rest at all for his heart's desire. 

O give ear to my heart's behest I 
(O Trq^s down, 
TaU Troy son fire/) 

2C^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



3o6 TROY TOWN. 

'* See my breast, how like it is; 
(O Troy Town/) 

See it bare for the air to kiss I 

Is the cup to thy heart's desire ? 

O for the breast, O make it his I 
(O Trq^s doum, 
Tall Trq/s on fire/) 

*' Yea, for my bosom here I sue ; 
{O Troy Town/) 

Thou must give it where 'tis due, 

Give it there to the heart's desire. 

Whom do I give my bosom to ? 
(O Trqy$ down, 
Tall Troys on fire/) 

*' Each twin breast is an apple sweet 

(O Troy Town /) 
Once an apple stirred the beat 
Of thy heart with the heart's desire :— 
Say, who brought it then to thy feet ? 
(O Trq^s down, 
Tall Trq^s on fire/) 

"They that claimed it then were three : 

{OTrqy Town/) 
For thy sake two hearts did he 
Make forlorn of the heart's desire* 
Do for him as he did for thee ! 
(O Troys down. 
Tall Troys on fire/) 

" Mine are apples grown to the south, 

(O Troy Town /) 
Grown to taste in Uie days of drouth. 
Taste and waste to the heart's desire : 
Mine are apples meet for his mouth," 
(O Troys down, 
Tall Troy son fire/) 



Digitized 



by Google 



TROY lOWN. 307 

Venus looked on Helen's gif^ 

(O Troy Town t) 
Looked and smiled with subtle drift, 
Saw the work of her heart's desire : — 
*' There thou kneel'st for Love to lift I " 

(O Tro^s down^ 

TMTro^sonfirtt) 

Venus looked in Helen's face, 

(OTroyTwrn!) 
Knew far off an hour and place, 
And fire lit from the heart's desire ; 
Laughed and said, '' Thy gift hath grace ! " 

(O Trq:/s down^ ' 

TaUTrq/sonfirtf) 

Cupid looked on Helen's breast, 

(O Troy Town /) 
Saw the heart within its nest. 
Saw the flame of the heart's desire,— 
Marked his arrow's burning crest 

(O Trq/s dotvn, 

Tall Troy's on fire f) 

Cupid took another dart, 

(O Troy Townf) 
Fledged it for another heart. 
Winged the shaft with the heart's desire. 
Drew the string and said, " Depart I " 

(O Trq^s down, 

Tall Trq/s on fire/) 

Paris turned upon his bed, 

(O Troy Town /) 
Turned upon his bed and said. 
Dead at heart with the heart's desire — 
" Oh to clasp her golden head 1 " 

(O Trq}^s down, 

Tall Trq/s OH fire/) 



Digitized 



by Google 



3o8 



EDEN BOWER. 

It was Lilith the wife of Adam : 

{Sing Eden Bower J) 
Not a drop of her blood was human, 
But she was made like a soft sweet womaiik 

Lilith stood on the skirts of Eden ; 
{Alas ike hour!) 
She was the first that thence was driven ; 
With her was heU and with Eve was hedvenJ 

In the ear of the Snake said Lilith : — 

{Sing Eden Bower f) 
" To thee I come when the rest is over ; 
A snake was I when thou wast my lover. 

" I was the fairest snake in Eden : 
{Alas the hour f) 
By the earth's will, new form and feature 
Made me a wife for the earth's new creatures 

*' Take me thou as I come from Adam : 

{Sing Eden Bower t) 

Once again shall my love subdue thee ; 

The past is past and I am come to thee. 

'* O but Adam was thrall to Lilith I 
{Alas the hour!) 
All the threads of my hair are golden, 
And there in a net his heart was holden. 



Digitized 



by Google 



EDEN BOWER, 309 

*' O and Lilith was queen of Adam 1 

(Sing Eden Bower /) 
AH the day and the night together 
My breath could shake his soul like a feathe];;i 

" What great joys had Adam and Lilith I— 

(Alas the hour /) 
Sweet close rings of the serpent's twining, 
As heart in heart lay sighing and pining. 

** What bright babes had Lilith and Adam !- 

(Sing Eden Bower f) 
Shapes that coiled in the woods and waters. 
Glittering sons and radiant daughters. 

« O thou God, the Lord God of Eden \ 

(Alas the hour!) 
Say, was this fair body for no man, 
That of Adam's flesh thou mak'st him a woman ? 

** O thou Snake, the King-snake of Eden I 

(Sing Eden Bower!) 
God's strong will our necks are under. 
But thou and I may cleave it in sunder. 

" Help, sweet Snake, sweet lover of Lilith ! 

(Alas the hour!) 
And let God learn how I loved and hated 
Man in the image of God created. 

" Help me once against Eve and Adam \ 
(Sing Eden Bower I) 
Help me once for this one endeavour, 
And then my love shall be thine for ever 1 

^'Strong b God, the fell foe of Lilith : 

(Alas the hour!) 
Nought in heaven or earth may aifright Him ; 
But join thou with me and we will smite Him. 



Digitized 



by Google 



310 EDEN BOWER, 

*' Strong is God, the great God of Eden : 
{Sing Eden Bower f) 
Over all He made He hath power ; 
But lend me thou thy shape for an hour ! 

" Lend thy shape for the love of Lilith I 

(Alas the hour!) v 
Look, my mouth and my cheek are ruddy, 
And thou art cold, and fire is my body. 

" Lend thy shape for the hate of Adam I 
{Sing Eden Bower/) 
That he may wail my joy that forsook him, 
And curse the day when the bride-sleep took him. 

" Lend thy shape for the shame of Eden I 

{Alas the hour/) 
Is not the foe-God weak as the foeman 
When love grows hate in the heart of a woman ? 

" Wouldst thou know the heart's hope of Lilith ? 

{Sing Eden Bower/) 
Then bring thou close thine head till it glisten 
Along my breast, and lip me and listen. 

" Am I sweet, O sweet Snake of Eden ? 

{Alas the hour /) 
Then ope thine ear to my warm mouth's cooing 
And learn what deed remains for our doing. 

" Thou didst hear when God said to Adam : — 

iSing Eden Bower f) 
have made thee warden ; 
Thou'rt free to eat of the trees of the garden : 

" ' Only of one tree eat not in Eden ; 

{Alas the hour /) 
All save one I give to thy freewill, — 
The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil' 



Digitized 



by Google 



RDEN BOWRR, 311 

* O my love, come nearer to Lilith I 

{Sing Eden Bower!) 
In thy sweet folds bind me and bend me^ 
And let me feel the shape thou shalt lend me 

" In thy shape 111 go back to Eden ; 
{Alas the hour!) 
In these coils that Tree will I grapple, 
And stretch this crowned head forth by the apple. 

« Lo, Eve bends to the breath of Lilith ! 
{Sing Eden Bower /) 
O how then shall my heart desire 
All her blood as food to its fire I 

" Lo, Eve bends to the words of Lilith I— 
{Alas the hour !) 

* Nay, this Tree's fruit, — ^why should ye hate it, 
Or Death be bom the day that ye ate it? 

** ' Nay, but on that great day in Eden, 
(Siftg Eden Bower!) 
By the help that in tliis wise Tree is, 
God knows well ye shall be as He is.' 

^' Then Eve shall eat and give unto Adam ; 

{Alas the hour!) 
And then they both shall know they are naked, 
And their hearts ache as my heart hath achbd. 

" Ay, let them hide 'mid the trees of Eden, 

{Sing Eden Bower!) 
As in the cool of the day in the garden 
God shall walk without pity or pardon. 

^Hear, thou Eve, the man's heart in Adam ! 

(Alas the hour!) 
Of his brave words hark to vhe bravest : — 

* This the woman gave that thou gavest' 



Digitized 



by Google 



3ia EDEN BOWER. 

** Hear Eve speak, yea list to her, Lilith t 

{Sing Eden Bower f) 
Feast thine heart with words that shall sate it — 
* This the serpent gave and I ate it' 

•' O proud Eve, cling close to thine Adam, 

{Alas the hour f) 
Driven forth as the beasts of his naming 
By the sword that for ever is flaming. 

" Know, thy path is known unto Lilith I 
{Sing Eden Bower/) 
While the blithe birds sang at thy wedding, 
I'here her tears grew thorns for thy treading. 

" O my love, thou Love-snake of Eden 1 
{Alas the hour I) 

to-day and the day to come after ! 

Loose me, love, — give breath to my laughter. 

" O bright Snake, the Death-worm of Adam ! 

{Sing Eden Bower/) 
Wreathe thy neck with my hair's bright tether. 
And wear my gold and thy gold together I 

*' On that day on the skirts of Eden, 
{Alas the hour I) 
In thy shape shall I glide back to thee. 
And in my shape for an instant view thee. 

''But when thou'rt thou and Lilith is Lilith, 

{Sing Eden Bower /) 
In what bliss past hearing or seeing 
Shall each one drink of the other's being ! 

"With cries of 'Eve !' and 'Eden I' and ' Adam !' 

{Alas the hour/) 
How shall we mingle our love's caresses, 

1 in thy coils, and thou in my tresses I 



Digitized 



by Google 



EDEN BOWER, 313 

" With those names^ ye echoes of Eden, 
(Sing Eden Bower/) 
Fire shall cry from my heart that bumeth, — 
^ Dust he is and to dust returneth I * 

X 

" Yet to-day, thou master of Lilith, — 

{Alas the hourf) 
Wrap me round in the fonn Til borrow 
And let me tell thee of sweet to-morrow. 

" In the planted garden eastward in Eden, 

(Sing Eden Bower I) 
Where the river goes forth to water the garden, 
The springs shall dry and the soil shall harden. 

" Yea, where the bride-sleep fell upon Adam, 

{Alas the hour t) 
None shall hear when the storm-wind whistles 
Through roses choked among thorns and thistles. 

" Yea, beside the east-gate of Eden, 

{Sing Eden Bower /) 
Where God joined them and none might sever, 
The sword turns this way and that for ever. 

" What of Adam cast out of Eden ? 
{Alas the hourf) 
Lo 1 with care like a shadow shaken, 
He tills the hard earth whence he was taken. 

" What of Eve too, cast out of Eden ? 

{Sing Eden Bower f) 
Nay, but she, the bride of God's giving. 
Must yet be mother of all men living. 

" Lo, God's grace, by the grace of Lilith I 

{Alas the hourf) 
To Eve's womb, from our sweet to-morrow, 
God shall greatly multiply sorrow. 



Digitized 



by Google 



314 EDEN BOWER. 

*' Fold me fast, O God-snake of Eden I 

{Sing Eden Bower/) 
What more prize than love to impel thee 7 
Grip^ and lip my limbs as I tell thee ! 

'' Lo I two babes for Eve and for Adam 1 

{Aias the hour!) 
Lo I sweet Snake> the travail and treasure, — 
Two men-children bom for their pleasure I 

" The first is Cain and the second Abel : 
{Sing Eden Bower/) 
The soul of one shall be made thy brother, 
And thy tongue shall lap the blood of the other.** 
{Alas the hour/) 



Digitized 



by Google 



3^5 



LOVE-LILY. 

Between the hands, between the brows, 

Between the lips of Lave-Lily, 
A spirit is bom whose birth endows 

My blood with fire to bum through me; 
Who breathes upon my gazing eyes. 

Who laughs and murmurs in mine ear, 
At whose least touch my colour flies, 

And whom my life grows faint to hear. 

Within the voice, within the heart. 

Within the mind of Love-Lily, 
A spirit is bom who lifts apart ' 

His tremulous wings and looks at me; 
Who on my mouth his finger lays, 

And shows, while whispering lutes confer, 
That Eden of Love's watered ways 

Whose winds and spirits worship her. 

Brows, hands, and lips, heart, mind, and voice. 

Kisses and words of Love-Lily, — 
Oh I bid me with your joy rejoice 

Till riotous longing rest in me ! 
Ah I let not hope be still distraught 

But find in her its gracious goal. 
Whose speech Truth knows not from her thought 

Nor Love her body from her souL 



Digitized 



by Google 



3i6 



SUNSET WINGS. 

To-night this sunset spreads two golden wings 

Cleaving the western sky ; 
Winged too with wind it is, and winnowings 
Of birds ; as if the day's last hour in rings 

Of strenuous flight must die. 

Sun-steeped in fire, the homeward pinions sway 

Above the dovecote-tops ; 
And clouds of starlings, ere they rest with day, 
Sink, clamorous like mill-waters, at wild play. 

By turns in every copse : 

Each tree heart-deep the wrangling rout receives, — 

Save for the whirr within. 
You could not tell the starlings from the leaves ; 
Then one great puff of wings, and the swarm heaves 

Away with all its din. 

Even thus Hope's hours, in ever-eddying flight. 

To many a refuge tend ; 
With the first light she laughed, and the last light 
Glows round her still ; who natheless in the night 

At length must make an end. 

And now the mustering rooks innumerable 

Together sail and soar, 
While for the day's death, like a tolling knell, 
Unto the heart they seem to cry, Farewell, 

No more, farewell, no more I 

Hope not plumed, as 'twere a fiery dart ? 

And oh I thou dying day, 
Even as thou goest must she too depart. 
And Sorrow fold such pinions on the heart 

As will not fly away ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



3^7 



THE CLOUD CONFINES. 

The day is dark and the night 
To him that would search their heart; 
No lips of cloud that will part 
Nor morning song in the light : 
Only, gazing alone, 
To him wild shadows are shown, 
Deep imder deep unknown 
And height above unknown height. 
Still we say as we go, — 

" Strange to think by the way, 
Whatever there is to know, 
That shall we know one day.** 

The Past is over and fled ; 
Named new, we name it the old ; 
Thereof some tale hath been told, 
But no word comes from the dead ; 
Whether at all they be, 
Or whether as bond or free, 
Or whether they too were we. 
Or by what spell they have sped. 
Still we say as we go, — 

*' Strange to think by the way, 
Whatever there is to know, 
That shall we know one day." 

What of the heart of hate 
That beats in thy breast, O Tune ?— 
Red strife from the furthest prime. 

And anguish of fierce debate; 



Digitized 



by Google 



3i8 THE CLOUD CONFINES. 

War that shatters her slain, 
And peace that grinds them as grain, 
And eyes fixed ever in vain 
On the pitiless eyes of Fate. 

Still we say as we go,— 

" Strange to think by the way. 
Whatever there is to know. 
That shall we know one day." 

What of the heart of love 
That bleeds in thy breast, O Man ? — 
Thy kisses snatched 'neath the ban 
Of fangs that mock them above ; 
Thy bells prolonged unto knells. 
Thy hope that a breath dispels. 
Thy bitter forlorn farewells 
And the empty echoes thereof? 
Still we say as we go, — 

" Strange to think by the way. 
Whatever there is to know, 
That shall we know one day." 

The sky leans dumb on the sea, 
Aweary with all its wings ; 
And oh I the song the sea sings 
Is dark everlastingly. 
Our past is clean forgot. 
Our present is and is not^ 
Our future's a sealed seedplot, 
And what betwixt them are we ?— - 
We who say as we go, — 

" Strange to think by the way, 
Whatever there is to know, 
That shall we know one day." 



Digitized 



by Google 



319 



DOWN STREAM. 

Between Holmscote and Hurstcote 

The river-reaches wind. 
The whispering trees accept the breeze, 

The ripple's cool and kind : 
With love low-whispered 'twizt the shores. 

With rippling laughters gay, 
With white arms bared to ply the oars. 

On last year's first of May. 

Between Holmscote and Hurstcote 

The river's brimmed with rain, 
Through close-met banks and parted banks 

Now near, now far again : 
With parting tears caressed to smiles, 

With meeting promised soon, 
With every sweet vow that beguiles, 

On last year's first of June. 

Between Holmscote and Hurstcote 

The river's fiecked with foam, 
'Neath shuddering clouds that hang in shrouds 

And lost winds wild for home : 
With infant wailings at the breast. 

With homeless steps astray. 
With wanderings shuddering tow'rds one rest 

On this year's first of May. 

Between Holmscote and Hurstcote 

The summer river flows 
With doubled flight of moons by night 

And lilies' deep repose : 



Digitized 



by Google 



320 DOWN STREAM. 

With lo t beneath the moon's white stare 
A white face not the moon, 

With liHes meshed in tangled hair, 
On this year's first of June. 

Between Holmscote and Hurstcote 

A troth was given and riven, 
From heart's trust grew one life to two, 

Two lost lives cry to Heaven : 
With banks spread calm to meet the sky, 

With meadows newly mowed, 
The harvest-paths of glad July, 

The sweet school-children's road* 



Digitized 



by Google 



$21 



THREE SHADOWS. 

I LOOKED and saw your eyes 

In the shadow of your hair 
As a traveller sees the stream 

In the shadow of the wood ; 
And I said, " My faint heart sighs 

Ah me ! to linger there, 
To drink deep and to dream 

In that sweet solitude." 

I looked and saw your heart 

In the shadow of your eyes, 
As a seeker sees the gold 

In the shadow of the stream ; 
And I said, " Ah me I what art 

Should win the immortal prize. 
Whose want must make life cold 

And Heaven a hollow dream ? " 

I looked and saw your love 

In the shadow of your heart, 
As a diver sees the pearl 

In the shadow of the sea ; 
And I murmured, not above 

My breath, but all apart, — 
*' Ah I you can love, true girl, 

And is your love for me ? ". 



2h 



Digitized 



by Google 



323 



A DEATH-PARTING. 

Leaves and rain and the days of the year^ 

{Water-willow and wellaway,) 
All these fall, and my soul gives ear, 
And she is hence who once was here. 

{IViih a wind blotvn night and day.) 

Ah ! but now, for a secret sign, 

(The willou/s wan and the water white,) 
In the held breath of the day's decline 
Her very face seemed pressed to mine. 
With a wind blown day and night,) 

O love, of my death my life is fain ; 

{The willows tvave on the water-way }) 
Your cheek and mine are cold in the rain. 
But warm they'll be when we meet again. 

{With a wind blown night and day,) 

Mists are heaved and cover the sky ; 

{J^he willows wail in the waning light,) 
O loose your lips, leave space for a sigh, — 
They seal my soul, I cannot die. 

{With a wind blown day and night.) 

Leaves and rain and the days of the year, 

{Water-willow and wellaway,) 
All still fall, and I still give ear, 
And she is hence, and I am here. 

{With a wind blown night and day.) 



Digitized 



by Google 



3»3 

SPRING. 

SoFT-LiTTERBD is the new-year's lambing-fold, 
And in the hollowed haystack at its side 
The shepherd lies o' nights now, wakeful-eyed 

At the ewes' travailing call through the dark cold. 

The young rooks cheep 'mid the thick caw o' the old : 
And near unpeopled stream-sides, on the jground, 
By her Spring cry the moorhen's nest is found, 

Where the drained flood-lands flaunt their marigold. 

Chill are the gusts to which the pastures cower, 
And chill the current ^^ere the young reeds stand 
As green and close as the young wheat on land : 
Yet here the cuckoo and the cuckoo-flower 
Plight to the heart Spring's perfect imminent hour 
Whose breath shall soothe you like your dear one's hand. 



UNTIMELY LOST. 
OuvER Madox Brown. Born 1855 ; Died 1874. 

Upon the landscape of his coming life 
A youth high-gifled gazed, and found it fair : 
The heights of work, the floods of praise, were there. 

What friendships, what desires, what love, what wife ? — 

All things to come. The fanned springtide was rife 
With imminent solstice ; and the ardent air 
Had summer sweets and autumn fires to bear ; — 

Heart's ease fuU-pulsed with perfect strength for strife. 

A mist has risen : we see the youth no more : 
Does he see on and strive on ? And may we 
Late-tottering world-worn hence, find his to be 

The young strong hand which helps us up that shore ? 

Or, echoing the No More with Nevermore, 

Must Night be ours and his ? We hope : and he ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



324 



PARTED PRESENCE. 

Love, I speak to your heart, 

Your heart that is always here. 

Oh draw me deep to its sphere, 
Though you and I are apart ; 
And yield, by the spirit's art, 

Each distant gift tiiat is dear. 

O love, my love, you are here ! 

Your eyes are afar to-day, 

Yet, love, look now in mine eyes. 

Two hearts sent forth may despise 
All dead things by the way. 
All between is decay, 

Dead hours and this hour that dies 

O love, look deep in mine eyes I 

Your hands to-day are not here. 
Yet lay them, love, in my hands. 
The hourglass sheds its sands 

All day for the dead hours' bier; 

But now, as two hearts draw near. 
This hour like a flower expands. 
O love, your hands in my hands ! 

Your voice is not on the air. 

Yet, love, I can hear your voice : 
It bids my heart to rejoice 

As knowing your heart is there, — 

A music sweet to declare 
The truth of your steadfast choice. 
O love, how sweet is your voice I 



Digitized 



by Google 



PARTED PRESENCE. ^^l 

To-day your lips are afar, 

Yet draw my lips to them, love; 

Around, beneath, and above, 
Is frost to bind and to bar; 
But where I am and you are, 

Desire and the fire thereof 

O kiss me, kiss me, my love ! 

Your heart is never away. 

But ever with mine, for ever, 

For ever without endeavour. 
To-morrow, love, as to-day; 
Two blent hearts never astray. 

Two souls no power may sever, 

Together, O my love, for ever! 



Digitized 



by Google 



326 



SPHERAL CHANGE. 

In tnis new shade of Death, the show 

Passes me still of form and foce ; 
Some benty some gazing as they go, 

Some swifUy, some at a dull pace, 

Not one that speaks in any case. 

If only one might speak t — ^the one 
Who never waits till I come near ; 

But always seated all alone 
As listening to the sunken air. 
Is gone before I come to her. 

O dearest I while we lived and died 

A living death in every day. 
Some hours we still were side by side. 

When where I was you too might stay 

And rest and need not go away. 

O nearest, furthest I Can there be 

At length some hard-earned heart-won home, 

Where, — exile changed for sanctuary, — 
Our lot may fill indeed its sum, 
And you may wait and I may come ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



327 



ALAS, SO LONG I 

Ah 1 dear one, we were young so long, 
It seemed that youth would never go, 
For skies and trees were ever in song 

And water in singing flow 
In the days we never again shall know. 
Alas, so long I 
Ah ! then was it all Spring weather ? 
Nay, but we were young and toge^er. 

Ah ! dear one, I've been old so long, 

It seems that age is loth to part. 
Though days and years have never a song. 

And oh ! have they still the art 
That warmed the pulses of heart to heart ? 
Alas, so long ! 
Ah 1 then was it all Spring weather ? 
Nay, but we were young and together. 

Ah I dear one, you've been dead so long, — 

How long until we meet again. 
Where hours may never lose their song 

Nor flowers forget the rain 
In glad noonlight that never shall wane ? 
Alas, so long I 
Ah t shall it be then Spring weather. 
And ah 1 shall we be young together 7 



Digitized 



by Google 



328 



INSOMNIA. 

Thin are the night-skirts left behind 
By daybreak hours that onward creep, 
And thin, alas I the shred of sleep 

That wavers with the spirit's wind : 

But in half-dreams that shift and roll 
And still remember and foi^et. 

My soul this hour has dj^wn your soul 
A little nearer yet. 

Our lives, most dear, are never near. 
Our thoughts are never far apart, 
Though all that draws us heart to heart 

Seems fainter now and now more clear. 

To-night Love claims his full control. 
And with desire and with regret 

My soul this hour has drawn your soul 
A little nearer yet 

Is there a home where heavy earth 

Melts to bright air that breathes no pain, 
Where water leaves no thirst again 

And springing fire is Love's new birth ? 

If faith long bound to one true goal 
May there at length its hope beget, 

My soul that hour shall draw your aoul 
For ever nearer yet. 



Digitized 



by Google 



w 



POSSESSION. 

There is a cloud above the sunset hill, 

That wends and makes no stay, 
For its goal lies beyond the fiery west ; 
A lingering breath no calm can chase away, 
The onward labour of the wind's last will ; 
A flying foam that overleaps the crest 
Of the top wave : and in possession still 
A further reach of longing ; though at rest 

From all the yearning years, 
Together in the bosom of that day 
Ye clingy and with your kisses drink your tears. 



Digitized 



by Google 



3P 



CHIMES. 



Honey-flowers to the honey-comb 
And the honey-bee's from home. 

A honey-comb and a honey-flower, 
And the bee shall have his hour. 

A honeyed heart for the honey-comb, 
And the humming bee flies home. 

A heavy heart in the honey-flower, 
And the bee has had his hour. 



n. 

A honey cell's in the honeysuckle, 
And the honey-bee knows it welL 

The honey-comb has a heart of honey. 
And the humming bee's so bonny. 

A honey-flower's the honeysuckle. 
And the bee's in the honey-bell. 

The honeysuckle is sucked of honey. 
And the bee is heavy and bonny. 



Digitized 



by Google 



CHIMES. «^i 



m. 

;Drown shell first for the butterfly 
And a bright wing by and by. 

Butterfly, good-bye to your shell, 
And, bright wings, speed you well* 

Bright lamplight for the butterfly 
And a burnt wing by and by. 

Butterfly, alas for your shell. 
And, bright wings, fere you well 

IV. 

Lost love-labour and lullaby, 
And lowly let love lie. 

Lost love-morrow and love-fellow 
And love's life lying low. 

Lovelor labour and life laid by 
And lowly let love lie. 

Late love-longing and life-sorrow 
And love's life lying low. 



V. 

Beauty's body and benison 
With a bosom-flower new blown. 

Bitter beauty and blessing bann'd 
With a breast to bum and brand* 

Beauty's bower in the dust o'erblown 
With a bare white breast of bone. 

Barren beauty and bower of sand 
With a blast on either hand. 



Digitized 



by Google 



332 CHIMBS. 

VI. 

Buried bars in the breakwater 
And bubble of th^ brimming weir. 

Bod^s blood in the breakwater 
And a buried body's bier. 

Buried bones in the breakwater 
And bubble of the brawling weir. 

Bitter tears in the breakwater 
And a breaking heart to bear. 



VII. 

Hollow heaven and the hurricane 
And hurry of the heavy rain. 

Hurried clouds in the hollow heaven 
And a heavy rain hard-driven. 

The heavy rain it hurries amain 
And heaven and the hurricane. 

Hurrying wind o'er the heaven's hollow 
And the heavy rain to follow. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



333 



ADIEU. 

Waving whispering trees, 
What do you say to the breeze 

And what says the breeze to you ? 
'Mid passing souls ill at ease, 
Moving murmuring trees, 

Would ye ever wave an Adieu ? 

Tossing turbulent seas, 
Winds that wrestle with these, 

Echo heard in the shell, — 
'Mid fleeting life ill at ease, 
Restless ravening seas, — 

Would the echo sigh Farewell 7 

Sui^ng sumptuous skies. 
For ever a new surprise. 

Clouds eternally new, — 
Is every flake that flies, 
Widening wandering skies, 

For a sign — Farewell, Adieu ? 

Sinking sufifering heart 

That know'st how weary thou art, — 

Soul so fain for a flight, — 
Aye, spread your wings to depart. 
Sad soul and sorrowing heart, — 

Adieu, Farewell, Good-night 



Digitized 



by Google 



334 



SOOTHSAY. 

Let no man ask thee of anything 
Not yearborn between Spring and Spring. 
More of all worlds than he can know, 
Each day the single sun doth show. 
A trustier gloss than thou canst give 
From all wise scrolls demonstrative, 
The sea doth sigh and the wind sing. 

Let no man awe thee on any height 
Of earthly kingship's mouldering might. 
The dust his heel holds meet for thy brow 
Hath all of it been what both are now ; 
And thou and he may plague together 
A beggar's eyes in some dusty weather 
When none that is now knows sound or sight 

Crave thou no dower of earthly things 

Unworthy Hope's imaginings. 

To have brought true birth of Song to be 

And to have won hearts to Poesy, 

Or anywhere in the sun or rain 

To have loved and been beloved again, 

Is loftiest reach of Hope's bright wings. 

The wild waifs cast up by the sea 

Are diverse ever seasonably. 

Even so the soul-tides still may land 

A different drift upon the sand. 

But one the sea is evermore : 

And one be still, 'twixt shore and shore, 

As the sea's life, thy soul in thee. 



Digitized 



by Google 



SOOTHS A Y. 335 

Say, hast thou pride ? How then may fit 

Thy mood with flatterers' silk-spun wit? 

Haply the sweet voice lifts thy crest, 

A breeze of fame made manifest. 

Nay, but then chafst at flattery ? Pause : 

Be sure thy wrath is not because 

It makes thee feel thou lovest it 

Let thy soul strive that still the same 

Be early friendship's sacred flame. 

The aflanities have strongest part 

In youth, and draw men heart to heart : 

As life wears on and finds no rest, 

The individual in each breast 

Is tyrannous to sunder them. 

In the life-drama's stem cue-call, 

A friend's a part well-prized by all : 

And if thou meet an enemy, 

What art thou that none such should be ? 

Even so : but if the two parts run 

Into each other and grow one, 

Then comes the curtain's cue to fall 

Whate'er by other's need is claimed 

More than by thine, — to him unblamed 

Resign it : and if he should hold 

What more than he thou lack'st, bread, gold, 

Or any good whereby we live, — 

To thee such substance let him give 

Freely : nor he nor thou be shamed. 

Strive that thy works prove equal : lest 
That work which thou hast done the best 
Should come to be to thee at length 

Siren as to envy seems the strength 
others) hateful and abhorr'd, — 
Thine own above thyself made lord, — 
Of self-rebuke the bitterest. 



Digitized 



by Google 



336 SOOTffSAY. 

Unto the man of yearning thought 
And aspiration, to do nought 
Is in itself almost an act, — 
Being chasm-fire and cataract 
Of the soul's utter depths unseal'd. 
Yet woe to thee if once thou yield 
Unto the act of doing nought 1 

How callous seems beyond revoke 
The clock with its last listless stroke I 
How much too late at length . — to trace 
The hour on its forewarning face, 
The thing thou hast not dared to do 1 • • • 
Behold, this may be thus ! Ere true 
It prove, arise and bear thy yoke. 

Let lore of all Theology 

Be to thy soul what it can be : 

But know, — the Power that fashions man 

Measured not out thy little span 

For thee to take the meting-rod 

In turn, and so approve on God 

Thy science of Theometry. 

To God at best, to Chance at worst. 
Give thanks for good things, last as first. 
But vdndstrown blossom is that good 
Whose apple is not gratitude. 
Even if no prayer uplift thy face. 
Let the sweet right to render grace 
As thy soul's cherished child be nurs'd. 

Didst ever say, "Lo, I forget "? 
Such thought was to remember yet. 
As in a gravegarth, count to see 
The monuments of memory. 
Be this thy soul's appointed scope : — 
Gaje onward without claim to hope. 
Nor, gazing backward, court regret. 



Digitized 



by Google 



337 



FIVE ENGLISH POETS. 



U THOMAS CHATTERTON. 

With Shakspeare's manhood at a boy's wild heart,^- 
Through Hamlet's doubt to Shakspeare near allied. 
And kin to Milton through his Satan's pride, — 

At Death's sole door he stooped, and craved a dart ; 

And to the dear new bower of England's art, — 
Even to that shrine Time else had deified, 
The unuttered heart that soared against his side, — 

Drove the fell point, and smote life's seals apart 

Thy nested home-loves, noble Chatterton ; 
The angel-trodden stair thy soul could trace 
Up Redcliffe's spire ; and in the world's armed space 
Thy gallant sword-play : — ^these to many an one 
Are sweet for ever ; as thy grave unknown 
And love-dream of thine unrecorded face. 



22 



Digitized 



by Google 



338 FIVE ENGLISH POETS. 



II. WILLIAM BLAKE. 



(to FREDERICK SHIELDS, ON HIS SKETCH OP BIAKS'S 
WORK-ROOM AND DEATH-ROOM, 3 FOUNTAIN COURT, STRAND.) 

This is the place. Even here the dauntless soul. 
The unflinching hand, wrought on ; till in that nook. 
As on that very bed, his life partook 

New birth, and passed. Yon river's dusky shoal, 

Wherelo the dose-built coiling lanes unroll. 

Faced his work-window, whence his eyes would stare. 
Thought-wandering, unto nought that met them there, 

But to the unfettered irreversible goal 

This cupboard. Holy of Holies, held the cloud 
Of his soul writ and limned ; this other one, 

His true wife's charge, full oft to their abode 
Yielded for daily bread the martyr's stone. 
Ere yet their food might be that Bread alone. 

The words now home-speech of the mouth of God. 



ni. SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE, 

His Soul fared forth (as from the deep home-grove 
The fathei^songster plies the hour-long quest), 
To feed his soul-brood hungering in the nest ; 

But his warm Heart, the mother-bird, above 

Their callow fledgling progeny still hove 

With tented roof of wings and fostering breast 
Till the Soul fed the soul-brood. Richly blest 

From Heaven their growth, whose food was Human I-ove. 

Yet ah I Like desert pools that show the stars 
Once in long leagues,— even such the scarce-snatched 

hours 
Which deepening pain left to his lordliest powers : — 

Heaven lost through spider-trammelled prison-baiB. 

Six years, from sixty saved ! Yet kindling skies 

Own them, a beacon to our centuries. 



Digitized 



by Google 



FIVE ENGUSH POETS. 339 

IV. JOHN KSATS. 

The weltering London ways where children weep 
And girls whom none call maidens laugh, — strange road 
Miring his outward steps, who inly trode 

The bright Castalian brink and Latmos' steep : — 

Even such his life's cross-paths ; till deathly deep 
He toiled through sands of Lethe ; and long pain, 
Weary with labour spurned and love found vain, 

In dead Rome's sheltering shadow wrapped his sleep. 

O pang-dowered Poet, whose reverberant lips 
And heart-stnmg lyre awoke the Moon's eclipse, — 

Thou whom the daisies glory in growing o'er, — 
Their fragrance clings around thy name, not writ 
But rumour'd in water, while f he fame of it 

Along Time's flood goes echoing evermore. 



V. PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY. 

(inscription for the couch, still preservbcv 
on which he passed the last night op his ufe.) 

TwDTT those twin worlds, — the world of Sleep, which 
gave 
No dream to warn, — the tidal world of Death, 
Which the earth's sea, as the earth, replenisheth, — 

Shelley, Song's orient sun, to breast the wave, 

Rose from this couch that morn. Ah I did he brave 
Only the sea ? — or did man's deed of hell 
Engulph his bark 'mid mists impenetrable ? . . • 

No eye discerned, nor any power might save. 

When that mist cleared, O Shelley I what dread veil 
Was rent for thee, to whom far-darkling Truth 
Reigned sovereign guide through thy brief ageless 
youth ? 
Was the Truth % TruA, SheUey ?— Hush I All-Hail, 
Past doul>t, thou gaVst it ; and in Truth's bright sphere 
Art first of praisers, being most prais^ here. 



Digitized 



by Google 



340 

TO PHILIP BOURKE MARSTON, 
INCITING ME TO POETIC WORK. 

Sweet Poet, thou of whom these years that roll 
Must one day yet the burdened birthright learn. 
And by the darkness of thine eyes discern 

How piercing was the sight within thy soul ; — 

Gifted apart, thou goest to the great goal, 
A cloud-bound radiant spirit, strong to earn. 
Light-reft, that prize for which fond myriads yearn 

Vainly light-blest, — the Seer's aureole. 

And doth thine ear, divinely dowered to catch 
All spheral sounds in thy song blent so well. 
Still hearken for my voice's slumbering spell 
With wistful love ? Ah I let the Muse now snatch 
My wreath for thy young brows, and bend to watch 
Thy veiled transfiguring sense's miracle. 



TIBER, NILE, AND THAMES. 

The head and hands of murdered Cicero, 
Above his seat high in the Forum hung, 
Drew jeers and burning tears. When on the rung 

Of a swift-mounted ladder, all aglow, 

Fulvia, Mark Antony's shameless wife, with show 
Of foot firm-poised and gleaming arm upflung, 
Bade her sharp needle pierce that god-like tongue 

Whose speech fed Rome even as the Tiber's flow. 

And thou, Cleopatra's Needle, that hadst thrid 
Great skirts of Time ere she and Antony hid 

Dead hope 1 — hast thou too reached, siurviving death, 
A city of sweet speech scorned, — on whose chill stone 
Keats withered, Coleridge pined, and Chatterton, 

Breadless, with poison froze the God-fired breath ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



341 

RALEIGH'S CELL IN THE TOWER. 

Hers writ was the World's History by his hand 
Whose steps knew all the earth ; albeit his world 
In these few piteous paces then was furl'd 

Here daily, hourly, have his proud feet spann'd 

This smaller speck than the receding land 

Had ever shown his ships ; what time he hurl'd 
Abroad o'er new-found regions spiced and pearl'd 

His country's high dominion and command 

Here dwelt two spheres. The vast terrestrial zone 
Hb spirit traversed ; and that spirit was 
Itself the zone celestial, round whose birth 
The planets played within the zodiac's girth ; 
Till hence, through unjust death unfeared, did pass 
His spirit to the only land unknown. 



WINTER. 

How lai^ge that thrush looks on the bare thorn-tree I 
A swarm of such, three little months ago, 
Had hidden in the leaves and let none know 

Save by the outburst of their minstrelsy. 

A white flake here and there — a snow-lily 

Of last night's frost — our naked flower-beds hold; 
And for a rose-flower on the darkling mould 

The hungry redbreast gleams. No bloom, no bee. 

The current shudders to its ice-bound sedge : 
Nipped in their bath, the stark reeds one by one 
Flash each its clinging diamond in the sun : 
'Neath winds which for this winter's sovereign pledge 
Shall curb great king-masts to the ocean's edge 
And leave memoiid forest-kings o'erthrown. 



Digitized 



by Google 



34« 
THE LAST THREE FROM TRAFALGAR 

AT THE ANNIVERSARY BANQUET, 2 1 ST OCTOBER 1 87*. 

In grappled ship)s around The Victory, 
Three boys did England's Duty with stout cheer. 
While one dread truth was kept from every ear, 

More dire than deafenmg fire that churned the sea : 

For in the flag-ship's weltering cockpit, he 
Who was the Battle's Heart without a peer, 
He who had seen all fearful sights save Fear, 

Was passing from all life save Victory. 

And round the old memorial board to^iay, 
Three greybeards— each a warworn British Tar — 
View through the mist of years that hour afar : 
Who soon shall greet, 'mid memories of fierce fray, 
The impassioned soul which on its radiant way 
Soared through the fiery cloud of Trafalgar. 

CZAR ALEXANDER THE SECOND. 

(13TH MARCH 1 881.) 

From him did forty million serfs, endowed 
Each with six feet of death-due soil, receive 
Rich freebom lifelong land, whereon to sheave 

Their country's harvest These to-day aloud 

Demand of Heaven a Father's blood,— sore bow'd 

With tears and thrilled with wrath ; who, while tfiey 

grieve. 
On every guilty head would fain achieve 

All torment by his edicts disallow'd. 

He stayed the knoufs red-ravening fangs; and first 
Of Russian traitors, his own murderers go 
White to the tomb. While he, — laid foully low 
With limbs red-rent, with festering brain which erst 
Willed kingly freedom, — 'gainst the deed accurst 
To God bears witness of his people's wpe. 



Digitized 



by Google 



343 



III.— SONNETS ON PICTURES. 



TOSL 

AN ANNUNCIATION, 

XARLY GERMAN. 

T he lilies s tand before her like a screen 

rnrough which, upon this warm and solemn day, 
God surely hears. For there she kneels to pray 

Who wafts our prayers to God — Mary the Queen. 

She was Faith's Present, parting what had been 
From what began wiUi her, and is for aye. 
On either hand, God's twofold system lay : 

With meek bowed face a Virgin prayed between. 

So prays she, and the Dove flies in to her. 
And she has turned. At the low porch is one 
Who looks as though deep awe made him to smile* 

Heavy with heat, the plants yield shadow there ; 
T he loud fl ies cross ea ch othe r in the sunj 
^nd the aisled pillai^ meet the poplar-aisle. 



Digitized 



by Google 



344 



FOR 

OUR LADY OF THE ROCKS 

BY LEONARDO DA VINCL 

Mother, is this the darkness of the end, 

The Shadow of Death ? and is that outer sea 
Infinite imminent Eternity ? 

And does the death-pang by man's seed sustained 

In Time's each instant cause thy face to bend 
Its silent prayer upon the Son, while He 
Blesses the dead with His hand silently 

To His long day which hours no more offend ? 

Mother of grace, the pass is difficult, 

Keen as these rocks, and the bewildered souls 

Throng it like echoes, blindly shuddering through. 
Thy name, O Lord, each spirits voice extols, 
Whose peace abides in the dark avenue 
Amid the bitterness of things occult. 



Digitized 



by Google 



345 



FOR 

A VENETIAN PASTORAL 

BY GIORGIONE. 

{In the Louvn.) 

Water, for anguish of the solstice : — nay, 
But dip the vessel slowly, — ^nay, but lean 
And hark how at its verge the wave sighs in 

Reluctant Hush I beyond all depth away 

The heat lies silent at the brink of day : 
Now the hand trails upon the viol-string 
That sobs, and the brown &ces cease to sing. 

Sad with the whole of pleasure. Whither stray 

Her eyes now, from whose mouth the slim pipes creep 
And leave it pouting, while the shadowed grass 
Is cool against h^r naked side ? Let be :— 

Say nothing now unto her lest she. weep. 
Nor name this ever. Be it as it was, — 
Life touching lips with Immortality. 



Digitized 



by Google 



346 



FOR 

AN ALLEGORICAL DANCE OF WOMEN 

BY ANDREA MANTEGNA. 

{In the Louvre.) 

Scarcely, I think ; yet it indeed tnay be 
The meaning reached him, when this music rang 
Clear through his frame, a sweet possessive pang, 

And he beheld these rocks and that ridged sea. 

But I believe that, leaning tow'rds them, he 
Just felt their hair carried across his face 
As each girl passed him ; nor gave ear to trace 

How many feet ; nor bent assuredly 

His eyes from the blind fixedness of thought 
To know the dancers. It is bitter glad 
Even unto tears. Its meaning filleth it, 
A secret of the wells of Life : to wit : — 
The heart's each pulse shall keep the sense it had 

With all, though the mind's labour run to nought. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC ^ 



347 
FOR 

RUGGIERO AND ANGELICA 

BY INGRES, 
I. 

A REMOTE sky, prolonged to the sea's brim : 
One rock-point standing buffeted alone. 
Vexed at its base with a foul beast unknown, 

Hell-birth of geomaunt and teraphim : 

A knight, and a winged creature bearing him, 
Reared at the rock : a woman fettered there. 
Leaning into the hollow with loose hair 

And throat let back and heartsick trail of limb. 

The sky is harsh, and the sea shrewd and salt : 
Under his lord the griffin-horse ramps blind 

With rigid wings and tail. The spear's lithe stem 
Thrilb in the roaring of those jaws : behind, 
That evil length of body chafes at fault. 

She does not hear nor see — she knows of them. 

n. 

Clench thine eyes now, — ^'tis the last instant, girl : 
Draw in thy senses, set thy knees, and take 
One breath for all : thy life is keen awake, — 

Thou mayst not swoon. Was that the scattered whirl 

Of its foam drenched thee ? — or the waves that curl 
And split, bleak spray wherein thy temples ache ? 
Or was it his the champion's blood to flake 

Thy flesh ? — or thine own blood's anointing, girl ? 

Now, silence : for the sea's is such a sound 
As irks not silence ; and except the sea. 

All now is still. Now the dead thing doth cease 
To writhe, and drifb. He turns to her : and she. 
Cast from the jaws of Death, remains ther^ bound. 
Again a woman in her nakedness. 



Digitized 



by Google 



348 



POR 

A VIRGIN AND CHILD 

BY HANS MEMMELINCK. 

(In the Academy of Bruges,) 

Mystery : God, man's life, born into man 
Of woman. There abideth cm her brow 
The ended pang of knowledge, the which now 

Is calm assured. Since first her task began 

She hath known all. What more of anguish than 
Endurance oft hath lived through, the whole space 
Through night till day, passed weak upon her face 

While the heard lapse of darkness slowly ran ? 

All bath been told her touching her dear Son, 
And all shall be accomplished. Where He sits 
Even now, a babe. He holds the symbol fruit 
Perfect and chosen. Until God permits, 
His soul's elect still have the absolute 
Harsh nether darkness, and make painful moan. 



Digitized 



by Google 



349 



FOR 

A MARRIAGE OF ST. CATHERINE 

BY THE SAME. 

(In th$ Hospital of St. John at Bruges.) 

Mystery : Catherine the bride of Christ. 
She kneels, and on her hand the holy Child 
Now sets the ring. Her life is hushed and mild, 

Laid in God's knowledge— ever unenticed 

From God, and in the end thus fitly priced. 
Awe, and the music that is near her, wrought 
Of angels, have possessed her eyes in thought : 

Her utter joy is hers, and hath sufficed. 

There is a pause while Mary Virgin turns 

The leaf, and reads. With eyes on the spread book, 
That damsel at her knees reads after her. 
John whom He loved, and John His harbinger; 
Listen and watch. Whereon soe'er thou look, 
The light is starred in gems and the gold burns. 



Digitized 



by Google 



3S0 



FOR 

THE WINE OF CIRCE 

BY EDWARD BURME JONES. 

Dusk-haired and gold-robed o'er the golden wine 
She stoops, wherein, distilled of death and shamei 
Sink the black drops; while, lit with fragrant flame, 

Round her spread board the golden sunflowers shine 

Doth Helios here with Hecate combine 
(O Circe, thou their votaress ?) to proclaim 
For these thy guests all rapture in Love's name, 

Till pitiless Night give Day the countersign ? 



Lords of their hour, they come. And by her knee 
Those cowering beasts, their equals heretofore, 

Wait ; who with them in new equality 
To-night shall echo back the sea's dull roar 
With a vain wail from passion's tide-strown shore 

Where the dishevelled seaweed hates the sea. 



Digitized 



by Google 



351 



FOR 

THE HOLY FAMILY 

BY MICHELANGELa 

{In the National Gallery*) 

Turk not the prophet's page, Q Son I He knew 
All that Thou hast to suffer, and hath writ 
Not yet Thine hour of knowledge. Infinite 

The sorrows that Thy manhood's lot must rue 

And dire acquaintance of Thy grief. That clue 
The spirits of Thy mournful ministerings 
Seek through yon scroll in silence. For these things 

The angels have desired to look into. 

Still before Eden waves the fiery sword, — 

Her Tree of Life unransomed : whose sad Tree 

Of Knowledge yet to growth of Calvary 

Must yield its Tempter, — Hell the earliest dead 

Of Earth resign, — and yet, O Son and Lord, 
The seed o' the woman bruise the serpent's head. 

* In this picture the Virgin Mother is seen withholding from the 
Child Saviour the prophetic writings in which His su&rings »vt 
foretold. Angelic figures beside them examine a scroll 



Digitized 



by Google 



3P 



FOR 

SPRING 

BY SANDRO BOTTICELU. 

(In the Accademia of Fhrena.) 

What masque of what old wind-withered New-Year 
Honours this Lady?* Flora, wanton-eyed 
For birth, and with all flowrets prankt and pied : 

Aurora, Zephyrus, with mutual cheer 

Of clasp and kiss : the Graces circling near, 

'Neath bower-linked arch of white arms glorified : 
And with those feathered feet which hovering glide 

O'er Spring's brief bloom, Hermes the harbinger. 

Birth-bare, not death-bare yet, the yoimg stems stand 
This Lady's temple-columns : o'er her head 
Love wings his shaft What mystery here is read 
Of homage or of hope ? But how command 
Dead Springs to answer ? And how question here 
These munmiers of that wind-withered New-Year ? 

• The same lady, here surrounded by the masque of Spring, is 
evidently the subject of a portrait by Botticelli formerly in the 
Pourtalte collection in Paris. This portrait is inscribed ** Smeralda 
BandineUi" 



Digitized 



by Google 



3S3 



IV.—SONI^ETS AND VERSES 

FOR ROSSEirrS OWN WORKS OF ART. 



MARrS GIRLHOOD. 
{Far a Pictun.) 



' Tms is that blessed Mary, pre-elect 

God's Vii^n. Gone is a great while, and she 
Dwelt young in Nazareth of Galilee. 

nUnto God's will she brought devout respect, 
Profound simplicity of intellect^ 
And supreme patience. From her mother's knee 
Faithful and hopeful ; wise in charity ; 
Strong in grave peace ; in pity circumspect 



So held she through her girlhood ; as it were 
An angel-watered lily, that near God 

Grows and is quiet Till, one dawn at home 
She woke in her white bed, and had no fear 
At all, — ^yet wept till sunshine, and felt awed : 
Because the fulness of the time was come. 

23 



Digitized 



by Google 



354 MARY'S GIRLHOOD, 

IL 

These are the symbols. On that cloth of red 
r the centre is the Tripoint : perfect each, 
Except the second of its points, to teach 

That Christ is not yet born. The books — whose head 

Is golden Charity, as Paul hath said — 
Those virtues are wherein the soul is rich : 
Therefore on them the lily standeth, which 

Is Innocence, being interpreted. 

The seven-thom'd briar and the palm seven-leaved 
Are her great sorrow and her great reward. 
Until the end be full, the Holy One 
Abides without She soon shall have achieved 
Her perfect purity : yea, God the Lord 

Shall soon vouchsafe His Son to be her Son. 



Digitized 



by Google 



355 



THE PASSOVER IN THE HOLY FAMILY. 
{For a Drawing, ♦) 

Here meet together the prefiguring day 
And day prefigured. '' Eating, thou shalt stand, 
Feet shod, loins girt, thy road-stafif in thine hand, 

With blood-stained door and lintel/'— did God say 

By Moses* mouth in ages passed away. 
And now, where this poor household doth comprise 
At Paschal-Feast two kindred families, — 

Lo! the slain lamb confronts the Lamb to slay. 

The pyre is piled. What agony's crown attained, 
What shadow of Death the Boy's fair brow subdue? 

Who holds that blood wherewith the porch is stained 
By Zachary the priest ? John binds the shoes 
He deemed himself not worthy to unloose ; 

And Mary culls the bitter herbs ordained. 

* The scene is in the house-porch, where Christ holds m bowl of 
blood firom which Zacbarias is sprinkling the posts and linteL 
Joseph has brought the lamb and Elizabeth lights the pyre. The 
shoes which John fastens and the bitter herbs whidi Maiy is 
gathering form part of the ritual 



Digitized 



by Google 



356 



MARY MAGDALENE 

AT THE DOOR OF SIMON THE PHARISEE. 

{For a Drawing,*) 

" Why wilt thou cast the roses from thine hair ? 

Nay, be thou all a rose, — wreath, lips, and cheek. 

Nay, not this house, — that banquet-house we seek ; 
See how they kiss and enter ; come thou there. 
This delicate day of love we two will share 

Till at our ear love's whispering night shall speak. 

What, sweet one, — ^hold'st thou still the foolish freak? 
Nay, when I kiss thy feet they'll leave the stair." 

" Oh loose me I Seest thou not my Bridegroom's face 
That draws me to Him ? For His feet my kiss. 
My hair, my tears He craves to-day : — and oh I 
What words can tell what other day and place 
Shall see me clasp those blood-stained feet of His ? 
He needs me, calls me, loves me : let me go I " 

* In the drawing Mary has left a pn>ces8ion of revellers, and is 
ascending by a sudden impulse the steps of the house where she 
sees Christ Her lover has followed her, and is trying to turn her 
back. 



Digitized 



by Google 



357 

MICHAEL SCOTTS WOOING. 
{For a Drawinf^.) 

Rose-sheathed beside the rosebud tongue 
Lurks the young adder's tooth ; 
Milk-mild from new-bom hemlock-bluth 

The earliest drops are wrung : 

And sweet the flower of his first youth 

When Michael Scott was young. 



ASPECTA MEDUSA* 
(For a Drawing,) 



Andromeda, by Perseus saved and wed, 
Hankered each day to see the Gorgon's head : 
Till o'er a fount he held it, bade her lean, 
And mirrored in the wave was safely seen 
That death she lived by. 



Let not thine eyes know 
Any forbidden thing itself, although 
It once should save as well as kill : but be 
Its shadow upon life enough for thee. 



Digitized 



by Google 



353 



CASSANDRA. 
{For a Drawing,^) 



Rend, rend thine hair, Cassandra : he will go. 
Yea, rend thy garments, wring thine hands, and cry 
From Troy still towered to the unreddened sky. 

See, all but she that bore thee mock thy woe : — 

He most whom that &ir woman arms, with show 
Of wrath on her bent brows ; for in this place 
This hour thou bad'st all men in Helen's face 

The ravished ravishing prize of Death to know. 



What eyes, what ears hath sweet Andromache, 
Save for her Hector's form and step ; as tear 
On tear make salt the warm last kiss he gave 
He goes. Cassandra's words beat heavily 
Like crows above his crest, and at his ear 
Ring hollow in the shield that shall not save. 



* The subject shows Cassandra prophes3ring among her kindred, 
as Hector leaves them for his last battle. They are on the platform 
of a fortress, from which the Trojan troops are marching out 
Helen is arming Paris ; Priam soothes Hecuba ; and Andromache 
holds the child to her bosom. 



Digitized 



by Google 



359 



u« 



" O Hector, gone, gone, gone ! O Hector, thee 

Two chariots wait, in Troy long bless'd and cuiVd ; 

And Grecian spear and Phrygian sand athirst 
Crave from thy veins the blood of victory. 
Lo f long upon our hearth the brand had we, 

Lit for the roof-tree's ruin : and to-day 

The ground-stone quits the wall, — the wind hath 
way,— 
And higher and higher the wings of fire are free. 

O Paris, Fans ! O thou burning brand. 
Thou beacon of the sea whence Venus rose. 

Lighting thy race to shipwreck I Even that hand 
Wherewith she took thine apple let her close 
Within thy curls at last, and while Troy glows 

Lif^ thee her trophy to the sea and land." 



Digitized 



by Google 



360 

VENUS VERTICORDIA. 
(For a Picture.) 

She hath the apple in her hand for thee, 
Yet almost in her heart would hold it back ; 
She muses, with her eyes upon the track 

Of that which in thy spirit they can see. 

Haply, "Behold, he is at peace," saith she ; 
" Alas I the apple for his lips, — the dart 
That follows its brief sweetness to his heart, — 

The wandering of his feet perpetually I " 

A little space her glance is still and coy , 
But if she give the fruit that works her spell, 

Those eyes shall flame as for her Phrygian boy. 

Then shall her bird's strained throat the woe foretell, 
And her far seas moan as a single shell, 

And through her dark grove strike the light of Troy. 



PANDORA. 
{For a Pidun.) 

What of the end. Pandora ? Was it thine, 
The deed that set these fiery pinions free ? 
Ah ! wherefore did the Olympian consistory 

In its own likeness make thee half divine ? 

Was it that Juno's brow might stand a sign 
For ever ? and the mien of Pallas be 
A deadly thing ? and that aU men might see 

In Venus' eyes the gaze of Proserpine? 

What of the end ? These beat their wings at will. 
The ill-bom things, the good things turned to ill, — 

Powers of the impassioned hours prohibited. 
Aye, clench the casket now ! Whither they go 
Thou mayst not dare to think : nor canst thou know 

If Hope still pent there be alive or dead. 



Digitized 



by Google 



361 

A SEA-SPELL. 
{For a Picture,) 

Her lute hangs shadowed in the apple-tree, 

While flashing fingers weave the sweet-strung speD 
Between its chords ; and as the wild notes swell| 

The sea-bird for those branches leaves the sea. 

But to what sound her listening ear stoops she ? 
What netherworld gulf-whispers doth she hear, 
In answering echoes from what planisphere, 

Along the wind, along the estuary 7 

She sinks into her spell : and when full soon 
Her lips move and she soars into her song, 
What creatures of the midmost main shall throng 
In furrowed surf-clouds to the summoning rune : 
Till he, the fated mariner, hears her ciy, 
And up her rock, bare-breasted, comes to die ? 



ASTARTE SYRIACA, 
(For a Picture,) 

Mystery : lo I betwixt the sun and moon 
Astarte of the Syrians : Venus Queen 
Ere Aphrodite was. In silver sheen 

Her twofold girdle clasps the infinite boon 

Of bliss whereof the heaven and earth commune : 
And from her neck's inclining flower-stem lean 
Love-freighted lips and absolute eyes that wean 

The pulse of hearts to the spheres' dominant tune. 

Torch-bearing, her sweet ministers compel 
All thrones of light beyond the sky and sea 
The witnesses of Beautjr's face to be : 

That face, of Love's all-penetrative spell 

Amulet, talisman, and oracle, — 

Betwixt the sun and moon a mystery. 



Digitized 



by Google 



362 



MNEMOSYNE. 

{For a Pictur$.) 

Thou fill'st from the winged chalice of the soul 
Thy lamp, O Memory, fire-winged to its goal. 



FIAMMETTA. 
(For a Picture.) 

Behold Fiammetta, shown in Vision here. 

' Gloom-girt 'mid Spring-flushed apple-growth shestands; 

And as she sways the branches with her handa^ 
Along her arm the sundered bloom falls sheer, 
In separate petals shed, each like a tear ; 

While from the quivering bough the bird expands 

His wings. And lo 1 thy spirit understands 
Tife shaken and shower'd and flown, and Death drawn 
near. 

All stirs with change. Her garments beat the air : 

The angel circling round her aureole 
. Shimmers in flight against the tree's grey bole : 
While she, with reassuring eyes most fair, 
k presage and a promise stands ; as 'twere 

On Death's dark storm the rainbow of the SouL 



Digitized 



by Google 



3^3 



"FOUND." 
(For a Pktun.) 

** There is a budding morrow in midnight : **^^ 
So sang our Keats, our English nightingale. 
And here, as lamps across the bridge turn pale 

fn London's smokeless resurrection-light. 

Dark breaks to dawn. But o'er the deadly blight 
Of Love deflowered and sorrow of none avail, 
Which makes this man gasp and this woman quail. 

Can day from darkness ever again take flight ? 

Ah I gave not these two hearts their mutual pledge^ 
Under one mantle sheltered 'neath the hedge 

In gloaming courtship ? And, O God 1 to-day 
He only knows he holds her ; — but what part 
Can life now take ? She cries in her locked heart,— 

" Leave me — I do not know you— go away I " 



Digitized 



by Google 



21^ 



THE DAY-DREAM. 
(For a Picture.) 

The thronged boughs of the shadowy sycamore 

Still bear young leaflets half the summer through ; 

From when the robin 'gainst the unhidden blue 
Perched dark, till now, deep in the leafy core, 
The embowered throstle's urgent wood-notes soar 

Through summer silence. Still the leaves come new ; 

Yet never rosy-sheathed as those which drew 
Their spiral tongues from spring-buds heretofore. 

Within the branching shade of Reverie 

Dreams even may spring till autumn ; yet none be 

Like woman's budding day-dream spirit-fimn'd. 
Lo I tow'rd deep skies, not deeper than her look, 
She dreams ; till now on her forgotten book 

Drops the forgotten blossom from her hand. 



Digitized 



by Google^ 



v.— POEMS IN ITALIAN 

{OR ITALIAN AND ENGLISH), 

FRENCH AND LATIN. 



Digitized 



by Google 



366 



GIOVENTIJ E SIGNORIA. 

Is, GioviNE il signore, 
Ed ama molte cose,— 
I cantiy le rose/ 

La forza e ramore. 

Quel che piii vuole 
Ancor non osa : 
Ahi piii che il sole, 
, Piii ch' ogni rosa^ 
' La cara cosa, v 

DoDna a gioire. 

£} giovine il signore, 
Ed ama quelle cose 
Che ardor dispose 

Iq cuore all' amore. 

Bella fandulla, 
Guardalo in viso ; 

Non mancar nulla, 
Motto o sorriso ; 
Ma viso. a viso 

Guarda a gradire. 

£) giovine il signore^ 
Ed ama tutte cose, 
Vezzose, giojose, 

Tenenti all' amore. 



Digitized 



by Google 



3<S7 



YOUTH AND LORDSHIP, 
{Italian Stnet-Song) 

My young lord's the lover 
Of earth and sky above. 

Of youth's sway and youth's play. 
Of songs and flowers and love. 

Yet for love's desire 

Green youth lacks the daring ; 

Though one dream of fire, 
All his hours ensnaring, 
Bums the boy past bearing-— 

The dream that girls inspire. 

My young lord's the lover 
Of every burning thought 

That Love's will, that Love's skill 
Withm his breast has wrought 

Lovely girl, look on him 
Soft as music's measure ; 

Yield him, when you've won him, 
Joys and toys at pleasure ; 
But to win your treasure, 

Softly look upon him. 

My young lord's the lover 

Of every tender grace 
That woman, to woo man, 

Gm wear in form or lace. 



Digitized 



by Google 



368 CIOVENTil E SIGNORTA. 

Prendilo in bracdo 
Adesso o mai ; 

Per piii mi taccio, 
Ch^ tu lo sai ; 

Bacialo e ravrai, 
Ma non lo dire. 

£ giovine il signore, 
Ed ama ben le cose 
Che Amor nascose, 

Che mostragli Amore. 

Deh trionfando 
Non fame pruova ; 

Ahim^ 1 die quando 
Gioja piii giova, 
Allor si trova 

Presso al finire. 

% giovine il signore, 
Ed ama tante cose, 
Le rose, le spose, 

Qnante gli dona Amore. 



Digitized 



by Google 



YOUTH AND LORDSHIP. 3^ 

Take him to your bosom 

Now, girl, or never ; 
Let not your new blossom 

Of sweet kisses sever ; 

Only guard< for ever 
Your boast within your bosonu 

My young lord's the lover 

Of every secret thing. 
Love-hidden, love-bidden 

This day to banqueting. 

Lovely girl, with vaunting 

Never tempt to-morrow : 
From all shapes enchanting 

Any joy can borrow. 

Still the spectre Sorrow 
Rises up for haunting. 

And now my lord's the lover 

Of ah I so many a sweet,— 
Of roses, of spouses, 

As many as love may greet 



24 



Digitized 



by Google 



370 



PROSERPINA. 

(per UN QUADRO.) 

LuNGi h la luce che in sd questo muro 

Rifrange appena, un breve istante scorta 

Del no palazzo alia soprana porta. 
Lungi quei fiori d'Enna/ O lido oscuro, 
Dal frutto tuo fatal che omai m'^ duro. 

Lungi quel delo dal tartareo manto 

Che qui mi cuopre : e lungi ahi lungi ahi quanto 
Le notti che saran dai dl che furo. 

Lungi da me mi sento ; e ognor sognando 
Cerco e ricerco, e resto ascoltatrice ; 
E qualche cuore a qualche anima dice, 

iDi cui mi giunge il suon da quando in quando. 
!!ontinuamente insieme sospirando,) — 
" Oimh per te, Proserpina infelice ! " 



LA RICORDANZA. 

Maggior dolore h ben la Ricordanza, 
O neir amaro inferno amena stanza ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



37« 



PROSERPINA. 

{For a Picture.) 

Afar away the light that brings cold cheer 
Unto this wall,— -one instant and no more 
Admitted at my distant palace-door. 

Afar the flowers of Enna from this drear 

Dire fruit, which, tasted once, must thrall me here. 
Afar those skies from this Tartarean grey 
That chills me : and afar, how far away, 

The nights that shall be from the days that were. 

Afar from mine own self I seem, and wing 
Strange ways in thought, and listen for a sign : 
And still some heart unto some soul doth pine, 

(Whose sounds mine inner sense is fain to bring. 

Continually together murmuring,) — 

" Woe's me for thee, unhappy Proserpine ! " 



MEMORY. 

Is Memory most of miseries miserablei 
Or the one flower of ease in bitterest hell ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



37a 
LA BELLA MANO. 

(fER UN QUAfiRa) 

O BELLA ManOy che ti lavi e piaci 
In quel medesmo tuo puro elemento 
Deade la Dea delF amoroso awento 

Nfucque, (e dall' onda s'infuocar le laci 

Di mille iaispegnibili fomad) : — 
Come a Venere a te Toro e Fai^ento 
Offron gli Atnori ; e ogoun riguarda attento 

La bocca che sorride e te che tacL 

In dolce modo dove onor t* invii 

Vattene adoma, e porta insiem fra tante 
Di Venere e di vergine sembiante ; 
Uniilemente in luoghi onesti e pii 
Bianca e soave ogaora ; infin che sii, 
O Mano, mansu^ta in man d'amante. 



Con manto d'oro, collana, ed anelli, 

Le place aver con quelli 
Non altro che una rosa ai suoi capellL 



Robe d'or, mais rien ne veut 
Qu' une rose k ses cheveuz. 



Digitized 



by Google 



»3 

■ 

LA BELLA MANO. 

O LOVELY hand, that thy sweet self dost lave 
In that thy pure and proper element, 
Whence erst the Lady of Love's high adv^t 

Was bom, and endless fires sprang from the wave :- 

Even as her Loves to her their offerings gave, 
For thee the jewelled gifts they bear ; while each 
Looks to those lips, of music-measured speech 

The fount, and of more bliss than man may crave. 

In royal wise ring-girt and bracelet-spann'd, 
A flower of Venus' own virginity. 

Go shine among thy sisterly sweet band ; 
In maiden-minded converse delicately 
Evermore white and soft ; until thou be, 

O hand I heart-handsel'd in a lover's hand* 



With golden mantle, rings, and necklace fair, 

It likes her best to wear 
Only a rose within her golden hair* 



A GOLDEN robe, yet will she wear 
Only a rose in her golden hain 



Digitized 



by Google 



374 



BARCAROLA. 

Per carit^ 

Mostrami amore : 
Mi punge il cuore, 

Ma non si sa 
Dove h amore. 

Che mi fa 

La bella etk, 

Sh non si sa 

Come amerk ? 
Ahi me solingo I 
II cuor mi stringo I 
Non pill ramingo, 

Per caritk I 

Per caritk, 

Mostrami il delo : 
Tutto h un velo, 

£ non si sa 
Dove h il delo. 

Se si sta 

Coslcolk, 

Non si sa 

Se non si va. 
Ahi me lontano ! 
Tutto h in vano I 
Prendimi in mano, 

Per caritk I 



Digitized 



by Google 



375 



BARCAROLA. 

Oltre tomba 
Qualche cosa ? 
E che ne did ? 
Saremo felid ? 
Terra mai posa, 
£ mar riinbomba. 



BAMBINO FACIATO. 

A Pippo Pipistrello 
Farfalla la fanciulla : 

" O vedi quanto b hello 
Ridendo in questa culla ! 

£ noi Fabbiamo fatto, 

Noi due insiem d 'un tratto, 
£ senza noi fia nulla." 



Digitized 



by Google 



376 



THOMJE nDES. 

"DiGiTUM tuum, Thoma, 
Infer, et vide mands I 
Manum tuam, Thoma, 
Aflfer, et mitte in latus." 

** Dominns et Deus, 
Deus/' dixit, 

" Et Dominus mens. 

" Quia me vidisti, 
Thoma, credidisti. 
Beat] qui non viderunt, 
Thoma, et crediderunt/ 

" Dominus et Deus, 
Deus," dixit, 

*' Et Dominus mens," 



Digitized 



by Google 



377 



VL—VEKSICLES AND 
FRAGMENTS. 



THE ORCHARD-PIT. 

Piled deep bdow the screening apple-branch 
They lie with bitter apples in their hands : 
And some are only ancient bones that blanch. 
And some had ships that last year's wind did launch, 
And some were yesterday the lords of lands. 

In the soil dell, among the apple-trees, 
High up above the hidden pit she stands. 

And there for ever sings, who gave to these, 

That lie below, her magic hour of ease. 
And those her apples holden in their hands. 

This in my dreams is shown me ; and her hair 

Crosses my lips and draws my burning breath ; 
Her song spreads golden wings upon the air. 
Life's eyes are gleaming from her forehead fair. 
And from her breasts the ravishing eyes of Death. 

Men say to me that sleep hath many dreams, 

Yet I knew never but this dream alone : 
There, from a dried-up channel, once the stream's, 
The glen slopes up ; even such in sleep it seems 
As to my waking sight the place well known, 

♦ ♦ He >ie * 

My love I call her, and she loves me well : 
But I love her as in the maelstrom's cup 
The whirled stone loves the leaf inseparable 
That clings to it round all the circling swell, 
And that the same last eddy swallows up. 



Digitized 



by Google 



378 VERSICLES AND FRAGMENTS. 

TO ART. 
I LOVED thee ere I loved a woman, Love. 



i 



ON BURNS. 

In whomsoever, since Poesy began, 
A Poet most of all men we may scan, 
Bums of all poets is the most a Man. 



FIN DI MAGGIO. 

Oh I May sits crowned with hawthorn-flower. 

And is Love's month, they say ; 
And Love's the fruit that is ripened best 

By ladies' eyes in May. 



And the Sibyl, you know. I saw her with my own eyes at Cums, 
hanging in a jar ; and, when the boys asked her, " What would you, 
Sibyl?" she answered, "I would die." — Pktronius. 

"I SAW the Sibyl at Cumae" 

(One said) '^ with mine own eye. 
She hung in a cage, and read her rune 

To all the passers-by. 
Said the boys, ' What wouldst thou, Sibyl ? * 

She answered, ' I would die.' " 



As balmy as the breath of her you love 

^^^len deep between her breasts it comes to you. 



Digitized 



by Google 



VERSICLES AND FRAGMENTS. 379 

" Was it a friend or foe that spread these lies ? " 
'' Nay, who but infants question in such wise ? 
Twas one of my most intimate enemies." 



At her step the water-hen 
Springs from her nook, and skimming the clear stream. 
Ripples its waters in a sinuous curve, 
And dives again in safety. 



Would God I knew there were a God to thank 
When thanks rise in me 1 



I SHUT myself in with my soul, 
And the shapes come eddying forth. 



If I could die like the British Queen 

Who faced the Roman war. 
Or hang in a cage for my country's sake 

Like Black Bess of Dunbar 1 



She bound her green sleeve on my helm, 
Sweet pledge of love's sweet meed : 

Warm was her bared arm round my neck 
As well she bade me speed ; 

And her kiss clings still between my lips. 
Heart's beat and strength at need. 



Digitized 



by Google 



38o VEMSICtMS AIW i^^RAGMENTS. 

WiUESUE is the mto whose soul has never waked 
To sudden pity of the poor torn past ? 



As much as in a hundred years, she's dead : 
Yet is to-day the day on which she died. 



Who shall say what is said in me, 

With all that I might have been dead in me ? 



\ 



Digitized 



by Google 



PROSE. 



I.— STORIES AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 



Digitized 



ized by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



383 



HAND AND SOUL. 

Rivolsimi in quel lato 
JJi onde venia la voce, 
£ parvemi una luce 
Che lucea quanto Stella : 
La mia menta era quella. 

Bonaggiunia Urbtdam (1250). 

Before any knowledge of painting was brought to 
Florence, there were already painters in Lucca, and 
Pisa, and Arezzo, who feared God and loved the art 
The workmen from Greece, whose trade it was to sell 
their own works in Italy and teach Italians to imitate 
them, had already found in rivals of the soil a skill that 
could forestall their lessons and cheapen their labours, 
more years than is supposed before the art came at all 
into Florence. The pre-eminence to which Cimabue was 
raised at once by his contemporaries, and which he still 
retains to a wide extent even in the modem mind, is 
to be accounted for, partly by the circumstances under 
which he arose, and partly by that extraordinary purpose 
of forhmi bom with the lives of some few, and through 
which it is not a little thing for any who went before, if 
they are even remembered as the shadows of the coming 
of such an one, and the voices which prepared his way 
in the wilderness. It is thus, almost exclusively, that 
the painters of whom I speak are now known. They 
have left little, and but little heed is taken of that which 
men hold to have been surpassed ; it is gone like time 
gone, — a track of dust and dead leaves that merely led 
to the fountain. 
Nevertheless, of very late years and in very rare 



Digitized 



by Google 



384 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS, 

instances, some signs of a better understanding have 
become manifest A case in point is that of the triptych 
and two cruciform pictures at Dresden, by Chiaro di 
Messer Bello dell' Erma, to which the eloquent pamphlet 
of Dr. Aemmster has at length succeeded in attracting 
the students. There is another still more solemn and 
beautiful work, now proved to be by the same hand, in 
the Pitti gallery at Florence, It is the one to which my 
narra^ve will relate. 



This Chiaro dell' Erma was a young man of very 

honourable family in Arezzo; where^^ conceiving art 

almost for himse lf, and loving it deeplj^^' he endeavoTrrScT^ 

\ 'from early boyhood towards the imitatioil of any obj ects 

I oflfered in nat ure. The extreme' T5iigiiig gl ler a ^9lbte^ 

^ e mbodimen t"bf his thoughts strengthenea us his years 

increasedj^lnor^ eveu Ihiill Ilia shiews 01 the blood of his 

life ; until he would feel faint in sunsets and at the sig^t 

of stately persons. When he had lived nineteen years, 

he heard of the famous Giunta Pisano; and, feeling 

much of admiration, with perhaps a little of that envy 

which youth always feels until it has learned to measure 

success by time and opportunity, he determined that he 

would seek out Giunta, and, if possible, become his 

pupil. 

Having arrived in Pisa, he clothed himself in humble 
apparel, being unwilling that any other thing than the 
desire he had for knowledge should be his plea with the 
great painter ; and then, leaving his baggage at a house 
of entertainment, he took his way along the stree^ 
asking whom he met for the lodging of Giunta* It 
soon chanced that one of that city, conceiving him to 
be a stranger and poor, took him into his house and 
refreshed him ; afterwards directing him on his way. 

When he was brought to speech of Giunta, he said 
merely that he was a student, and that nothing in the 
world was so much at his heart as to become that which 



Digitized 



by Google 



BAND AND SOUL. 385 

he had heard told of him with whom he was speaking. 
He was received with courtesy and consideration, and 
soon stood among the works of the famous artist But 
the forms he saw there were lifeless and incomplete; 
and a sudden exultation possessed him as he said within 
himself, " I am the master of this man^" The blood 
came at first into his face, but the next moment he was 
quite pale and fell to trembling. He was able, however, 
to conceal his emotion ; speaking very little to Giunta, 
but when he took his leave, thanking him respectfully. 

After this, Chiaro's first resolve was, that he would 
work out thoroughly some one of his thoughts, and let 
the world know him. But the lesson which he had now 
learned, of how small a greatness might win fame, and 
how little there was to strive against, served to makq 
him torpid, and rendered his exertions less continual. 
Also Pisa was a larger and more luxurious city than 
Arezzo; and when, in his walks, he saw the great 
gardens laid out for pleasure^ and the beautiful women 
who passed to and fro, and heard the music that was in 
the groves of the city at evening, he was taken with 
wonder that he had never claimed his share of thq 
inheritance of those years in which his youth was cast. 
And women loved Chiaro ; for, in despite of the burthen 
of study, he was well-favoured and very manly in his 
walking ; and, seeing his face in front, there was a glory 
upon it, as upon the face of one who feels a light round 
his hair. 

So he put thought from him, and partook of his life. 
But, one night, bein^ in a certain company of ladies, 
a gentleman that was there with him began to speak of 
the paintings of a youth named Bonaventura, which he 
had seen in Lucca; adding that Giunta Pisano might 
now look for a rival When Chiaro heard this, the 
lamps shook before him and the music beat in his ears. 
He rose up, alleging a sudden sickness, and went out of 
that house with his teeth set And, being again within 
his room, he wrote up over the door the name of 

25 



Digitized 



by Google 



386 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. -^ 

Bonaventura, that it might stop him when he would 
go out. 

He now took to work diligently, not returning to 
Arezzo, but remaining in Pisa, that no day more might 
be lost; only living entirely to himself. Sometimes, 
after nightfall, he would walk abroad in the most solitary 
places he could find ; hardly feeling the ground under 
him, because of the thoughts of the day which held him 
in fever. 

The lodging Chiaro had chosen was in a house that 
looked upon gardens fast by the Church of San Petronio. 
It was here, and at this time, that he painted the 
Dresden pictures; as also, in all likelihood, the one — 
inferior in merit, but certainly his — which is now at 
Munich. For the most part he was calm and regular in 
his manner of study ; though often he would remain at 
work through the whole of a day, not resting once so 
long as the light lasted ; flushed, and with the hair from 
his face. Or, at times, when he could not paint, he 
would sit for hours in thought of all the greatness the 
world had known from of old ; until he was weak with 
yearning, like one who gazes upon a path of stars. 

He continued in this patient endeavour for about three 
years, at the end of which his name was spoken through- 
out all Tuscany. As his fame waxed, he began to be 
employed, besides easel-pictures, upon wall-paintings ; 
but I believe that no traces remain to us of any of these 
latter. He is said to have painted in the Duomo ; and 
D'Agincourt mentions having seen some portions of a 
picture by him which originally had its place above 
the high altar in the Church of the Certosa ; but which, 
at the time he saw it, being very dilapidated, had been 
hewn out of the wall, and was preserved in the stores 
of the convent. Before the period of Dr. Aemmster's 
researches, however, it had been entirely destroyed. 

Chiaro was now famous. It was for the race of fame 
that he had girded up his loins ; and he had not paused 
until fame was reached ; yet now, in taking breath, he 



Digitized 



by Google 



BAND AND SOUL. 387 

found that the weight was still at his heart The years 
of his labour had fallen from him, and his life was still 
in its first painful desire. 

With all that Chiaro had done during these three . 
years, and even before with the studies of his early 
youth, there- had always been a ^;;:^g ^ wnrfhip pnii,,' 
secadce^ llMvas the peace-offering that he made to GpdJ 
and to his own soul for the eager selfishness of his ahnr^ 
There was earth, indeed, upon the hem of his raiment ; 
but this was of the heaven, heavenly. He had seasons 
when he could endure to think of no other feature of his 
hope than thi& Sometimes it had even seemed to him 
to behold that day when his mistress — his mystical lady 
(now hardly in her ninth year, but whose smile at 
meeting had already lighted on his soul,) — even she, his 
own gracious Italian Art — should pass, through the sun 
that never sets, into the shadow of the tree of life, and 
be seen of God and found good : and then it had seemed "l 
to him that he, with many who, since his coming, had | 
joined the band of whom he was one (for, in his dream, ; 
the body he had worn on earth had been dead an <* ^ 
hundred years), were permitted to gather round the j 
blessed maiden, and to worship with her through all ' 
ages and ages of ages, sa ying. Holy, holy, holy . This • 
thing he had seen with tne ey es 01 nis sp iriTj^ and in \ 
this thing had trusted, belitivlll^ that it ^9f(j<m surely 
come to pass. 

But now, (being at length led to inquire closely into 
himself,) even as, in the pursuit of fame, the unrest 
abiding after attainment had proved to him that he had 
misinterpreted the craving of his own spirit — so also, . 
now that he would willingly have fallen back on devo- I 
tion, he became aware that much of that reverence 
which he had mistaken for faith had been no more than 
the worship of beauty. Therefore, after certain days / 
passed in perplexity, Chiaro said within himself, "My * 
life and my will are yet before me : I will take another 
aim to my life." 



Digitized 



by Google 



388 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF FOEMS. 

f From that moment Chiaro set a watch on his soul, and 
I put his hand to no other woite but only to such as had 
,* for their end the presentment of some moral greatness ^ 
I that should influence the beholder: and to this end, » 
! he multiplied abstractions, and foi^ot the beauty and • 
. passion of the world. So the people ceased to throng 
I about his pictures as heretofore ; and, when they were 

I' carried through town and town to their destination, they 
were no longer delayed by the crowds eager to gaze and 
admire; and no prayers or offerings were brought to 
j them on their path, as to his Madonnas, and his Saints, 
' and his Holy Children, wrought for the sake of the life 
! he saw in the feces that he loved. Only the critical 

I audience remained to him ; and these, in default of more 
worthy matter, would have turned their scrutiny on a 
puppet or a mantle. Meanwhile, he had no more of 
fever upon him ; but was calm and pale each day in all 
^hat he did and in his goings in and out The works he 
iproduced at this time have perished — in all likelihood, - 
(not unjustly. It is said (and we may easily believe it), 
that, though more laboured than his former pictures, 
they were cold and unemphatic; bearing marked out- 
upon them the measure of that boundary to which they 
were made to conform. 

And the weight was still close at Chiaro's heart : but 
he held in his breath, never resting (for he was afraid), 
and would not know it. 

Now it happened, within these days, that there fell 
a great feast in Pisa, for holy matters : and each man left . 
his occupation ; and all the guilds and companies of the 
city were got together for games and rejoicings. And 
there were scarcely any that stayed in the houses, 
except ladies who lay or sat along their balconies 
between open windows which let the breeze beat through 
the rooms and over the spread tables from end to end. 
And the golden cloths that their arms lay upon drew 
all eyes upward to see their beauty ; and the day was 
long ; and every hour of the day was bright with the sun. 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAND AND SOUL. 389 

So Chiaro's model, when he awoke that morning on 
the. hot pavement of the Piazza Nunziata, and saw the 
hurry of people that passed him, got up and went along 
with them ; and Chiaro waited for him in vain. 

For the whole of that morning, the music was in 
Chiaro's room from the Church close at hand ; and he 
could hear the sounds that the crowd made in the 
streets; hushed only at long intervals while the pro- 
cessions for the feast-day chanted in going under his 
windows. Also, more than once, there was a high 
clamour from the meeting of factious persons : for the 
ladies of both leagues were looking down ; and he who 
encotmtered his enemy could not choose but draw upon 
him. Chiaro waited a long time idle ; and then knew 
that his model was gone elsewhere. When at his work, 
he was blind and deaf to all else ; but he feared sloth : 
for then his stealthy thoughts would begin to beat round 
and round him, seeking a point for attack. He now 
rose, therefore, and went to the window. It was 
within a short space of noon ; and underneath him a 
throng of people was coming out through the porch 
of San Petronio. 

The two greatest houses of the feud in Pisa had filled 
the church for that mass. The first to leave had been 
the Gherghiotti; who, stopping on the threshold, had 
fiadlen back in ranks along each side of the archway : so 
that now, in passing outward, the Marotoli had to walk 
between two files of men whom they hated, and whose 
fathers had hated theirs. All the chiefs were there and 
their whole adherence; and each knew the name of 
each. Every man of the Marotoli, as he came forth and 
saw his foes, laid back his hood and gazed about him, to 
show the badge upon the close cap that held his hair. 
And of the Gherghiotti there were some who tightened 
their girdles; and some shrilled and threw up their 
wrists scornfully, as who flies a falcon ; for that was the 
crest of their house. 

On the walls within the entry were a nimiber of tali 



Digitized 



by Google 



390 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

narrow pictures, presenting a moral allegory of Peace, 
which Chiaro had painted that year for the Church. The 
Gherghiotti stood with their backs to these frescoes ; and 
among them Golzo Ninuccio, the youngest noble of the 
faction, called by the people Golaghiotta, for his debased 
life. This youth had remained for some while talking 
listlessly to his fellows, though with his sleepy sunken 
eyes fixed on them who passed : but now, seeing that 
no man jostled another, he drew the long silver shoe 
off his foot and struck the dust out of it on the cloak of 
him who was going by, asking him how far the tides 
rose at Viderza. And he said so because it was three 
months since, at that place, the Ghei^ghiotti had beaten 
the Marotoli to the sands, and held them there while ^e 
sea came in ; whereby many had been drowned. And, 
when he had spoken, at once the whole archway was 
dazzling with the light of confused swords ; and they 
who had left turned back; and they who were still 
behind made haste to come forth; and there was so 
much blood cast up the walls on a sudden, that it ran 
in long streams down Chiaro's paintings. 

Chiaro turned himself from the window ; for the light 
felt dry between his lids, and he could not look. He sat 
down, and heard the noise of contention driven out of 
the church -porch and a great way through the streets ; 
and soon there was a deep murmur that heaved and 
waxed from the other side of the city, where those of 
both parties were gathering to join in the tumult 

Chiaro sat with his face in his open hands. Once 
again he had wished to set his foot on a place that 
looked green and fertile ; and once again it seemed to 
him that the thin rank mask was about to spread away, 
and that this time the chill of the water must leave 
leprosy in his flesh. The light still swam in his head, 
and bewildered bim at first; but when he knew his 
thoughts, they were these : — 

** Fame failed me : faith failed me : and now this also, 
— the hope that I nourished in this my generation of 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAND AND SOUL. 391 

men, — shall pass from me, and leave my feet and my 
hands groping. Yet because of this are my feet become 
slow and my hands thin. I am as one who, through the 
whole night, holding his way diligently, hath smitten 
the steel unto the flint, to lead some whom he knew 
darkling ; who hath kept his eyes always on the sparks 
that himself made, lest they should fail; and who, 
towards dawn, turning to bid them that he had guided 
God speed, sees the wet grass untrodden except of his 
own feet I am as the last hour of the day, whose 
chimes are a perfect number ; whom the next foUoweth 
not, nor light ensueth from him ; but in the same dark* 
ness is the old order begun afresh. Men say, ' This is 
not God nor man ; he is not as we are, neither above 
us : let him sit beneath us, for we are many.' Where I 
write Peace, in that spot is the drawing of swords, and 
there men's footprints are red. When I would sow, 
another harvest is ripe. Nay, it is much worse with me 
than thus much. Am I not as a cloth drawn before the 
light, that the looker may not be blinded ? but which 
sheweth thereby the grain of its own coarseness, so 
that the light seems defiled, and men say, * We will not 
walk by it' Wherefore through me they shall be 
doubly accursed, seeing that through me they reject the 
light May one be a devil and not know it ? " 

As Chiaro was in these thoughts, the fever encroached 
slowly on his veins, till he could sit no longer and would 
have risen ; but suddenly he found awe within him, and 
held his head bowed, without stirring. The warmth of 
the air was not shaken ; but there seemed a pulse in the 
light, and a living freshness, like rain. The silence 
was a painful music, that made the blood ache in his 
temples ; and he lifted his face and his deep eyes. 

A woman was present in his room, clad to the hands 
and feet with a green and grey raiment, fashioned to 
that time. It seemed that the first thoughts he had ever 
known were given him as at first from her eyes, and he 
knew her hair to be the golden veil through which he 



Digitized 



by Google 



392 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

hrjirld his dream s. Though her hands were joined, her 
face was not lifted, but set forward; and though the 
gaze was austere, yet her mouth was supreme in gentle- 
ness. And as he looked, Chiaro's spirit appeared 
abashed of its own intimate presence, and his lips 
shook with the thrill of tears ; it seemed such a bitter 
while till the spirit might be indeed alone. 

She did not move closer towards him, but he felt her 
to be as much with him as his breath. He was like one 
who, scaling a great steepness, hears his owi^ _ voice 
echoed in some place much higher than be can see, 
and the name of which is not known to him. As the 
woman stood, her speech was with Chiaro : not, as it 
were, from her mouth or in his ears; but distinctly 
between them. 

" I am an image, Chiaro, of thine own soul within 
thee. See me, and know me as I am. Thou sayest 
• that fame has failed thee, and faith failed thee ; but 
because at least thou hast not laid thy life unto riches, 
therefore, though thus late, I am suffered to come into 
thy knowledge. Fame sufficed not, for that thou didst 
seek fame : irrlr-lhinr nwn jrm^iniJX-fSiJ' ^^^ mind's 



r<vnqf j^nr^^ hnfr thj' ^e heart's) , and all shaiTa ppiuve -and 
sufSceT For Fame, in noble soils, is a fruit of the 
Spring : but not therefore should it be said : ' Lo I my 
garden that I planted is barren : the crocus is here, but 
the lily is dead in the dry ground, and shall not lift the 
earth that covers it: therefore I will fling my garden 
together, and give it unto the builders.' Take heed 
rather that thou trouble not the wise secret earth ; for in 
the mould that thou throwest up shall the first tender 
growth lie to waste ; which else had been made strong 
in its season. Yea, and even if the year fail past in all 
its months, and the soil be indeed, to thee, peevish and 
incapable, and though thou indeed gather all thy harvest, 
and it suffice for others, and thou remain vexed with 
emptiness; and others drink of thy streams, and the 
drouth rasp thy throat; — let it be enough that these 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAND AND SOUL. 393 

have found the feast good, and thanked the giver: 
remembering that, when the winter is striven through, 
there is another year, whose wind is meek, and whose 
smfulfilleth all." 

fWh ile he heard, Chiaro went slowly on his knees. It 
was not to her that s^Je, for the speech seemed within 
him and his oj^J /Tlie air brooded in sunshine, and 
though the turmon wS great outside, the air within was 
at peaceiy But when he looked in her eyes, he wept 
And sRe^came to him, and cast her hair over him, and 
took her hands about his forehead, and spoke again : — 

** Thou hast said>" she continued, gently, " that faith 
failed thee. This cannot be. Either thou hadst it not, 
or thou hast it But who bade thee strike the point 
betwixt love and faith ? Wouldst thou sift the warm 
breeze from the sun that quickens it ? Who bade thee 
turn upon God and say : ' Behold, my offering is of 
earth, and not worthy: Thy fire comes not upon it; 
therefore, though I slay not my brother whom Thou 
acceptest, I will depart before Thou smite me.' Why 
shotddst thou rise up and tell God He is not content ? 
Had He, of His warrant, certified so to thee ? Be not 
njr^ \€\ g#*#>lr oi^( division ; but possess thy love in 
Sufidciency : assuredly this is faith, for the heart must 
believe first AVhat H ehath set in thine heart to do, 
and evenlHbUKll Ch6u tlo it ^ViChout tiiought 



th at do thou ; and ev entHgnghl 

oCHim. it shall S jffftii d o n t s ^ ic is mis sacriface that He 



asketn ot thee, and His flame is upon it for a sign. 
Think not of Him ; but of His love and thy love For 
God is no morbid exactor: He hath no hand to bow 
beneath, nor a foot, that thou shouldst kiss it." 

And Chiaro held silence, and wept into her hair which 
covered his face; and the salt tears that he shed ran 
through her hair upon his lips ; and he tasted the bitter- 
ness of shame. 

Then the fair woman, that was his soul, spoke again 
to him, saying : 

'' And for this thy last purpose, and for those unprofit- 



Digitized 



by Google 



394 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS, 

able truths of thy teaching; — thine heart hath already 
put them away, and it needs not that I lay my bidding 
upon thee. How is it that thou, a man, wouldst say 
coldly to the mind what God hath said to the heart 
warmly? Thy will was honest and wholesome; but 
look well lest this also be folly, — to say, * I, in doing 
this, do strengthen God among men.' When at any 
time hath He cried unto thee, saying, ' My son, lend Me 
thy shoulder, for I fall'? Deemest thou that the men 
who enter God's temple in malice, to the provoking of 
blood, and neither for His love nor for His wrath will 
abate their purpose, — shall afterwards stand, with thee 
in the porch midway between Him and themselves, to 
give ear unto thy thin voice, which merely the fJEdl of 
their visors can drown, and to see thy hands, stretched 
feebly, tremble among their swords ? Give thou to God 
no more than He asketh of thee ; but to man also, that 
which is man's. In all that thou doest, work from thine 
own heart, simply ; for his heart is as thine, when thine 
is wise and humble ; and he shall have understanding of 
thee. One drop of rain is as another, and the sun's 
prism in all : and shalt thou not be as he, whose lives 
are the breath of One ? Only by making thyself his 
equal can he learn to hold communion with thee, and at 
last own thee above him. Not till thou lean over the 
water shalt thou see thine image therein : stand erect, 
and it shall slope from thy feet and be lost. Know that 
there is but this means whereby thou mayst serve God 
with man : — Set thine hand and thy soul to serve man 
with God." 

And when she that spoke had said these words within 
Chiaro's spirit, she left his side quietly, and stood up as 
he had first seen her : with her fingers laid together, 
and her eyes steadfast, and with the breadth of her long 
dress covering her feet on the floor. And, speaking 
again, she said : — 

"Chiaro, servant of God, take now thine Art unto 
thee, and paint me thus, as I am, Jo know me : weak, as 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAND AND SOUL. 395 

I am, and in the weeds of this time ; only with eyes 
which seek out labour, and with a faith, not learned, yet 
jealous of prayer. QJq this; so shall thy,scml stand 
before thee always, and perplex thee no m ore/M 

And Chiaro did as she bade him. WhilSTie worked, 
his face grew solemn with knowledge : and before the 
shadows had turned, his work was done. Having 
finished, he lay back where he sat, and was asleep imme- 
diately : for the growth of that strong sunset was heavy 
about him, and he felt weak and haggard ; like one just 
come out of a dusk, hollow country, bewildered with 
echoes, where he had lost himself, and who has not slept 
for many days and nights. And when she saw him lie 
back, the beautiful woman came to him, and sat at his 
head, gazing, and quieted his sleep with her voice. 

The, tumult of the factions had endured all that day 
through all Pisa, though Chiaro had not heard it : and 
the last service of that feast was a mass sung at mid- 
night from the windows of all the churches for the many 
dead who lay about the city, and who had to be buried 
before morning, because of the extreme heat. 



In the spring of 1847, I was at Florence. Such as 
were there at the same time with myself — those, at 
least, to whom Art is something, — will certainly recollect 
how many rooms of the Pitti Gallery were closed 
through that season, in order that some of the pictures 
they contained might be examined and repaired without 
the necessity of removal. The hall, the staircases, 
and the vast central suite of apartments, were the only 
accessible portions ; and in these such paintings as they 
could admit from the sealed penetralia were profanely 
huddled together, without respect of dates, schools, or 
persona 

I fear that, through this interdict, I may have missed 
seeing many of the best pictures. I do not mean oit/y 
the most talked of: for these, as they were restored, 



Digitized 



by Google 



396 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

generally found their way somehow into the open rooms, 
owing to the clamours raised by the students; and I 
remember how old Ercoli's, the curator's, spectacles used 
to be mirrored in the reclaimed surface, as he leaned 
mysteriously over these works with some of the visitors, 
to scrutinize and elucidate. 

One picture that I saw that spring, I shall not easily 
forget. It was among those, I believe, brought from the 
other rooms, and had been hung, obviously out of all 
chronology, immediately beneath that head by Raphael 
so long known as the Berrettino, and now said to be the 
portrait of Cecco CiullL 

The picture I speak of is a small one, and represents 
merely the figure of a woman, clad to the hands and feet 
with a green and grey raiment, chaste and early in its 
fashion, but exceedingly simple. She is standing : her 
hands are held together lightly, and her eyes set ear- 
nestly open. 

The face and hands in this picture, though wrought 
with great delicacy, have the appearance of being 
painted at once, in a single sitting: the drapery is- 
unfinished. As soon as I saw the figure, it drew an 
awe upon me, Hk'^ V'n*^tr in '^hndny ^ I shall not attempt 
to describe it more than I have already done ; foy the 
most absorbing wonder of it was its literalifj^. C^ou 
knew that figure, when painted, had been seen ; yet it 
was not a thing to be seen of men^ This language will 
appear ridiculous to such as haVF^never looked on the 
work ; and it may be even to some among those who 
have. On examining it closely, I perceived in one 
comer of the canvas the words Manus Animam pinxit, . 
and the date 1239. 

I turned to my Catalogue, but that was useless, for the 
pictures were all displaced. I then stepped up to the 
Cavaliere Ercoli, who was in the room at the moment, 
and asked him regarding the subject and authorship of 
the painting. He treated the matter, I thought, some- 
what slightingly, and said that he could show me the 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAND AND SOUL, 397 

reference in the Catalogue, which he had compiled This, 
when found, was not of much value, as it merely said, 
" Schizzo d'autore incerto," adding the inscription.* I 
could willingly have prolonged my inquiry, in the hope 
that it might somehow lead to some result ; but I had 
disturbed the curator from certain yards of Guido, and 
he was not communicative. I went back, therefore, and 
stood before the picture till it grew dusk. 

The next day I was there again; but this time a 
circle of students was round the spot, all copying the 
Btrrettiuo, I contrived, however, to find a place whence 
I could see my picture, and where I seemed to be in 
nobody's way. For some minutes I remained undis- 
turbed ; and then I heard, in an Elnglish voice : '' Might 
I beg of you, sir, to stand a little more to this side, as 
you interrupt my view ? " 

I felt vexed, for, standing where he asked me, a glare 
struck on the picture from the vdndows, and I could not 
see it However, the request was reasonably made, and 
from a countryman ; so I complied, and turning away, 
stood by his easel. I knew it was not worth while ; yet 
I referred in some way to the work underneath the one 
he was copying. He did not laugh, but he smiled as we 
do in England. *' Very odd, is it not ? " said he. 

The other students near us were all continental ; and 
seeing an Englishman select an Englishman to speak 
with, conceived, I suppose, that he could understand no 
language but his own. They had evidently been noticing 
the interest which the little picture appeared to excite 
in me. 



* I should here say, that in the latest catalogues (Rowing; as in 
cases before mentioned, to the zeal and enthusiasm 01 Dr. Aemm- 
ster), this, and several other pictures^ have been more competently 
entered. The work in question is now placed in the 5a/ei Sissa^ 
goMOf a room I did not see — ^under the number 161. It is described 
as "Figura mistica di Chiaro dell' Erma," and there b a brief 
notice of the author appended. 



Digitized 



by Google 



39S STORIES, AND SCHEMES 01' POEMS. 

One of them, an Italian, said something to another 
who stood next to him. He spoke with a Genoese 
accent, and I lost the sense in the villanous dialect. 
"Che so?" replied the other, lifting his eyebrows 
towards the figure; ''roba mistica: 'st' Inglesi son 
matti sul misticismo : somiglia alle nebbie di Ik Li 
fa pensare alia patria, 

' e inteneriace il core 
Lo di ch' han detto ai dolci amici adio.* * 

" La notte, vuoi dire," said a third. 

There was a general laugh. My compatriot was 
evidently a novice in the language, and did not take 
in what was said. I remained silent, being amused. 

"Et toi done?" said he who had quoted Dante, 
turning to a student, whose birthplace was unmistakable, 
even had he been addressed in any other language : 
" que dis-tu de ce genre-Ui ? " 

" Moi ? " returned the Frenchman, standing back from 

\ his easel, and looking at me and at the figure, quite 

politely, though with an evident reservation : '' Je dis, 

mon cher, que c'est une sp€cialit6 dont je me fiche pas 

mal. Je tiens que quand on ne comprend pas une 

^chose, c'est qu' elle ne signifie rien." 

My reader thinks possibly that the French student 
was right. 



Digitized 



by Google 



399 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 

'' In all my life," said my uncle in his customary voice, made up 
of goodness and trusting simplicity, and a spice of piety withal, 
wMch, an't pleased your worship, made it sound the sweeter, — 
'^ In ail my life," quoth my uncle Toby, " I have never heard a 
stranger story than one which was told me by a sergeant in 
Maclure*s regiment, and which, with your permission, Doctor, I 
will relate." 

" No stranger, brother Toby," said my father testily, " than a 
certain tale to be found in Slawkenbergius (being the eighth of 
his third Decad), and called by him the History of an Icelandish 
Nose." 

''Nor than the golden legend of Saint Anschankus of Lithuania," 
added Dr. Slop, " who, being troubled digestively while delivering 
his discourse * de Sanctis sanctorum,' was tempted by the Devil in 
imagifu vasts in contumeliantf — ^which is to say, — in the form of a 
vessel unto dishonour." 

Now ilxcentrio^ as one mocking, sayeth, etc, etc — ^Tristram 

SlIANDT. 

Among my earliest recollections, none is stronger than 
that of my father standing before the fire when he came 
home in the London winter evenings, and singing to us 
in his sweet, generous tones : sometimes andent English 
ditties, — such songs as one might translate from the 
birds, and the brooks might set to music ; sometimes 
those with which foreign travel had familiarized his 
youth, — among them the great tunes which have rung 
the world's changes since '89. I used to sit on the 
hearth-rug, listening to him, and look between his knees 
into the fire till it burned my face, while the sights 
swarming up in it seemed changed and changed with the 
music : till the music and the fire and my heart burned 
together, and I would take paper and pencil, and try in 
some childish way to fix the shapes that rose within me. 
For my hope, even then, was to be a painter. 



Digitized 



by Google 



400 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

The first book I remember to have read, of my own 
accord, was an old-fashioned work on Art, which my 
mother had, — Hamilton's " English Conoscente." It was 
a kind of continental tour, — sufficiently Della-Cruscan, 
from what I can recall of it, — and contained notices of 
pictures which the author had seen abroad, with engrav- 
ings after some of them. These were in the English 
fashion of that day, executed in stipple and printed with 
red ink ; tasteless enough, no doubt, but I yearned to- 
wards them and would toil over them for days. One 
especially possessed for me a strong and indefinable 
charm : it was a Saint Agnes in glory, by Bucciolo d'Orli 
Angiolieri. This plate I could copy from the first with 
much more success than I could any of the others; 
indeed, it was mainly my love of the figure, and a desire 
to obtain some knowledge regarding it, which impelled 
me, by one magnanimous effort upon the " Conoscente," 
to master in a few days more of the difficult art of reading 
than my mother's laborious inculcations had accomplished 
till then. However, what I managed to spell and puzzle 
out related chiefly to the executive qualities of the 
picture, which could be little understood by a mere child ; 
of the artist himself, or the meaning of his work, the 
author of the book appeared to know scarcely any- 
thing. 

As I became older, my boyish impulse towards art 
grew into a vital passion ; till at last my father took me 
from school and permitted me my own bent of study. 
There is no need that I should dwell much upon the 
next few years of my life. The beginnings of Art, 
entered on at all seriously, present an alternation of 
extremes : — on the one hand, the most bewildering 
phases of mental endeavour, on the other, a toil rigidly 
exact and dealing often with trifles. What was then 
the precise shape of the cloud within my tabernacle, I 
could scarcely say now ; or whether through so thick a 
veil I could be sure of its presence there at all. And 
as to which statue at the Museum I drew most or learned 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 401 

least from, — or which Professor at the Academy '* set " 
the model in the worst taste, — these are things which no 
one need care to know. I may say, briefly, that I was 
wayward enough in the pursuit, if not in the purpose ; 
that I cared even too httle for what could be taught 
me by others; and that my original designs greatly 
outnumbered my school-drawings. 

In most cases where study (such study, at least, as 
involves any practical elements) has benumbed that 
subtle transition which brings youth out of boyhbod, 
there comes a point, after some time, when the mind 
loses its suppleness and is riveted merely by the con- 
tinuance of the mechanical effort. It is then that the 
constrained senses gradually assume their utmost ten- 
sion, and any urgent impression from without will 
suffice to scatter the charm. The student looks up : the 
film of their own fixedness drops at once from before 
his eyes, and for the first time he sees his life in the 
face. 

In my nineteenth year, I might say that, between one 
path of Art and another, I worked hard. One afternoon 
I was returning, after an unprofitable morning, from 
a class which I attended. The day was one of those 
oppressive lulls in autumn, when application, unless 
under sustained excitement, is all but impossible, — 
when the perceptions seem curdled and the brain full 
of sand. On ascending the stairs to my room, I heard 
voices there, and when I entered, found my sister 
Catharine, with another young lady, busily turning over 
my sketches and papers, as if in search of something. 
Catharine laughed, and introduced her companion as 
Miss Mary Arden* There might have been a little 
malice in the laugh^ for I remembered to have heard the 
lady's name before, and to have then made in fun some 
teasing inquiries about her, as one will of one's sisters' 
friends. I bowed for the ^introduction, and stood re- 
buked. She had her back to the window, and I could 
not well see her features at the moment; but I made sure 

26 



Digitized 



by Google 



402 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

she was very beautiful, from her tranquil body and the 
way that she held her hands. Catharine told me they 
had been looking together for a book of hers which 
I had had by me for some time, and which she had 
promised to Miss Arden. I joined in the search, the 
book was found, and soon after they left my room. I 
had come in utterly spiritless; but now I fell to and 
worked well for several hours. In the evening. Miss 
Arden remained with our family circle till rather late : 
till she left I did not return to my room, nor, when 
there, was my work resumed that night. I had thought 
her more beautiful than at first. 

After that, every time I saw her, her beauty seemed 
to grow on my sight by gazing, as the stars do in water. 
It was some time before I ceased to think of her beauty 
alone ; and even then it was still of her that I thought. 
For about a year my studies somewhat lost their hold 
upon me, and when that year was upon its close, she 
and I were promised in marriage. 

Miss Arden's station in life, though not lofty, was one 
of more ease than my own, but the earnestness of her 
attachment to me had deterred her parents from placing 
any obstacles in the way of our union. All the mor^ 
therefore, did I now long to obtain at once such a posi- 
tion as should secure me from reproaching myself with 
any sacrifice made by her for my sake : and I now set to 
work with all the energy of which I was capable, upon 
a picture of some labour, involving various aspects of 
study. The subject was a modem one, and indeed it 
has often seemed to me that all work, to be truly 
worthy, should be wrought out of the age itself, as well 
as out of the soul of its producer, which must needs be 
a soul of the age. At this picture I laboured constantly 
and unwearidly, my days and my nights ; and Mary sat 
to me for the principal female figure. The exhibition to 
which I sent it opened a few weeks before the complex 
tion of my twenty-first year. 

Naturally enough, I was there on the opening day. 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT A GNES OF INTERCESSION. 403 

My picture, I knew, had been accepted, but I was 
ignorant of a matter perhaps still more important, — 
its situation on the walls. On that now depended its 
success; on its success the fulfilment of my most 
cherished hopes might almost be said to depend. That 
is not the least curious feature of life as evolved in 
society, — which, where the average strength and the 
liverage mind are equal, as in this world, becomes to 
each fife another name for destiny, — when a man, having 
endured labour, gives its fruits into the hands of other 
men, that they may do their work between him and 
mankind : confiding it to them, unknown, without seek- 
ing knowledge of them; to them, who have probably 
done in likewise before him, without appeal to the 
sympathy of kindred experience : submitting to them his 
naked soul, himself, blind and unseen: and with no 
thought of retaliation, when, it may be, by their judg- 
ment, more than one year, from his dubious threescore 
and ten, drops alongside, unprofitable, leaving its baffled 
labour for its successors to recommence. There is 
perhaps no proof more complete how sluggish and little 
arrogant, in aggregate life, is the sense of individuality. 

I dare say something like this may have been passing 
in my mind as I entered the lobby of the exhibition, 
though the principle, vnth me as with others, was sub- 
servient to its application ; my thoughts, in fact, starting 
from and tending towards myself and my own picture. 
The kind of uncertainty in which I then was is rather 
a nervous afiair ; and when, as I shouldered my way 
through the press, I heard my name spoken close behind 
me, I beheve that I could have wished the speaker 
further off without being particular as to distance. I 
could not well, however, do otherwise than look round, 
and on doing so, recognised in him who had addressed 
me a gentleman to whom I had been introduced over- 
night at the house of a friend, and to whose remarks on 
the Com question and the National Debt I had listened 
with a wish for deliverance somewhat akin to that which 



Digitized 



by Google 



404 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

I now felt ; the more so, perhaps, that my distaste was 
coupled with surprise ; his name having been for some 
time fiEuniliar to me as that of a writer of poetry. 

As soon as we were rid of the crush, we spoke and 
shook hands ; and I said, to conceal my chagrin, some 
platitudes as to Poetry being present to support her 
sister Art in the hour of trial. 

"Oh just so, thank you," said he; "have you any- 
thing here?" 

While he spoke, it suddenly struck me that my friend, 
the night before, had informed me this gentleman was a 
critic as well as a poet. And indeed, for the hippopota- 
mus-fronted man, with his splay limbs and wading gait, 
it seemed the more congenial vocation of the two. In 
a moment, the instinctive antagonism wedged itself 
between the artist and the reviewer, and I avoided his 
question. 

He had taken my arm, and we were now in the gallery 
together. My companion's scrutiny was limited almost 
entirely to the "line," but my own glance wandered 
furtively among the suburbs and outskirts of the ceiling, 
as a misgiving possessed me that I might have a per- 
sonal interest in those unenviable "high places" of art. 
Works, which at another time would have absorbed my 
whole attention, could now obtain from me but a restless 
and hurried examination : still I dared not institute an open 
search for my own, lest thereby I should reveal to my 
companion its presence in some dismal condemned comer 
which might otherwise escape his notice. Had I procured 
my catalogue, I might at least have known in which room 
to look; but I had omitted to do so, thinking thereby 
to know my fate the sooner, and never anticipating so 
vexatious an obstacle to my search. Meanwhile I must 
answer his questions, listen to his criticism, observe and 
discuss. After nearly an hour of this work, we were 
not through the first room. My thoughts were already 
bewildered, and my face burning with excitement 

By the time we reached the second room, the crowd 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 405 

"was more dense than ever, and the heat more and more 
oppressive. A glance round the walls could reveal but 
litUe of the consecrated " line," before all parts of which 
the backs were clustered more or less thickly ; except, 
perhaps, where at intervals hung the work of some 
venerable member, whose glory was departed from him. 
The seats in the middle of the room were, for the most 
part, empty as yet : here and there only an unenthusi- 
astic lady had been left by her party, and sat in stately 
unruffled toilet, her eye ranging apathetically over the 
upper portion of the walls, where the gilt frames were 
packed together in desolate parade.^ Over these my gaze 
also passed uneasily, but without encountering the object 
of its solicitude. 

In this room my friend the critic came upon a picture, 
conspicuously hung, which interested him prodigiously, 
and on which he seemed determined to have my opinion. 
It was one of those tender and tearful works, those 
" labours of love," since familiar to all print-shop yK^f/feMrs, 
— in which the wax doll is made to occupy a position in 
Art which it can never have contemplated in the days 
of its humble origin. The silks heaved and swayed in 
front of this picture the whole day long. 

Ail that we could do was to stand behind, and catch 
a glimpse of it now and then, through the whispering 
bonnets, whose "curtains" brushed our feces continu- 
ally. I hardly knew what to say, but my companion 
was lavish of his admiration, and began to give symp- 
toms of the gushing of the poet-soul. It appeared that 
he had already seen the picture in the studio, and being 
but little satisfied with my monosyllables, was at great 
pains to convince me. While he chattered, I trembled 
with rage and impatience. 

"You must be tired," said he at last; ''so am I; let 
us rest a little." He led the way to a seat I was his 
slave, bound hand and foot : I followed him. 

The crisis now proceeded rapidly. When seated, he 
took from his pocket some papers, one of which he 



Digitized 



by Google 



406 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS 

handed to me. Who does not know the dainty action of 
a poet fingering MS. ? The knowledge forms a portion 
of those wondrous instincts implanted in us for self- 
preservation. I was past resistance, however, and took 
the paper submissively. 

" They are some verses/' he said, " suggested by tiie 
picture you have just seen. I mean to print them in 
our next number, as being the only species of criticism 
adequate to such a work." 

I read the poem twice over, for after the first reading 
I found I had not attended to a word of it, and was 
ashamed to give' it him back. The repetition was not, 
however, much more successful, as regarded comprehen- 
sion, — a fact which I have since believed (having seen 
it again) may have been dependent upon other causes 
besides my distracted thoughts. The poem, now in- 
cluded among the works of its author, runs as follows : — 

" O thou who art not as I am, 

Yet knowest all that I must be,— 

O thou who livcst certainly 
Full of deep meekness like a lamb 
Close laid for warmth under its dam, 

On pastures bare towards the sea :— > 

" Look on me, for my soul is bleak, 

Nor owns its labour in the years, 

Because of the deep pain of tears : 
It hath not found and will not seek, 
Lest that indeed remain to speak 

Which, passing, it believes it hears. 

" Like ranks in calm unipotence 

Swayed past, compact and regular, 
Time's purposes and portents are : 

Yet the soul sleeps, while in the sense 

The graven brows of Consequence 
Lie sunk, as in blind wells the star. 

" O gaze along the wind-strewn path 
That curves distinct upon the road 
To the dim purple-hu^ed abode. 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION 407 

Lo t autumntide and aftermath 1 
Remember that the year has wrath 
If the ungarnered wheat corrode. 

'' It is not that the fears are sore 

Or that the evil pride repels : 

But there where the heart's knowledge dwells 
The heart is gnawed within the core, 
Nor loves the perfume from that shore 

Faint with bloom-pulvered asphodels.** 

Having atoned for non-attention by a second perusal, 
whose only result was non-comprehension, I thought I 
had done my duty towards this performance, which I 
accordingly folded up and returned to its author. He 
asked, in so many words, my opinion of it. 

" I think," replied I coolly, " that when a poet strikes 
out for himself a new path in style, he should first be 
quite convinced that it possesses sufficient advantages 
to counterbalance the contempt which the swarm of his 
imitators will bring upon poetry." 

My ambiguity was successful. I could see him take 
the compliment to himself, and inhale it like a scent^ 
while a slow broad smile covered his face. It was much 
as if, at some meeting, on a speech being made com- 
plimentary to the chairman, one of the waiters should 
elbow that personage aside, plant his knuckles on the 
table, and proceed to return thanks. 

And indeed, I believe my gentleman was about to do 
so in due form, but my thoughts, which had been unable 
to resist some enjoyment of his conceit, now suddenly 
reverted to their one dominant theme; and rising at 
once, in an indignant spleen at being thus harassed and 
beset, I declared that I must leave him, and hurry 
through the rest of the gallery by myself, for that I had 
an impending appointment He rose also. As we 
were shaking hands, a part of the ^ line " opposite to 
where we stood was left bare by a lapse in the crowd. 
"There seems to be an odd-looking picture," said my 
companion. I looked in the same direction : the press 



Digitized 



by Google 



408 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS, 

was closing again; I caught only a glimpse of the 
canvas, but that sufficed : it was my own picture^ on 
the line I For a moment my head swam with me. 

He walked towards the place, and I followed him. I 
did not at first hear well what he said of the picture ; 
but when I did, I found he was abusing it He called 
it quaint, crude, even grotesque; and certainly the 
uncompromising adherence to nature as then present 
before me, which I had attempted throughout, gave it, 
in the exhibition, a more curious and unique appearance 
than I could have anticipated. Of course only a very 
few minutes elapsed before my companion turned to the 
catalogue for the artist's name. 

"They thought the thing good," he drawled as he ran 
his eye down the pages, "or it wouldn't be on the line. 
605, 606 or else the fellow has interest some- 
where. 630, what the deuce am I thinking of? 

^^3; ^'3f ^13 Here it is Why," he exclaimed, 

short of breath with astonishment, "the picture is 
yours!" 

" Well, it seems so," said I, looking over his shoulder ; 
I suppose they're likely to know." 

" And so you wanted to get away before we came to 
it. And so the picture is yours I " 

"Likely to remain so too," I replied laughing, "if 
every one thinks as well of it as you do." 

" Oh I mind you," he exclaimed, " you must not be 
offended : one always finds fault first : I am sure to 
congratulate you." 

The surprise he was in made him speak rather loud, 
so that people were beginning to nudge each other, and 
whisper that I was the painter. I therefore rej)eated 
hurriedly that I really must go, or I should miss my 
appointment. 

" Stay a minute," ejaculated my friend the critic ; " I 
am trying to think what the style of your picture is like. 
It is like the works of a very early man that I saw in 
Italy. Angioloni, Angellini, Angioiieri, — that was the 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. .409 

name, — Bucciuolo Angiolieri. He always turned the toes 
in. The head of your woman there " (and he pointed to 
the figure painted from Mary) ^is exactly like a 
St Agnes of his at Bologna.** 

A flash seemed to strike before my eyes as he spoke. 
The name mentioned was a part of my first recollections; 
and the picture he spoke of. • . . Yes, indeed, there 
in the face of my betrothed bride, I beheld the once 
familiar features of the St Agnes, forgotten since child- 
hood I I gazed fixedly on the work of my own hands 
and thought turned in my brain like a wheel. 

When I looked again towards my companion, I could 
see that he was wondering at my evident abstraction. 
I did not explain, but abruptly bidding him good-bye, 
hastened out of the exhibition. 

As I walked homewards, the cloud was still about me, 
and the street seemed to pass me like a shadow. My 
life had been, as it were, drawn by, and the child and 
the man brought together. How had I not at once 
recognized, in her I loved, the dream of my childhood ? 
Yet, doubtless, the sympathy of relation, though uncon- 
scious, must have had its influence. The fact of the 
likeness was a mere casualty, however singular; but 
that which had cast the shadow of a man's love in the 
path of the child, and left the seed at his heart to 
work its growth blindly in darkness, was surely much 
more than chance. 

Immediately on reaching home, I made inquiries of 
my mother concerning my old friend the "English 
Conoscente " ; but learned, to my disapp>ointment, that 
she had long since missed the book, and had never 
recovered it. I felt vexed in the extreme. 

The joy with which the news of my picture was 
hailed at home may readily be imagined. There was 
one, however, to whom it may have been more welcome 
even than to my own household : to her, as to myself, it 
was hope seen nearer. I could scarcely have assigned 
a reason why I refrained from mentioning to her, or to 



Digitized 



by Google 



410 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

any one, the strange point of resemblance \diich I had 
been led to perceive; but from some unaccountable 
reluctance I kept it to myself at the time. The matter 
was detailed in the journal of the worthy poet-critic who 
had made the discovery ; sudi scraps of research being 
much too scarce not to be worked to their utmost; it 
may be too that my precipitate retreat had left him in 
the belief of my being a convicted plagiarist I do not 
think, however, that either Mary's family or my own 
saw the paper ; and indeed it was much too aesdietic to 
permit itself many readers. 

Meanwhile, my picture was obtaining that amount of 
notice, favourable with imfavourable, which constitutes 
success, and was not long in finding a purchaser. My 
way seemed clearing before me. Still, I could not 
prevent my mind from dwelling on the curious incident 
connected with the painting, and which, by constant 
brooding upon it, had begun to assume, in my idea, 
almost the character of a mystery. The coincidence was 
the more singular that my work, being in subject, 
costume, and accessories, English, and of the present 
period, could scarcely have been expected to suggest so 
striking an affinity in style to the productions of one of 
the earliest Italian painters. 

The gentleman who purchased my picture had com- 
missioned me at the same time for another. I had 
always entertained a great wish to visit Italy, but now 
a still stronger impulse than before drew me thither. 
All substantial record having been lost, I could hardly 
persuade myself that the idol of my childhood, and the 
worship I had rendered it, was not all an unreal dream ; 
and every day the longing possessed me more strongly 
to look with my own eyes upon the veritable St Agnes. 
Not holding myself free to marry as yet, I therefore 
determined (having it now within my power) that I 
would seek Italy at once, and remain there while I 
painted my next picture. Nor could even the thought 
of leaving Mary deter me from this resolution. 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT A GNES OF INTERCESSION. 41 1 

On the day I quitted England, Mary's father again 
placed her hand in mine, and renewed his promise ; but 
our own hearts were a covenant between us. 

From this point, my narrative will proceed more 
rapidly to its issue. Some lives of men are as the sea 
is, continually vexed and trampled with winds. Others 
are, as it were, left on the beach. There the wave is 
long in reaching its tide-mark, where it abides but a 
moment ; afterwards, for the rest of that day, the water 
is shifted back more or less slowly; the sand it has 
filled hardens; and houriy the wind drives lower till 
nightfalL 

To dwell here on my travels any further than in so 
much as they concern the thread of my story, would be 
superfluous. The first place where I established myself, 
on arriving in the Papal States, was Bologna, since it 
was there, as I well remembered, that the St Agnes of 
Bucduolo Angiolieri was said to be. I soon became 
convinced, however, after ransacking the galleries and 
private collections, that I had been misinformed. The 
great Clementine is for the most part a dismal wilderness 
of Bolognese Art, "where nothing is that hath life," 
being rendered only die more ghastly by the "life-in- 
death" of Guido and the Caracci; and the private 
collectors seem to emulate the Clementine. 

From Bologna I removed to Rome, where I stayed 
only for a month, and proceeded thence into Tuscany. 
Here, in the painter's native province, after all, I 
thought the picture was most likely to be found ; as is 
generally the case with artists who have produced com- 
paratively few works, and whose fame is not of the 
highest order of all Having visited Siena and Arezzo, 
I took up my abode in Florence. Here, however, seeing 
die necessity of getting to work at once, I commenced 
my next picture, devoting to it a certain number of hours 
each day ; the rest of my time being chiefly spent among 
the galleries, where I continued my search. The St. 
Agnes still eluded me ; but in the Pitti and elsewhere, 



Digitized 



by Google 



413 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

I met with several works of Bucciuolo ; in all of which 
I thought, in fact, that I could myself recognize, despite 
the \vide difference both of subject and occasional treat- 
ment, a certain mental approximation, not easily defined, 
to the style of my own productions. The peculiarities 
of feeling and manner which had attracted my boyish 
admiration had evidently simk deep, and maintained, 
though hitherto unperceived, their influence over me. 

I had been at Florence for about three months, and 
my picture was progressing, though slowly enough ; 
moreover, the other idea which engrossed me was losing 
its energy, by the recurrence of defeat, so that I now 
determined on leaving the thing mainly to chance, and 
went here and there, during the hours when I was not 
at work, seeing what was to see. One day, however, 
being in a bookseller's shop, I came upon some numbers 
of a new Dictionary of Works of Art, then in course of 
publication, where it was stated that a painting of St. 
Agnes, by Bucciuolo Angiolieri, was in the possession 
of the Academy of Perugia. This then, doubtless, was 
the work I wished to see; and when in the Roman 
States, I must already have passed upon my search 
through the town which contained it In how many 
books had I rummaged for the information which chance 
had at length thrown in my way I I was almost inclined 
to be provoked with so inglorious a success. All my 
interest in the pursuit, however, revived at once, and I 
immediately commenced taking measures for retracing 
my steps to Perugia. Before doing so I despatched a 
long letter to Mary, with whom I kept up a correspond- 
ence, telling her where to direct her next missive, but 
without informing her as to the motive of my abrupt 
removal, although in my letter I dwelt at some length, 
among other topics, on those works of Bucciuolo which 
I had met with at Florence. 

I arrived at Perugia late in the evening, and to see the 
gallery before the next morning was out of the question. 
I passed a most restless night. The same one thought 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 413 

had been more or less with me during the whole of my 
journey, and would not leave me now until my wish was 
satisfied. The next day proved to be one on which the 
pictures were not visible; so that on hastening to the 
Academy in the morning, I was again disappointed. 
Upon the second day, had they refused me adinittance, 
I believe I should have resorted to desperate measurea 
The doors however were at last wide open. Having 
put the swarm of guides to rout, I set my feet on the 
threshold ; and such is the power of one absorbing idea, 
long suffered to dwell on the mind, that as I entered 
I felt my heart choke me as if with some vague 
apprehension. 

This portion of my story which the reader has already 
gone through is so unromantic and easy of belief, that I 
fear the startling circumstances which remain to be told 
will jar upon him all the more by contrast as a clumsy 
fabrication. My course, however, must be to speak on, 
relating to the best of my memory things in which the 
memory is not likely to have failed ; and reserving at 
least my own inward knowledge that all the events of 
this narrative (however unequal the measure of credit 
they may obtain) have been equally, with myself, 
matters of personal experience. 

The Academy of Perugia is, in its little sphere, one 
of the high places of privilege ; and the first room, the 
Council Chamber, full of rickety arm chairs, is hung 
with the presentation pictures of the members, a collec- 
tion of indigenous grandeurs of the school of David. I 
purchased a catalogue of an old woman who was knitting 
in one comer, and proceeded to turn the leaves with 
nervous anxiety. Having found that the Florentine 
pictures were in the last room, I commenced hurrying 
across the rest of the gallery as fast as the polish of the 
waxed boards would permit. There was no visitor 
besides myself in the rooms, which were full of Roman, 
Bolognese, and Perugian handiwork : one or two students 
only, who had set up their easels before some master- 



Digitized 



by Google 



414 STORIES. AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

piece of the " advanced " style, stared round in wonder 
at my irreverent haste. As I walked, I continued my 
search in the catalogue ; so that, by the time I reached 
the Florentine room, I had found the number, and 
walked, with a beating heart, straight up to the picture. 

The picture is about half the size of life ; it represents 
a beautiful woman, seated, in the costume of the painter's 
time, richly adorned with jewels; she holds a palm 
branch, and a lamb nestles to her feet The glory round 
her head is a device pricked without colour on the gold 
background, which is full of the iaces of angels. The 
countenance was the one known to me, by a feeble 
reflex, in childhood; it was also the exact portrait of 
Mary, feature by feature. I had been absent from her 
for more than five months, and it was like seeing her 
again. 

As I looked, my whole life seemed to crowd about me> 
and to stun me like a pulse in my head. For some 
time I stood lost in astonishment, admiration, perplexity, 
helpless of conjecture, and an almost painful sense of 
love. 

I had seen that in the catalogue there was some 
account of the picture ; and now, after a long while, I 
removed my eyes, dizzy with gazing and with thought, 
from the face, and read in Italian as follows : 

** No, 212. St Agnes, with a glory of angels. By 
Bucciuolo Angiolieri, 

"Bertuccio, Buccio, or Bucciuolo d'Orli Angiolieri, a 
native of Cignana in the Florentine territory, was bom 
in 1405 and died in 1460. He was the friend, and has 
been described as the pupil, of Benozzo Gozzoli ; which 
latter statement is not likely to be correct, since their 
ages were nearly the same, as are also the dates of their 
earliest known pictures 

" He is said by some to have been the first to introduce 
a perfectly nude figure in a devotional subject (the St 
Sebastian now at Florence) ; an opinion which Professor 
Ehrenhaupt has called in question, by fixing the date of 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT A GNES OF INTERCESSION. 415 

the five anonymous frescoes in the Church of Sant' 
Andrea d'Oltr 'amo, which contain several nude figures, 
at a period antecedent to that in which he flourished. 
His works are to be met with at Florence, at Lucca, and 
in one or two cities of Germany. The present picture, 
though ostensibly representing St Agnes, is the por- 
trait of Blanzifiore dall 'Ambra, a lady to whom the 
pcdnter was deeply attached, and who died early. The 
circumstances connected by tradition with the painting 
of this picture are of a peculiarly melancholy nature. 

" It appears that, in the vicissitudes of faction, the lady's 
family were exiled from Florence, and took refuge at 
Lucca ; where some of them were delivered by treachery 
to their enemies and put to death. These accumulated 
misfortunes (not the least among which was the separa- 
tion from her lover, who, on account of his own ties and 
connections, could not quit Florence), preyed fatally on 
the mind and health of Blanzifiore; and before many 
months had passed, she was declared to be beyond 
medicinal aid. No sooner did she learn this, than her 
first thought was of the misery which her death would 
occasion her lover ; and she insisted on his being sum- 
moned immediately from Florence, that they might at 
least see each other once again upon earth. When, on his 
arrival, she witnessed his anguish at thus losing her for 
ever, Blanzifiore declared that she would rise at once 
from her bed, and that Buociuolo should paint her por- 
trait before she died ; for so, she said, there should still 
remain something to him whereby to have her in 
memory. In this will she persisted against all remon- 
strance occasioned by the fears of her firiends ; and for 
two days, though in a dying state, she sat with wonder- 
ful eaei^gy to her lover: clad in her most sumptuous 
attire, and arrayed with all her jewels : her two sisters 
remaining constantly at her side, to sustain her and 
supply restoratives. On the third day, while Bucciuolo 
was still at work, she died without moving. 

'' After her death, Bucciuolo finished the portrait, and 



Digitized 



by Google 



4i6 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

added to it the attributes of St. Agnes, in honour of her 
purity. He kept it always near him during his lifetime; 
and, in d3ring, bequeathed it to the Church of Santa 
Agnese del Lavoranti, where he was buried at her side. 
During all the years of his life, after the death of Blan- 
zifiore, he remained at Lucca : where some of his works 
are still to be found. 

" The present picture has been copied many times, but 
never competently engraved ; and was among those con- 
veyed to Paris by Bonaparte, in the days of his omnipo- 
tence." 

The feeling of wonder which attained bewilderment, 
as I proceeded with this notice, was yet less strong than 
an intense penetrating sympathy excited in me by the 
unhappy narrative, which I could not easily have 
accounted for, but which so overcame me that, as I 
finished, the tears stung my eyes I remained for some 
time leaning upon the bar which separated me from the 
picture, till at last my mind settled to more definite 
thought But thought here only served to confound. A 
woman had then lived four hundred years since, of 
whom that picture was the portrait ; and my own eyes 
bore me witness that it was also the surpassingly per- 
fect resemblance of a woman now living and breathing, 
— of my own affianced bride I While I stood, these 
things grew and grew upon my mind, till my thoughts 
seemed to hustle about me like pent-up air. 

The catalogue was still open in my hand ; and now, 
as my eyes wandered, in aimless distraction, over the 
page, they were arrested by these words : " No, 231. 
Portrait of Bucciuolo Angiolieri painted by himself** At 
first my bewildered perceptions scarcely attached a 
meaning to the words; yet, owing no doubt to the 
direction of my thoughts, my eye dwelt upon them, and 
continued to peruse them over and over, until at last 
their purport flashed upon me. At the same instant 
that it did so, I turned round and glanced rapidly over 
the walls for the number : it was at the other end of the 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAJirr AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 417 

room. A trembling suspense, with something almost of 
involuntary awe, was upon me as I ran towards the 
spot ; the picture was hung low ; I stooped over the rail 
to look closely at it, and was face to face with myself f 
I can recall my feeling at that moment, only as one of 
the most lively and exquisite fear. 

It was myself, of nearly the same age as mine was 
then, but perhaps a Httle older. The hair and beard 
were of my colour, trimmed in an antique feshion ; and 
the dress belonged to the early part of the fifteenth cen- 
tury. In the background was a portion of the city of 
Florence. One of the upper comers contained this 
inscription : — 

ALBERTUS* ORLITIS ANGELERIUS 

Ipsum^^si 

JETAJ. SUiE XXIV. 

That it was my portrait, — tiiat the St Agnes was the 
portrait of Mary, — and that both had been painted by 
myself four hundred years ago, — this now rose up dis- 
tinctly before me as the one and only solution of so 
startling a mystery, and as being, in fact, that result 
round which, or some portion of which, my soul had 
been blindly hovering, uncertain of itself. The tremen- 
dous experience of that moment, the like of which has 
never, perhaps, been known to any other man, must 
remain undescribed ; since the description, read calmly 
at common leisure, could seem but fantastic raving. I 
was as one who, coming after a wilderness to some city 
dead since the first world, should find among the tombs 
a human body in his own exact image, embalmed ; 
having the blackened coin still within its lips, and the 
jars still at its side^ in honour of gods whose very names 
are abolished. 

After the first incapable pause, during which I stood 
rooted to the spot, I could no longer endure to look on 

*' Alberto, Albertuccio, Bertncdo, Bucdo, Buccmolo, 

27 



Digitized 



by Google 



4i8 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

the picture, and turning away, fled back throu^ the 
rooms and into the street. I reached it with the sweat 
springing on my forehead, and my face felt pale and 
cold in the sun. 

As I hurried homewards, amid all the chaos of my 
ideas, I had clearly resolved on one thing, — ^namely, that 
I would leave Perugia that night on my return to Eng- 
land. I had passports which would carry me as far as 
the confines of Italy; and when there I counted on 
somehow getting them signed at once by the requisite 
authorities, so as to pursue my journey without delay. 

On entering my room in the hotel where I had put up, 
I found a letter from Mary lying on the table. I was 
too much agitated with conflicting thoughts to open it at 
once ; and therefore allowed it to remain till my pertur- 
bation should in some measure have subsided. I drew 
the blinds before my windows, and covered my face to 
think ; my forehead was still damp between my hands. 
At least an hour must have elapsed in that tumult of the 
spirit which leaves no impression behind, before I opened 
the letter. 

It was an answer to the one which I had posted before 
leaving Florence. After many questions and much news 
of home, there was a paragraph which ran thus : — 

" The account you give me of the works of Bucduolo 
Angiolieri interested me greatly. I am surprised never 
to have heard you mention him before, as he appears to 
find so much favour with you. But perhaps he was un- 
known to you till now. How I wish I could stand by 
your side before his pictures, to enjoy them with you 
and hear you interpret their beauties I I assure you that 
what you say about them is so vivid, and shows so much 
insight into all the meanings of the painter, that, while 
reading, I could scarcely divest myself of the impression 
that you were describing some of your own works." 

As I finished the last sentence, the paper fell from my 
hands. A solemn passage of Scripture had been running 
in my mind ; and as I again lay back and hid my now 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 419 

burning and fevered face, I repeated it aloud : — " How 
unsearchable are Thy judgments, and Thy ways past 
finding out I " 

As I have said, my intention was to set out from 
Perugia that same night; but on making inquiry, I 
found that it would be impossible to do so before the 
morning, as there was no conveyance till then. Post- 
horses, indeed, I might have had, but of this my re- 
sources would not permit me to think. That was a 
troubled and gloomy evening- for me. I wrote, as well 
as my disturbed state would allow me, a short letter to 
my mother, and one to Mary, to apprise them of my 
return ; after which, I* went early to bed, and, contrary 
to my expectations, was soon asleep. 

That night I had a dream, which has remained as 
clear and whole in my memory as the events of the day : 
and so strange were those events — so apart from the 
rest of my life till then, — that I could sometimes almost 
persuade myself that my dream of that night also was 
not without a mystic reality. 

I dreamt that I was in London, at the exhibition where 
my picture had been ; but in the place of my picture, 
which I could not see, there hung the St Agnes of 
Perugia. A crowd was before it; and I heard several 
say that it was against the rules to hang that picture, 
for that the painter (naming me) was dead. At this, a 
woman who was there began to weep : I looked at her 
and perceived it to be Mary. She had her arm in that 
of a man who appeared to wear a masquerade dress ; 
his back was towards me, and he was busily writing on 
some tablets; but on peering over his shoulder, I saw 
that his pencil left no mark where it passed, which he 
did not seem to perceive, however, going on as before. 
I spoke to Mary, but she continued crying and did not 
look up. I then touched her companion on the shoulder ; 
but finding that he paid no attention, I shook him and 
told him to resign that lady*s arm to me, as she was my 
bride. He then turned round suddenly, and showed me 



Digitized 



by Google 



420 STORIES^ AND SCHEMES OF POEMS, 

my own &ce with the hair and bes^rd quaintly cut, as ixi 
the portrait of Bucciuolo. Aftpr loo|dng mournfully at 
me, he said, " Not mine, friend, but neither thine : " and 
while he spoke, his face fell in hke a dead face. Mean- 
time, every one seemed pale and uneasy, and they began 
to whisper in knots; and all at once I found opposite 
me the critic I met at the gallery, who was saying some- 
thing I could not understand, but so fast that he panted 
and kept wiping his forehead. Then my dream changed. 
I was going upstairs to my room at home, where I 
thought Mary was waiting to sit for her portrait The 
staircase was quite dark ; and as I went up, the voices 
of several persons I knew passed by me, as if they were 
descending; and sometime^ my own among them. I 
had reached the top, and was feeling for the handle of 
the door, when it was opened suddenly by an angel; 
and looking in, I saw, not Mary, but a woman whose 
face was hidden with white light, and who ha4 a lamb 
beside her that was bleating aloud. She kneU in the 
middle of the room, and I heard her say several times : 
'' O Lord, it is more than he ca^ bfsar. Spare him, O 
Lord, for her sake whom he consecrated to me." ASta 
this, music came out of heaven, and I thought to have 
heard speech ; but instead, there was silence that woke 
me. 

This dream must have occurred repeatedly in the 
course of the night, for I repiember waking up in perfect 
darkness, overpowered with fear, and crying out in the 
words which I had beard spoken by the woman ; and 
when I woke in the morning, it wa3 from the same 
dream, and the same words were on my lips. 

During the two days parsed at Perugia, I had not had 
time to think of the picture I was engaged upon, which 
had therefore remained in its packing-ca^, as had also 
the rest of my baggage. I was thus in readiness to start 
without further preliminaries. My mind was so con- 
fused and disturbed that I have but a faint recoUection 
of that morning ; to the agitating events of the previous 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 42I 

day, my dream had now added, in spite of myself, a 
Vague foreboding of calamity. 

No obstacle occurred throughout the course of my 
journey, which was, even at that recent date, a longer 
one than it is now. The whole time, with me, was 
occupied by one haunting and despotic idea : it accom- 
panied me all day on the road; and if we paused at 
night it either held me awake or drove all rest from my 
sleep. It is owing to this, I Suppose, that the wretched 
mode of conveyance, the evil roads, the evil weather, 
the evil inns, the harassings of petty authorities, and all 
those annoyances which are set as close as milestones 
all over the Contihent, remain in my memory only with 
a general sense of discomfort. Moreover, on the day 
when I left Perugia I had felt the seeds of fever already 
in my veins ; and during the journey this oppression 
kept constantly on the increase. I was obliged, however, 
carefully to conceal it, since the panic of the cholera was 
again in Europe, and any sign of illness would have 
caused me to be left at once on the road. 

By the night of my arrival in London, I felt that I was 
truly and seriously ill; and, indeed, during the last 
part of the journey, physical suflferin"g had for the first 
time succeeded in partially distracting my thought from 
the thing which possessed it The first inquiries I made 
of my family were regarding Mary. I learned that she 
at least was still in good health, and anxiously looking 
for my arrival ; that she would have been there, indeed, 
but that I had not been expected till a day later. This 
was a weight taken from my heart After scarcely more 
than an hour passed among my family, I repaired to my 
bed ; both body and mind had at length a perfect craving 
for rest. My mother, immediately on my arrival, had 
noticed my flushed and haggard appearance ; but when 
questioned by her I attributed this to the fatigues of 
travelling. 

In spite of my extreme need of sleep, and the wish I 
felt for it, I believe that I slept but little that night 



Digitized 



by Google 



422 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

I am not certain, however, for I can only remember that 
as soon as I lay down my head began to whirl till I 
seemed to be lifted out of my bed ; but whether this 
were in waking or a part of some distempered dream, I 
cannot determine. This, however, is the last thing I can 
recall. The next morning I was in a raging fever, which 
lasted for five weeks. 

Health and consciousness came back to me by degrees^ 
as light and air towards the outlet of a long vault. At 
length, one day, I sat up in bed for the first time. My 
head felt light in the pillows ; and the sunshine that 
warmed the room made my blood creep refreshingly. 
My father and mother were both with me. 

As sense had deserted my mind, so had it returned, 
in the form of one constant thought But this was 
now grown peremptory, absolute, uncompromising, and 
seemed to cry within me for speech, till silence became 
a torment. To-day, therefore, feeling for the first time, 
since my gradual recovery, enough of strength for the 
effort, I resolved that I would at last tell the whole to 
my parents. Having first warned th^n of the extra- 
ordinary nature of the disclosure I was about to make, 
I accordingly began. Before I had ^one far with my 
story, however, 4ny mother fell back in her seat, sobbing 
violently ; then rose, and running up to me, kissed me 
many times, still sobbing and calling me her poor boy. 
She then left the room. I looked towards my &ther, 
and saw that he had turned away his face. In a few 
moments he rose also without looking at me, and went 
out as my mother had done. 

I could not quite account for this, but was so weary of 
doubt and conjecture, that I was content to attribute it to 
the feelings excited by my narration and the pity for all 
those troubles which the events I spoke of had brought 
upon me. It may appear strange, but I believe it to 
have been the fact, that the startling and portentous 
reality which those events had for me, while it left me 
fully prepared for wonder and perturbation on the part 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAIN7 AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 423 

of my hearers, prevented the idea from even occurring 
to me that, as far as belief went, there could be more 
hesitation in another's than in my own. 

It was not long before my father returned. On my 
questioning him as to the cause of my mother's excite- 
ment, he made no explicit answer, but begged to hear 
the remainder of what I had to disclose. I went on, 
therefore, and told my tale to the end. When I had 
finished, my father again appeared deeply afifected ; but 
soon recovering himself, endeavoured, by reasoning, to 
persuade me either that the circumstances I had described 
had no foundation save in my own diseased fancy, or 
else that at the time of their occurrence incipient iUness 
had caused me to magnify very ordinary events into 
marvels and omens. 

Finding that I still persisted in my conviction of their 
actuality, he then informed me that the matters I had 
related were already known to himself and to my mother 
through the disjointed ravings of my long delirium, in 
which I had dwelt on the same theme incessantly ; and 
that their grief, which I had remarked, was occasioned 
by hearing me discourse thus connectedly on the same 
wild and unreal subject, after they had hoped me to be 
on the road to recovery. To convince me that this 
could merely be the effect of prolonged illness, he led 
me to remark that I had never till then alluded to the 
topic, either by word or in any of my letters, although, 
by my account, the chain of coincidences had already 
b^;un before I left England. Lastly, he implored me 
most earnestly at once to resist and dispel this fantastic 
brain sickness, lest the same idea, allowed to retain 
possession of my mind, might end, — as he dreaded to 
think that it indeed might, — by endangering my reason. 

My Other's last words struck me like a stone in the 
mouth; there was no longer any answer that I could 
make. I was very weak at the time, and I beheve I 
lay down in my bed and sobbed. I remember it was 
on that day that it seemed to me of no use to see Mary 



Digitized 



by Google 



424 STOJilES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS, 

again, or, indeed, to strive agaifi «fter any aim I had 
had, and that for the first time I wished to die; and 
then it was that there came distinctly, such as it may 
never have come to any other man, the unutterable 
suspicion of the vanity of death. 

From that day until I was able to leave my bed, I 
never in any way alluded to the same terrible subject ; 
but I feared my father's eye as though I had been 
indeed ft madman. It is a wonder that I did not 
really lose my senses. I lived in a continual panic lest 
I should again speak of that matter unconsciously, and 
used to repeat inwardly, for hours together, words 
enjoining myself to silence. Several friends of the 
family, who had made constant inquiries during my 
illness, now wished to see me; but this I strictly 
refused, being in fear that my incubus might get the 
better of me, and that I might suddenly implore them to 
say if they had any recollection of a former existence. 
Even a voice or a whistle from the street would set me 
wondering whether that man also had lived before, and 
if so, why I alone should be cursed with this awful 
knowledge. It was useless even to seek relief in books ; 
for the name of any historical character occurring at onctt 
disturbed my fevered mind with conjectures as to what 
name its possessor now bore, who he was, and in what 
country his lot was cast. 

For another week after that day I was confined to my 
room, and then at last I might go forth. Latterly, I had 
scarcely spoken to any one, but I do not think that either 
my father or my mother imagined I had forgotten. It 
was on a Sunday that I left the house for the first time. 
Some person must have been buried at the neighbouring 
church very early that morning, for I recollect that the 
first thing I heard upon waking was die funeral bell. 
I had had, during the ni^t, but a restless throbbing 
kind of sleep ; and I suppose it was my excited nerves 
which made me wait with a feeling of ominous dread 
through the long pauses of the toiling, unbroken as they 



Digitized 



by Google 



SAINT AGNES OF INTERCESSION. 435 

were by imy sound fh)m the silent Sunday streets, 
except the twitter of birds about the housetops. The 
last knell had long ceased, and I had been lying for some 
time in bitter reverie, when the bells began to ring for 
church. I cannot express the sudden refreshing joy 
which filled me at that moment. I rose from my bed, 
and kneeling down, prayed while the sound lasted. 

On joining my parents at breakfast, I made my mother 
repeat to me once more how many times Mary had 
called during my illness, and all that she had said and 
done. They told me that she would probably be there 
that morning ; but my impatience would not permit me 
to wait ; I must go and seek her myself at once. Often 
already, said my parents, she had wished and begged 
to see me, but they had feared for my strength. This 
was in my thoughts as I left the house; and when, 
shutting the door behind me, I stood once again in the 
living sunshine, it seemed as if her love burst around 
me like music 

I set out hastily in the well-known direction of Mary's 
house. While I walked through the crowded streets, 
the sense of reality grew upon me at every step, and for 
the first time during some months I felt a man among 
men. Any artist or thoughtful man whatsoever, whose 
life has passed in a large city, can scarcely fail, in course 
of time, to have some association connecting each spot 
continually passed and repassed with the labours of his 
own mind. In the woods and fields every place has its 
proper spell and mystery, and needs no consecration 
from thought ; but wherever in the daily walk through 
the thronged and jarring city, the soul has read some 
knowledge from life, or laboured towards some birth 
within its own silence, there abides the glory of that 
hour, and the cloud rests there before an unseen taber- 
nacle. And thus now, with myself, old trains of thought 
and the conceptions of former years came back as I 
passed from one swarming resort to another, and seemed, 
by contrast, to wake my spirit from its wild and fantastic 



Digitized 



by Google 



426 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

broodings to a consciousness of something like actual 
existence ; as the mere reflections of objects, sunk in the 
vague pathless water, appear almost to strengthen it into 
substance. 



Digitized 



by Google 



w 



THE ORCHARD PIT. 

Men tell me that sleep has many dreams; but all my 
life I have dreamt one dream alone. 

I see a glen whose sides slope upward from the deep 
bed of a dried-up stream, and either slope is covered 
vKth wild apple-trees. In the largest tree, within the 
fork whence the limbs divide, a fair, golden-haired 
woman stands and sings, with one white arm stretched 
along a branch of the tree, and with the other holding 
forth a bright red apple, as if to some one coming down 
the slope. Below her feet the trees grow more and 
more tangled, and stretch from both sides across the deep 
pit below : and the pit is full of the bodies of men. 

They lie in heaps beneath the screen of boughs, with 
her apples bitten in their hands; and some are no 
more than ancient bones now, and some seem dead but 
yesterday. She stands over them in the glen, and sings 
for ever, and offers her apple still. 

This dream shows me no strange place. I know the 
glen, and have known it from childhood, and heard many 
tales of those who have died there by the Siren's spell. 

I pass there oflen now, and look at it as one might 
look at a place chosen for one's grave. I see nothing, 
but I know that it means death for me. The apple-trees 
are like others^ and have childish memories connected 
with them, though I was taught to shun the place. 

No man sees the woman but once, and then no other 
is near ; and no man sees that man again. 

One day, in hunting, my dogs tracked the deer to that 
dell, and he fled and crouched under that tree, but the 
dogs would not go near him. And when I approached, 
he looked in my eyes as if to say, ^* Here you shall die. 



Digitized 



by Google 



428 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

and will you here give death ? " And his eyes seemed 
the eyes of my soul, and I called oflf the dogs, who were 
glad to follow me, and we left the deer to fly. 

I know that I must go there and hear the song and 
take the apple. I join with the young knights in their 
games ; and have led our vassals and fought well. But 
all seems to me a dream, except what only I among 
them all shall see. Yet who knows? Is there one 
among them doomed like myself, and who is silent, like 
me ? We shall not meet in the dell, for each man gdes 
there alone: but in the pit we shall meet each other, 
and perhaps know. 

Each man who is the Siren's choice dreams the same 
dream, and always of some familiar spot wherever he 
lives in the world, and it is there that he finds her when 
his time comes. But when he sinks in the pit, it is the 
whole pomp of her dead gathered through the world that 
awaits him there ; for all attend her to grace her triumph. 
Have they any souls out of those bodies ? Or are the 
bodies still the house of the soul, the Siren's prey till die 
day of judgment ? 

We were ten brothers. One is gone there already. 
One day we looked for his return from a border foray, 
and his men came home without him, saying that he had 
told them he went to seek his love who would coine to 
meet him by another road. But anon his love met 
them, asking for him; and they sought him vainly all 
that day. But in the night his love rose fVom a dream ; 
and she went to the edge of the Siren's dell, and there 
lay his helmet and his sword. And her they sought in 
the morning, and thei^e she lay dead. None has ever 
told this thing to my love, my sweet love who is affianced 
to me. 

One day at table my love oflfered me an apple. Ahd 
as 1 took it she laughed, and said, " Do not eat, it is the 
fruit of the Siren's dell." And I laughed and ate : and 
at the heart of the apple was a red stain like a woman's 
mouth ; and as I bit it I could feel a kiss upoh my lips. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THB ORCHARD PIT. 4291 

The same evening I inal^ed with my love by that 
place, and she would needs have me sit with her under 
the apple- tree in which the Siren is said to stand. Then 
she stood in the hollow fork of the tree, and plucked an 
apple, and stretched it to me and would have sung : but 
at that moment ^e cried out, and leaped from the tree 
into my arms, and said that the leaves were whispering 
other words to her, and my name among them. She 
threw the apple to the bottom of the dell, and fol- 
lowed it with her eyes, to see how far it would fall, till 
it was hidden by the tangled boughs. And as we still 
looked, a little snake crept up through them. 

She would needs go with me afterwards to pray in the 
church, where my ancestors and hers are buried ; and 
she looked round on the efifigies, and said, '' How long 
will it be before we lie here carved together ? " And I 
thought I heard the wind in the apple trees that seemed 
to whisper, ** How long ? " 

And late that nighty when all were asleep, I went back 
to the dell, and said in my turn, *' How long ? " And 
for a moment I seemed to see a hand and apple stretched 
firom the middle of the tree where my love had stood. 
And then it was gone : and 1 plucked the apples and bit 
them, and cast them in the pit, and said, '^ Come." 

I speak of my love, and she loves me well ; but I love 
her only as the stone whirling down the rapids loves 
the dead leaf that travels with it and clings to it, and 
that the same eddy will swallow up. 

Last night, at last, I dreamed how the end will come, 
and now I know it is near. I not only saw, in sleep, the 
li&long pageant of the glen, but I took my part in it at 
last, and learned for certain why that dream was mine. 

I seemed to be walking with my love among the hills 
that lead downward to the glen : and still she said, '' It 
is late ; " but the wind was glenwards, and said, " Hither.'' 
And still she said, " Home grows fiu* ; " but the rooks 
flew glenwards, and said, '^ Hither." And still she said, 
''Come back;" but the sun had set, and the moon 



Digitized 



by Google 



430 STORIES, AND SCMMJIfES OF POEMS. 

laboured towards the glen, and said, ''Hither." And 
my heart said in me, " Aye, thither at last" Then we 
stood on the margin of the slope, with the apple-trees 
beneath us ; and the moon bade the clouds fall from her, 
and sat in her throne like the sun at noon-day : and 
none of the apple-trees were bare now, though autumn 
was far worn, but fruit and blossom covered them 
together. And they were too thick to see through 
clearly ; but looking far down I saw a white hand holding 
forth an apple, and heard the first notes of the Siren's 
song. Then my love clung to me and wept; but I 
began to struggle down the slope through the thick wall 
of bough and fruit and blossom, scattering them as the 
storm scatters the dead leaves ; for that one apple only 
would my heart have. And my love snatched at me as 
I went ; but the branches I thrust away sprang back on 
my path, and tore her hands and &ce : and the last 
I knew of her was the lifUng of her hands to heaven as 
she cried aloud above me, while I still forced my way 
downwards. And now the Siren's song rose clearer as 
I went. At first she sang, " G>me to Love ; " and of the 
sweetness of Love she said many things. And next she 
sang, " Come to Life ; " and Life was sweet in her song. 
But long before I reached her, she knew that all her will 
was mine : and then her voice rose softer than ever, 
and her words were, " Come to Death ; " and Death's 
name in her mouth was the very swoon of all sweetest 
things that be. And then my path cleared; and she 
stood over against me in the fork of the tree I knew so 
well, blazing now like a lamp beneath the moon. And 
one kiss I had of her mouth, as I took the apple from 
her hand. But while I bit it, my brain whirled and my 
foot stumbled ; and I felt my crashing fall through the 
tangled boughs beneath her feet, and saw the dead white 
faces that welcomed me in the pit And so I woke cold 
in my bed : but it still seemed that I lay indeed at last 
among those who shall be my mates for ever, and could 
feel the apple still in my hand. 



Digitized 



by Google 



43« 



THE DOOM OF THE SIRENS. 

a lyrical tragedy. 

Act L— Scene l 

Hermitage near the Sirens' Rock. A Christianized 
Prince, flying from persecution in the latter days of 
the Roman Empire, is driven that way by stress of 
weather (having with him his wife and infiant child), 
and succeeds in taking refuge in the Hermitage. The 
Hermit relates to him the legend of the Sirens, and how 
they are among the Pagan powers not yet subdued but 
still acting as demons against die human race. The 
spell upon them is that their power cannot be destroyed 
until one of them shall yield to human love and become 
enamoured of some one among her intended victims. 
The Hermit has, therefore, established himself hard by 
to pray for travellers in danger, and, if possible, to warn 
them ofiF in time, and he implores the Prince to pursue 
his voyage by some other course. The Prince, however, 
says that he shall not be able to do so, and trusts in 
Heaven and in his love for his wife to guard him against 
danger. He dwells on his being a Christian, and there- 
fore beyond the power of Pagan demons, who had as yet 
destroyed only those unprotected by true faith. The 
storm having subsided (this scene occurs the morning 
after he had taken refuge), the Prince and his family re- 
embark, leaving the Hermit praying for their safety. 
Scene 2. 
The ship arrives at the Sirens' Rock, amid tiie songs 
of the three Sirens, Thelziope, Thebunoe, and Ligeia. 
The first offers wealtii, the second greatness and tnimiph 
over his enemies, the third (Ligeia) offers her love. 
Here a chorus in which the three contend and the wife 



Digitized 



by Google 



432 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

strives against them. The Prince gradually, in spite of 
his eflforts, succumbs to Ligeia and climbs the rock, his 
wife following him. Here the choral contention is con- 
tinued^ the Prince clinging to Ligeia, rapt by her spells 
into the beUef that it is the time of his first love and that 
he is surrounded by the scenes of that time. At last he 
dies in her arms, as she sings, under her poisonous breath, 
calling her as he dies by his wife's name, and shrinking 
from his wife without recognition. The Queen makes a 
prayer begging God to make him know her. During 
this he dies, and Ligeia then says, 

" He knows us now ; woman, take back your dead 1 * 

The Queen pronounces a despairing curse against Ligeia, 
praying that she may yet love and be hated and so 
destroy herself and her sisters. The Queen then flings 
herself in madness from the rock into the sea. 

SCENB 3, 

The Hermit puts out in a boat to where the Prince's 
ship is still. lying, and takes the infant to his Hermitage^ 
He soliloquizes over him, saying how, if the faith prevails 
in his father's kingdom, he will take him in due time to 
occupy the throne, but how otherwise the youth ^all 
stay with himself to serve him as an acolyte, and so 
escape the storms of human passion more baneful than 
those of the sea. 

Twenty-one years elapse between Acts L and IL 

Act IL — Scene i. 

At the court of the Byzantine Prince. The courtiers 
are conversing about the approaching marriage of the 
young Prince, now come to the throne. One of them 
relates particulars respecting his bdng brought there as 
a boy by the Hermit, who revealed the secret of his 
Other's and mother's death only to a trustee) counsellor, 
the father of the girl he is now about to marry. Th^ 
alio refer to tlie trouble o/ tii^ time when the fprmer 



Digitized 



by Google 



TEE DOOM OP THE SIRENS, 433 

Prince had to fly from his kingdom on accoimt of his 
faith, and recall to each other the progress of events 
since, and the establishment of Christianity in the 
country, afler which the young Prince was brought back 
by the Hermit, and seated on his father's throne. Allu- 
sions are made to various omens and portents appearing 
to bear on the inysterious death of the Prince's father 
and mother, and on the vengeance still to be taken 
for it 

Scene 2. 

A grove, formerly sacred to an Oracle. The Prince 
and his betrothed meet here and speak of their love and 
approaching nuptials, which are to take place the next 
day. They are both, however, troubled by dreams they 
have had and which they relate to each other at length. 
These bear fantastically on the* death of the Prince's 
parents, but without clearly revealing anything, though 
seeming to prognosticate misfortunes still unaccomplished, 
and a fatal issue to their love. The Prince connecte 
these things with the events of his early boyhood, which 
he dimly remembers in the hermitage by the Sirens'. 
Rock, before the Hermit brought him to his kingdoiji; 
and he confesses to his betrothed the gloomy uncertainty 
with which his mind is clouded. However, they try to 
foi-get all forebodings and dwell on the happiness in store 
for them. They sing to each other and together, but 
their songs seem to find an ominous burden in the echoes 
of the sacred grove, and they part at last, saddened in 
spite of themselves. The Prince goes, leaving the lady, 
who says that she will stay there till her maidens join 
her. Being left alone, she suddenly hears a voice calliqg 
her, and finds that it comes from the Oracle of the grove, 
whose shrine is forgotten and almost oveigrown. She 
forces the tangled growth aside and enters the precincts. 

SCEMB 3* 

The Shrine of the Oracle. Here the Oracle speaks to 
her; at first in dark sentences^ but at length more 

28 



Digitized 



by Google 



434 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

explicitly, as to a great task awaiting her lover, without 
accomplishing which he must not hope for love or peace. 
It speaks of the evil powers which caused his parents' 
death, and are doomed themselves to annihilation by the 
just vengeance transmitted to him. It then tells her 
clearly how it is the heavenly will that the Prince shall 
only wed if he survives the vengeance due for his parents' 
death, but that he had been chosen now to fulfil the doom 
of the Sirens, and must at once accomplish his mission. 
Finally the Oracle announces that its function has been 
so far renewed for the last time that it may be com[>elled 
to denounce its fellow powers of Paganism; but that 
now its voice is silent for ever. At the end of this 
scene the Bride's maidens come to meet her, and find 
her bewildered and in tears, but cannot learn the cause 
from her. 

Scene 4. 
The Bridal Chamber on the morning afler the nuptials. 
The scene opens with a reveilU'e sung outside. The 
Prince and Princess are together, and he is speaking 
to her of his love and their, future happiness ; but after 
a time, in the midst of their endearments, he begins to 
perceive that she is disturbed and anxious, and presses 
her to tell him the cause. She at last informs him with 
tears of her conference with the Oracle on their last 
meeting in the grove. This (as she tells him) she had 
not the courage to reveal to him before their wedding, 
as, if obeyed, it must tear him from her arms, perhaps 
never to return ; and she had then resolved to suppress 
the terrible secret at any risk to herself; but on the 
bridal night, while she lay in his arms, the Hermit, now 
a saint in heaven, had appeared to her in a dream, with 
a wrathful aspect He had told her how by his means 
the Prince had been preserved in infancy; had reproached 
her with her silence as to the charge she had received ; 
and had told her that if she did not now make known to 
her husband the will of Heaven, some fatal mischance 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE DOOM OF THE SIRENS. 435 

would soon separate them for ever. All this she now 
tells him with many tears and with bitter upbraidings of 
the cruel fate which compelled her to avoid the certain 
wrath threatened to him by sending him on a mission 
of such terrible uncertainty. Before telling all this she 
had consented to speak only on his promising to grant 
the first favour she should afterwards ask for herself; 
and she now tells him that this favour is the permission 
to accompany him on his voyage. He endeavours in 
vain to dissuade her from this, and at last consents to it 

Act III. — Scene i. 

The hermitage near the Sirens' Rock, as in Act I. 
Arrival of the Prince, accompanied by his Bride, who is 
prevailed on by him to remain in prayer at the hermitage 
while he pursues his journey to the rock. Before they 
part, a paper is found written, by which they learn that 
the Hermit had died there a year and a day before, and 
that he named the day of their present arrival as the 
one on which his hermitage woiild again be tenanted, 
and yet on which its appointed use would cease. 
Scene 2, 

The Sirens' Rock. The Sirens have been warned by 
the evil powers to whom they are tributary that this 
day is a signal one for them. They are imcertain 
whether for good or ill, but are possessed by a spirit 
of baneful exultation, and in their songs alternate from 
one to the other wild tales of their triumphs in past 
times and the renowned victims who have succumbed to 
them. As they reach the name of the Christian Prince 
and his wife who died by their means, a vessel comes in 
view, but almost before their songs have been directed 
towards it, they are surprised to see it make straight for 
the rock, and the occupant resolutely disembark and 
commence the ascent. As he nears them, they exchange 
scornful prophecies of his ruin between the pauses of 
their song ; but gradually Ligeia, who has at first begged 
him of her sisters as her special prey, finds herself 



Digitized 



by Google 



436 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS 

strangely overpowered by emotions she does not under- 
stand, and by the time he reaches the summit of the 
rock and stands before them, she is alternately beseech- 
ing him for his love and her sisters for his life. A long 
chorus here occurs : Ligeia yielding to the agony of her 
passion, while the Prince repulses and reviles her, and 
the other Sirens wail and curse, warning her of the im- 
pending doom. The Prince tells Ligeia of his parentage 
and mission, but she still madly craves for his love, and 
holds forth to him such promises of infernal soveraignty 
as her gods a£ford, if he will yield to her passion. He, 
meanwhile, though proof against her lures and loathing 
her in his heart, is physically absorbed into the death- 
agony of the expiring spell ; and when, at his last word 
of reprobation, the curse seizes her and her sisters, and 
they dash themselves headlong from the rock, he also 
succumbs to the doom, calling with his last breath on his 
Bride to come to him. Throughout the scene the prayers 
of the Bride are fitfully wafted from the hermitage 
between the pauses of the Sirens' songs and the deadly 
chorus of love and hate. 

Scene 3. 
"Within the hermitage, the Bride still pra3ring. TTie 
scene to commence with a few lines of prayer, after 
which the Spirit of the Prince appears, calling the Bride 
to come to him, in the same words with which the last 
scene ended. She then discourses to him, saying many 
things in gradually increasing ecstasy of love, he all the 
time speaking to her at intervals, only the same words 
as before. She ends by answering him in his own 
words, calling him to come to her, and so dies. 

In case of representation — ^supp>osing the hermitage 
and rock to be visible on the stage at the same time — 
the conclusion might be that at the mom^it of the Prince's 
death, when he calls to his Bride, she breaks off her 
prayers; answering him in the same words, and dies. 
Scene 3 would thus be dispensed with. 



Digitizfed 



by Google 



43r 



THE CUP OF WATER. 

Yhe young King of a conntiy is hunting on a day with a 
young Knight, his friend ; when, feeling thirsty, he stops 
at a Forester's cottage, and the Forester's daughter brings 
him a cup of water to drink. Both of them are equally 
enamoured at once of her unequalled beauty. The 
King, however, has been affianced from boyhood to a 
Princess, worthy of aU love, and whom he has always 
believed he loved until undeceived by his new absorbing 
passion ; but the Knight, resolved to sacrifice all other 
considerations to his love, goes again to the Forester's 
cottage and asks his daughter's hand. He finds that the 
girl has fixed her thoughts on the King, whose rank she 
does not know. On hearing it she tells her suitor 
humbly that she must die if such be her fate, but cannot 
love another. The Knight goes to the King to tell him 
all and beg his help; and the two friends then come 
to an explanation. Ultimately the King goes to the girl 
and pleads his friend's cause, not disguising his own 
passion, but sa3ring that as he sacrifices himself to honour, 
so should she, at his prayer, accept a noble man whom 
he loves better than all men and whom she will love too. 
This she does at last; and the King makes his friend an 
Earl and gives him a grant of the forest and surround- 
ing country as a marriage gifl, with the annexed condition, 
that the Earl's wife shall bring the King a cup of water 
at the same spot on every anniversary of their first 
meeting when he rides a-hunting with her husband. At 
no other time will he see her, loving her too much. He 
weds the Princess, and thus two years pass, the condition 
being always fulfilled. But before the thinl anniversary 



Digitized 



by Google 



438 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS. 

the lady dies in childbirth, leaving a daughter. The 
King's life wears on, and still he and his friend pursue 
their practice of hunting on that day, for sixteen years. 
When the anniversary comes round for the sixteenth 
time since the lady's death, the Earl tells his daughter, 
who has grown to her mother's perfect likeness (but 
whom the King has never seen), to meet them on the 
old spot with the cup of water, as her mother first did 
when of the same age. The King, on seeing her, is 
deeply moved ; but on her being presented to him by 
the Earl, he is about to take the cup from her hand, when 
he is aware of a second figure in her exact likeness, but 
dressed in peasant's clothes, who steps to her side as he 
bends from his horse to ti^e the cup, looks in his face 
with solemn words of love and welcome, and kisses him 
on the mouth. He falls forward on his horse's neck, and 
is lifted up dead. 



Digitized 



by Google 



439 



MICHAEL SCOTT'S WOOING. 

HiCHASL Scott and a friend, both young and dissolute, 
are returning from a carouse, by moonlight, along a wild 
sea-coast during a groundswell. As they come within 
view of a small house on the rocky shore, his companion 
taimts Michael Scott as to his known passion for the 
maiden Janet who dwells there with her father, and as 
to the failure of the snares he has laid for her. Scott is 
goaded to great irritation, and as they near the p>oint of 
the sands overlooked by the cottage, he turns round on 
his friend and declares that the maiden shall come out to 
turn then and there at his summons. The friend still 
taimts and banters him, sa3ring that wine has heated his 
brain ; but Scott stands quite still, muttering, and regard- 
ing the cottage with a gesture of command. After he 
has done so for some time, the door opens softly, and Janet 
comes running down the rock. As she approaches, she 
nearly rushes into Michael Scotfs arms, but instead, 
swerves aside, runs swiftly by him, and plunges into the 
surging waves. With a shriek Michael plunges after 
her, and strikes out this side and that, and lashes his 
way among the billows, between the rising and sinking 
breakers ; but all in vain, no sign appears of her. After 
some time spent in this way he returns almost exhausted 
to the sands, and passing without answer by his appalled 
and questioning friend, he climbs the rock to the door 
of the cottage, which is now closed. Janet's father 
answers his loud knocking, and to him he says, '' Slay 
me, for your daughter has drowned herself this hour in 
yonder sea, and by my means." The father at first 
suspects some stratagem, but finally deems him mad, 
and says, "You rave, — my daughter is at rest in her 



Digitized 



by Google 



440 STORIES, AND SCHEMES OF POEMS 

bed" ''Go seek her there," answers Michael Scott 
The father goes up to his daughter's chamber, and re- 
turning very pale, signs to Michael to follow him. 
Together they climb the stair, and find Janet half lying 
and half kneeling, turned violently round, as if, in the 
act of rising from her bed, she had again thrown herself 
backward and clasped the feet of a crucifix at her bed- 
head ; so she lies diead. Michael Scott rushes from the 
house, and returning maddened to die seashore, is with 
difiiculty restrained from suicide by his friend. At last 
he stands like stone for a while, and then, as if repeatii^ 
an inner whisper, he describes the maiden's last struggle 
with her heart He says how she loved him but would 
not sin ; how hearing in her sleep his appeal from the 
shore she almost 3delded, and the embodied image of 
her longing came rushing out to him ; but how in the 
last instant she turned back for refuge to Christ, and her 
soul was wrung from her by the struggle of her heart 
"And as I speak," he says, "the fiend who whispers 
this concerning her says also in my ear how surely I 
am lost" 



Digitized 



by Google 



441 



THE PALIMPSEST. 

(subject for tale or humorous poem.) 

The jeaiousdes of two rival Scholars, a classical and a 
theological one, respecting a palimpsest The classical 
one takes years to decipher hi^ Pagan author, while the 
Theologian considers the only value of the scroll to con- 
sist in the Early Father on the surface, whom he is to 
edit in> due course. The Theologian is in bad health, and 
expects to die before the Classic has finished. This drives 
him to desperation, and impels him at last to murder his 
rival ; who in dying, shows him in triumph the scroll, 
from which the Early Father has been completely erased 
by addsi leaving a fair MS. of the Pagan poet 



Digitized 



by Google 



442 



THE PHILTRE. 

A woBCAN, intensely enamoured of a man who does not 
love her, makes use of a philtre to secure his love. In 
this she succeeds; but it also acts gradually upon his 
life. She attempts to avert this by destroying the whole 
effect of the philtre, but finds this is not permitted her ; 
and he dies in her arms, deeply loving her and deeply 
loved by her, while she is conscious of being the cause 
of his death. As he yields his last breath in a kiss, she 
knows that his spirit now hates her. 



Digitized 



by Google 



443 



II.^LITERARY PAPERS. 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 

Blake felt his way in drawing, notwithstanding his 
love of a ''bold determinate outline," and did not get 
this at once. Copyists and plagiarists do that, but not 
original artists, as it is common to suppose : they find 
a difficulty in developing the first idea. Blake drew 
a rough, dotted line with pencil, then with ink; then 
colour, filling in cautiously, carefully. At the same time 
he attached very great importance to "first lines," and 
was wont to affirm — ^" First thoughts are best in art, 
second thoughts in other matters." 

He held that nature should be learned by heart, and 
remembered by the painter, as the poet remembers 
language. " To learn the language of art, Copy for ever 
is my rule," said he. But he never painted his pictures 
from models, "Models are difficult— enslave one — 
efi&ce from one's mind a conception or reminiscence 
which was better." This last axiom is open to much 
more discussion than can be given it here. From 
Fuseli, that often rep)orted declaration of his, "Nature 
puts me out," seems but another expression of the 
same wilful arrogance and want of delicate shades, 
whether of character or style, which we find in that 
painter's works. Nevertheless a sentence should here 
be spared to say that England would do well to preserve 
some remnant of Fuseli's work before it is irremediably 
obliterated. His oil pictures are, for the most part, 



Digitized 



by Google 



444 UTERAJtY PAPERS. 

monstrously overloaded in bulk as in style, and not less 
overloaded in mere slimy pigment But his sketches in 
water-wash and pencil or pen-and-ink should yet be 
formed, ere too late, into a precious national collection, 
including as they do many specimens than which not 
the greatest Italian masters could show greater proofs of 
mastery. 

Blake's natural tendencies were, in many respects, far 
dififerent from Fuseli's ; and it is deeply to be r^retted 
that an antagonism, which became more and more 
personal as well as artistic, to the petty practice of the 
art of his day, — joined no doubt to inevitable sympathy 
with this very Fuseli, fighting in great measure^ the same 
battle with himself for the high against the low,^ — should 
have led to Blake's adopting and unreservedly following 
the dogma above given as regards the living modeL 
Poverty, and consequent difficulty of models at com- 
mand, must have had something to do with it too. The 
truth on this point is, that no imaginative artist can fully^ 
express his own tone of mind without sometimes in his 
life working untrammelled by present reference to 
nature ; and, indeed, that the first conception of every 
serious woik must be wrought into something like 
complete form, as a preparatory design, without such 
aid, before having recourse to it in the carrying-out of 
the work. But it is equally or still more imperative 
that immediate study of nature should pervade the whole 
completed work. Tenderness, the constant unison of 
wonder and familiarity so mysteriously allied in nature, 
the sense of fulness and abundance such as we feel in 
a field, not because we pry into it all, but because it is 
all there : these are the inestimable prizes to be secured 
only by such study in the painter's every picture. And 
all this Blake, as thoroughly as any painter, was gifted 
to have attained, as we may see especially in his works 
of that smallest size where memory and genius may 
really almost stand in lieu of immediate consultation of 
nature. But the larger his works are^ the further he 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILUAM BLAKE. 445 

departs from this lovely impression of natural truth ; and 
when we read the above maxim, we know why. How- 
ever, the principle was not one about which he had no 
misgiving, for very fluctuating if not quite conflicting 
opinions on this point might be quoted from bis writings. 
No special consideration has yet been entered on here 
of Blake's claim as a colourist, but it is desirable that 
this should be done now in winding up the subject, both 
because his place in this respect among painters is very 
peculiar, and also on account of the many misleading 
things he wrote regarding colour, carried away at the 
moment, after his fiery fashion, by the predominance he 
wished to give to other qualities in some aigument in 
hand. Another reason why his characteristics in this 
respect need to be dwelt upon is that certainly his most 
original and prismatic system of colour, — in which tints 
laid on side by side, each in its utmost force, are made 
by masterly treatment to produce a startling and novel 
efiect of truth, — ^must be viewed as being, more decid- 
edly than the system of any other painter, the fore- 
runner of a style of execution now characterizing a whole 
new section of the English School, and making itself 
admitted as actually involving some positive additions to 
the resources of the art Some of the out«door pictures 
of this class, studied as they are with a closeness of 
imitation perhaps unprecedented, have nevertheless no 
slight essential afi&nity to Blake's way of representing 
natural scenes, though the smallness of scale in these 
latter, and the spiritual quality which alwa3rs mingles 
with their truth to nature, may render the parallel less 
apparent than it otherwise would be. In Blake's colour- 
ing of landscape, a subtle and exquisite reality forms 
quite as strong an element as does ideal grandeur; 
whether we find him dealing with the pastoral sweetness 
of drinking cattle at a stream, their hides and fleeces all 
glorified by sunset with magic rainbow hues ; or reveal- 
ing to us, in a flash of creative genius, some parted sky 
and beaten sea full of portentous expectation. One 



Digitized 



by Google 



446 UTERARY PAPERS. 

unfailing sign of his true brotherhood with all the great 
colourists is the lovingly wrought and realistic flesh- 
painting which is constantly to be met with in the midst 
of his most extraordinary effects. For pure realism, too, 
though secured in a few touches as only greatness can, 
let us turn to the dingy London street, all snow-clad and 
smoke-spotted, through which the litde black Chimney- 
sweeper wends his way in the Songs of Experience, 
Certainly an unaccoimtable j)erversity of colour may 
now and then be apparent, as where in the same series, 
the tiger is painted in fantastic streaks of red, green, 
blue, and yellow, while a tree stem at his side tanta- 
lizingly supplies the tint which one might venture to 
think his due, and is perfect tiger-colour! I am sure 
however that such vagaries, curious enough no doubt, 
are not common with Blake, as the above is the only 
striking instance I can recall in his published work. 
But, [>erhaps, a few occasional bewilderments may be 
allowed to a system of colour which is often suddenly 
called uppn to help in embodying such conceptions as 
painter never before dreamed of: some old skeleton 
folded together in the dark bowels of earth or rock, dis- 
coloured with metallic stain and vegetable mould ; some 
symbolic human birth of crowned flowers at dawn, amid 
rosy light and the joyful opening of all things. Even 
a presentment of the most abstract truths of natural 
science is not only attempted by this new painter, but 
actually effected by legitimate pictorial ways; and we 
are somehow shown, in figurative yet not wholly unreal 
shapes and hues, the mingling of organic substances, 
the gradual development and perpetual transftision of 
life. 

The reader who wishes to study Blake as a colourist 
has a means of doing so, thorough in kind though limited 
in extent, by going to the Print Room at the British 
Museum (which is accessible to any one who takes the 
proper course to gain admission), and there examining 
certain of Blake's hand-coloured prints, bound in 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 447 

volumes. All those in the collection are not equally 
valuable, since the various copies of Blake's own colour- 
ing differ extremely in finish and richness. The Museum 
copy of the Songs of Innocence and Experience is rather a 
poor one, though it will serve to judge of the book ; and 
some others of his works are there represented by copies 
which, I feel convinced, are not coloured by Blake's hand 
at all, but got up more or less in his manner, and brought 
into die market after his death. But two volumes here — 
the Song of Los, and especially the smaller of the two 
collections of odd plates from his different works, which 
is labelled Designs iy W. Blake, and numbered inside 
the fly-leaf 5240 — afford specimens of his colouring, 
perhaps equal to any that could be seen. 

The tinting in the Song of Los is not, throughout, of 
one order of value; but no finer example of Blake's 
power in rendering poetic effects of landscape could be 
found than that almost miraculous expression of the 
glow and freedom of air in dosing sunset, in a plate 
where a youth and maiden, lightly embraced, are racing 
along a saddened low-lit hill, against an open sky of 
blazing and changing wonder. But in the volume of 
collected designs I have specified, almost every plate (or 
more properly water-colour drawing, as the printed 
groundwork in such specimens is completely overlaid) 
shows Blake's colour to advantage, and some in its very 
fullest force. See^ for instance, in plate 8» the deep, 
unfathomable, green sea churning a broken foam as 
white as milk against that sky which is all blue and gold 
and blood-veined heart of fire; while from sea to sky 
one locked and motionless face gazes, as it might seem, 
for ever. Or, in plate 9, the fair tongues and threads of 
liquid flame deepening to the redness of blood, lapping 
round the flesh-tints of a human figure which bathes 
and swims in the furnace. Or plate 12, which, like the 
other two, really embodies some of the wild ideas in 
Ufisenf but might seem to be Aurora guiding the new- 
bom day, as a child, through a soft-coniplexioned sky of 



Digitized 



by Google 



448 WmRARY PAP£XS. 

fleeting rose and tingling grey, such as only dawn and 
dreams can show us. Or, for pure delightfulness, intri- 
cate colour, and a kind of Shakespearean sympathy wi& 
all forms of life and growth, as in the Midsummer N^fki's 
Dream, let the gazer, having this precious book once in 
his hands, Unger long over plates lo, i6, 28, and 23. If 
they be for him, he will be joyful more and more the 
longer he looks, and will gain back in that time some 
things as he first knew them, not encumbered bdiind 
the days of his life ; things too delicate £ot memoiy or 
years since foigotten ; the momentary sense of spring in 
winter-sunshine, the long sunsets long ago, and DaUing 
fires on many distant hills. 

The inequality in value, to which J have alluded, 
between various copies of the same design as coloured 
by Blake, may be tested by comparing the bo<^ con- 
taining the plates alluded to above, with the copies of 
Urizen and the Book of Thel, also in Hie Print Room, 
some of whose contents are the same as in this collected 
volume. The immense difierence dependent on ^;reater 
finish in the book I have described, and indeed some- 
times involving the introduction of entirely new features 
into the design, will thus be at once apparent. In these 
highly-brought specimens, the colour has a half floating 
and half granulated character which is most curious and 
puzzling, aeeming dependent on the use of some peculiar 
means, either in vehicle, or by some kind of pressure or 
stamping which had the result of blending the trans- 
parent and body tints in a manner not easily described. 
The actual printing from the plate bearing the design 
was as I have said, and feel convinced, confined to the 
first impression in monochrome. But this perpleadng 
quality of execution reaches its climax in some of 
Blake's '^ oil-colour printed" and hand-finished designs, 
such as several large ones now in the possession <^ 
Captain Butts, the grandson of Blake's fiiend and patron. 
One of these, the Newton, consists in a great part of 
rock covered with fossil substance or lichen of some 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILUAM BLAKE. 449 

kind, the treatment of which is as endlessly varied and 
intricate as a photc^raph from a piece of seaweed would 
be. It cannot possibly be all handwork, and yet I can 
conceive no mechanical process, short of photography, 
which is really capable of explaining it It is no less 
than a complete mystery, well worthy of any amount of 
inquiry, if a clue could only be found from which to 
commence. In nearly all Blake's works of this solidly 
painted kind, it is greatly to be lamented that the 
harmony of tints is continusdly impaired by the blacken- 
ing of the bad white pigment, and perhaps red lead also, 
which has been used, — an injury which must probably 
go still further in course of time. 

Of the process by which the designs last alluded to 
were produced, the following explanation has been fur- 
nished by Mr. Tatham. It is interesting, and I have no 
doubt correct as regards the groundwork, but certainly 
it quite falls short of accounting for the perplexing 
intricacy of such portions as the rock-background of the 
Newton, *^ Blake, when he wanted to make his prints 
in oil " (writes my informant), " took a common thick 
millboard, and drew, in some strong ink or colour, his 
design upon it strong and thick; He then painted upon 
that in such oil colours and in such a state of fusion that 
they would blur well. He painted roughly and quickly, 
so that no colour would have time to dry. He then 
took a print of that on paper, and this impression he 
coloured up in water-colours, repainting his outline on 
the millboard when he wanted to take another print 
This plan he had recourse to, because he could vary 
slightly each impression; and each having a sort of 
accidental look, he could branch out so as to make each 
one different The accidental look they had was very 
enticing." Objections might be raised to this account 
as to the apparent impracticability of painting in water- 
colours over oil ; but I do not believe it would be found 
so, if the oil colour were merely stamped as described, 
and left to dry thoroughly into the paper. 

29 



Digitized 



by Google 



450 LITERARY PAPEBS. 

In concluding a biography which has for its subject 
a life so prone to new paths as was that of William 
Blake, it may be well to allude, however briefly, to those 
succeeding British artists who have shown unmistakably 
something of his influence in their works. Foremost 
among these comes a very great though as yet imper- 
fectly acknowledged name, — that of David Scott of Edin- 
burgh, a man whom Blake himself would have delighted 
to honour, and to whose high appreciation of Blake the 
motto on the title-page of the present book bears witness. 
Another proof«of this is to be found in a MS. note in a 
copy of Thi Grave which belonged to Scott ; which note 
I shaU here transcribe. I may premise that the apparent 
preference given to Thi Gravi over Blake's other works 
seems to me almost to argue in the writer an imperfect 
acquaintance with the/o^. 

** These, of any series of designs which art has pro- 
duced" (writes the Scottish painter), '*are the most 
purely elevated in their relation and sentiment It 
would be long to discriminate the position tiiey hold in 
this respect, and at the same time the disregard in 
whidi they may be held by some who judge of them in 
a material relation ; while the great beauty which they 
possess will at once be apparent to others who can 
appreciate their style in its immaterial connection. But 
the sum of the whole in my mind is this : that these 
designs reach the intellectual or infinite, in an abstract 
significance, more entirely immixed with inferior ele- 
ments and local conventions than any others ; that they 
are the result of high intelligence^ of thought, and df 
a progress of art through many styles and stages of 
different times, produced through a bright generalizing 
and transcendental mind. 

''The errors or defects of Blake's mere science in 
form, and his proneness to overdo some of its best fea- 
tures into weakness, are less perceptible in these than 
in others of his works. What was a disappointment to 
him was a benefit to the work, — that it was etched by 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 451 

another, who was able to render it in a style dxoroughly 
consistent, (but which Blake has the originality of having 
pointed out, in his series from Young, thou^ he did not 
properly effect it,) and to pass over those solecisms 
which would have interrupted its impression, in a way 
that, to the apprehender of these, need scarcely give 
c^nce, and hides them from the discovery of others. 
They are etched with most appropriate and consummate 
ability." Dawd ScoU^ 1844. 

In the list of subscribers appended to Blake's Grave, 
we find the name of " Mr. Robert Scott, Edinburgh." 
This was the engraver, father of David Scott, to whom, 
therefore^ this book (published in 1808, one year after 
his birth) must have conle as an early association and 
influence. That such was the case is often traceable in 
his works, varied as they are in their grand range of 
subject, and even treatment And it is singular that the 
clear perception of Blake's weak side, cedent in the 
second paragraph of the note, did not save its writer 
from falHng into defects exactly similar in that peculiar 
dass of his works in which he most resembles Blake. 
It must be noticed, however,, that these are chiefly among 
his earlier productions (such as the Monograms 0/ 
Man, the picture of Discord^ etc), or else among the 
sketches left imperfect; while the note dates only five 
years before his untimely death at the age of fcuty- 
two. This is not a place where any attempt can be 
made at estimating the true position of David Scott 
Such a task will need, and some day doubtless find, 
ample limit and opportunity. It is fortunate that an 
unusually full and excellent biographical record of him 
already exists in die Memoir from the hand of a brother 
no less allied to him by mental and artistic powers than 
by ties of blood ; but what is needed is that his works 
should be collected and competently placed before the 
world. An opportunity in this direction was afforded 
by the International Exhibition of 1862; but the two 
noble works of his which were there were so unpardon- 



Digitized 



by Google 



459 LITER AR Y PAPERS. 

ably ill-placed (and that where so much was well seen 
whidi was not worth the seeing) that the chance was 
completely missed. David Scott will one day be ac- 
knowledged as the painter most nearly fiil£[lling the 
highest requirements for historic art, both as a thhiker 
and a colourist (in spite of the great claims in many 
respects of Etty and Maclise), who had come among us 
from the time of Hogarth to his own. In saying this it 
is necessary to add distinctly (for the sake of objectors 
who have raised, or may raise, their voices), that it is 
not only or even chiefly on his intellectuaJ eminence 
that the statement is based, but also on the great qualities 
of colour and powers of solid execution displayed in his 
finest works, which are to be found among those deriving 
their subjects from history. 

Another painter, ranking far below David Scott, but 
still not to be forgotten where British poetic art is the 
theme, was Theodore von Hoist, an Englishman, though 
of German extraction ; in many of whose most charac- 
teristic works the influence of Blake, as well as of 
Fuseli, has probably been felt But Hoist was far from 
possessing anything like the depth of thought or high 
aims which distinguished Blake. At the same time, his 
native sense of beauty and colour in the more ideal 
walks of art was originally beyond that of any among 
his contemporaries, except Etty and Scott He may be 
best described, perhaps, to the many who do not know 
his works, as being, in some sort, the Edgar Poe of 
painting; but lacking, probably, even the continuity of 
closely studied work in the midst of irregularities which 
distinguished the weird American poet, and has enabled 
him to leave behind some things which cannot be soon 
forgotten. Hoist, on the contrary, it is to be feared, has 
hardly transmitted such complete record of his naturally 
great gifts as can secure their rescue from oblivion. It 
would be very desirable that an account of him and his 
works should be written by some one best able to do so 
among^ose still living who must have known him. 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 453 

It is a tribute due to an artist who, however imperfect 
his self-expression during a short and fitful career, forms 
certainly one of the few connecting links between the 
early and sound period of English colour and method in 
painting, and that revival of which so many signs have, 
in late years, been apparent At present, much of what 
he did is doubtless in danger of being lost altogether. 
Specimens from his hand existed in the late Northwick 
collection^ now dispersed ; and some years since I saw 
a most beautiful work by him — ^a female head or half 
figure — among the pictures at Stafibrd House. But 
Hoist's sketches and designs on paper (a legion past 
numbering) were, for the most part, more expressive of 
his full powers than his pictures, which were too often 
merely sketches enlarged without reference to nature. 
Of these, a very extensive collection was possessed by 
the late Serjeant Ralph Thomas. What has become of 
them ? Amongst Hoist's pictures, the best are nearly 
always those partaking of the fantastic or supernatural, 
which, however dubious a ground to take in art, was the 
true bent of his genius. A notable instance of his com- 
parative weakness in subjects of pure dignity may be 
found in what has been pronounced his best work, 
and was probably about the most "successful" at the 
time of its production; that is, the Raising of Jairu^s 
DaughtiTy which was once in the gallery at the Pantheon 
in Oxford Street Probably the fullest account of Hoist 
is to be found in the sufficiently brief notice of him 
which appeared in the Art Journal (or Art Union, as 
then called). 

Of any affinity in spirit to Blake which might be found 
existing in the works of some living artists, it is not 
necessary to speak here ; yet allusion should be made to 
one still alive and honoured in other ways, who early in 
life produced a series of Biblical designs seldom equalled 
for imaginative impression, and perhaps more decidedly 
like Blake's works, though quite free from plagiarism, 
than anything else that could be cited. I allude to Om 



Digitized 



by Google 



4S4 LITERARY PAPERS. 

Hundred Copper-fiate Engravings from original drawings 
by Isaac T€^!or, ju$nor, caktdatea to ornament aH qnartB 
and octavo editions of the Bible. London : Allan BeM 
& Co., Warwick Square, 1834. Strange as it may 
appear, I believe I am right in stating that these were 
produced in youth by the late v^ierable author of the 
Natural History of Enthusiasm, and many other works. 
How he came to do them, or why he did no more, I have 
no means of recording. They are very small and very 
unattractively engraved, sometimes by the artist and 
sometimes by others. In simplicity, dignity, and 
original thought, probably in genend n^ect at the time, 
and certainly in complete disregard ever since, they bear 
a dose affinity to the mass of Blake's works, and may 
&irly be supposed to have been, in some measure^ 
insph^ by the study of them. The Witch of Endor, 
The Plague Stayed, The Death of Samson, and many 
others are, in spirit, even well worthy of his hand, and 
from him, at least, would not have missed the admiration 
they deserve. 

Having spoken so far of Blake's influence as a painter, 
I should be glad if I could point out that the simplicity 
and purity of his style as a lyrical poet had also exercised 
some sway. But, indeed, he is so far removed from 
ordinary apprehensions in most of his poems, or more or 
less in all, and they have been so little spread abroad, 
that it will be impossible to attribute to them any decided 
place among the impulses which have directed the extra* 
ordinary mass of poetry, displaying power of one or 
another kind, which has been brought before us, from 
his day to our own. Perhaps some infusion of his 
modest and genuine beauties might add a charm even to 
the most gifted works of our present rather redundant 
time. One grand poem which was, till lately, on the 
same footing as his own (or even a still more obscure 
one) as regards popular recognition, and which shares, 
^ough on a more perfect scale than he ever realized 
in poetry, the exalted and primeval, if not the subtly 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 451 

etheiealized, qualities of his poetic art, may be found 
in Charles Wells's scrii>tural drama of Joseph and ki$ 
BreikreHp published in 1824 under the assumed name of 
Howard. This work affords, perhaps, the solitary in- 
stance, within our period, of poetry of the very first class 
foiling quite unrecognized and remaining so for a long 
space of years. In the first edition of this U/e of Biake 
it was prophesied that Wells's time would *^ assuredly 
still come." In iZ^S Joseph and his Brethren was repub- 
lished under the auspices of Mr. Swinburne, and with 
an introduction from his pen. Charles Wells lived to 
see this new phoenix form <^ the genius of his youth, 
but died in 1878. The work is attainable now, and need 
not here be dwelt on at any length. In what may 
be called the Anglo-Hebraic order of aphoristic truth, 
Shakspeare, Blake, and Wells are nearly akin; nor 
could any fourth poet be named so absolutely in the 
same connection, though from the Shakspearean point of 
view alone the ''marvellous," nay miraculous. Chatter- 
ton must also be included. It may be noted that Wells's 
admirable prose Stories after Nature (1822) have not yet 
been republished. 

A very singular example of the closest and most abso- 
lute resemblance to Blake's poetry may be met with (if 
only one could meet with it) in a phantasmal sort of little 
book, published, or perhaps not published but only 
printed, some years since, and entitled Improvisations 
of the Spirit, It bears no author's name, but was 
written by Dr. J. J. Garth Wilkinson, the highly-gifted 
editor of Swedenborg's writings, and author of a Life 
of him : to whom we owe a reprint of the poems in 
Blake's Songs of Innocence and Experience. These im- 
provisations profess to be written under precisely the 
same kind of spiritual guidance, amounting to abnegation 
of personal effort in the writer, which Blake supposed to 
have presided over the production of his Jentsaiem, etc 
The little book has passed into the general (and in all 
other cases richly-deserved) limbo of the modem '' spin- 



Digitized 



by Google 



456 LITERARY PAPERS. 

tualist** muse. It is a very thkk little book, however 
unsubstantial its origin ; and contains, amid much that is 
disjointed or hopelessly obscure (but then why be the 
polisher of poems for which a ghost, and not even your 
own ghost, is alone responsible?) many passages and 
indeed whole compositions of a remote and charming 
beauty, or sometimes of a grotesque figurative relation 
to things of another sphere, which are startlingly akin 
to Blake's writings,— covdd pass, in fact, for no one's 
but his. Professing as they do the same new kind of 
authorship, they might afford plenty of material for 
comparison and bewildered speculation, if such were in 
any request. 

Considering the interval of seventeen years which has 
now elapsed since the first publication of this Lift^ it 
may be well to refer briefly to such studies connected 
with Blake as have since appeared. This is not the 
place where any attempt could be made to appraise the 
thanks due for such a work as Mr. Swinburne's CriUcal 
Essay on Blake. The task chiefly undertaken in it — 
that of exploring and expounding the system of thought 
and personal mythology which pervades Blake's Fro- 
phetic Books — has been fulfilled, not by piecework or 
analysis, but by creative intuition. The fiat of Form 
and Light has gone forth, and as far as such a chaos 
could respond it has responded. To the volume itself, 
and to that only, can any reader be referred for its store 
of intellectual wealth and reach of eloquent dominion. 
Next among Blake labours of love let me here refer to 
Mr. James Smetham's deeply sympathetic and assimila- 
tive study (in the form of a review article on the present 
Life) published in the London QuarUrfy Review for 
January 1869. As this article is reprinted in our 
present Vol. II., no further tribute to its delicacy and 
force needs to be made here : it speaks for itselC But 
some personal mention, however shght, should here 
exist as due to its author, a painter and designer of our 
own day who is, in many signal respects, very closely 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 457 

akin to Blake ; more so, probably, than any other living 
artist could be said to be. James Smetham's work — 
generally of small or moderate size — ranges from Gospel 
subjects, of the subtlest imaginative and mental insight, 
and sometimes of the grandest colouring, through Old 
Testament compositions and through poetic and pastoral 
themes of every kind, to a special imaginative form of 
landscape. In all these he partakes greatly of Blake's 
immediate spirit, being also often nearly allied by land- 
scape intensity to Samuel Palmer, — in youth, the noble 
disciple of Blake. Mr. Smetham's works are very 
numerous, and, as other exclusive things have come to 
be, will some day be known in a wide circle. Space is 
altogether wanting to make more than this passing men- 
tion here of them and of their producer, who shares, in 
a remarkable manner, Blake's mental beauties and his 
formative shortcomings, and possesses besides an indi- 
vidual invention which often claims equality with the 
great exceptional master himself. 

Mr. W. B. Scott's two valuable contributions to Blake 
records — his Catalogue Raisonne of the Exhibition of 
Blokes Works, as held at the Burlington Fine Arts 
Club in 1876, and his Etchings from Blak^s Works, 
with Descriptive Text — are both duly specified in the 
General Catalogues, existing in our VoL II. We will 
say briefly here that no man living has a better right to 
write of Blake or to engrave his work than Mr. Scott, 
whose work of both kinds is now too well known* to call 
for recognition. Last but not least, the richly condensed 
and representative essay prefixed by Mr. W. M. Rossetti 
to his edition (in the Aldine series) of Blake's Poetical 
Works demands from all sides — as its writer has, from 
all sides, discerned and declared Blake — the highest 
commendation we can here briefly offer. 

The reader has now reached the threshold of the 
Second Volume of this work, in which he will be for- 
tunate enough to be commiuiicating directly with Blake's 
own mind, in a series of writings in prose and verse, 



Digitized 



by Google 



4SS LITERARY PAPERS. 

many of them here first published. Now pethsps 
no poet ever courted a public with more apparent 
need for some smoothing of the way, or mild fore- 
warning, from within, from without, or indeed from 
any region whence a helping heaven and four bountiful 
winds might be pleased to wafl it, than does Blake 
in many of the ''emanations" contained in this our 
Second Volume. Yet, on the other hand, there is 
the plain truth that such aid will be not at aU 
needed by those whom these writings will impress, and 
almost certainly lost upon those whom they vnH not On 
the whole, I have thought it best to pre&ce each class of 
these Selections with a few short remarks, but neither to 
enciunber with many words their sure effect in the 
right circles, nor to do battle with their destiny in the 
wrong. Only it may be specified here, that whenever 
any pieces occurring in Blake's written note-books 
appeared of a nature on the privacy of which he might 
have relied in writing them, these have been passed by, 
in the task of selection. At the same time, all has been 
included which seemed capable in any way of extending 
our knowledge of Blake as a poet and writer, in the 
manner he himself might have wished. Mere obscurity 
or remoteness from usual ways of thought was, as we 
know, no bar to publication with him ; therefore, in all 
cases where such qualities, even seeming to myself 
excessive, are found in conjunction with the lyrical 
power and beauty of expression so peculiar to Blake's 
style as a poet (and this, let us not forget, startlingly in 
advance of the time at which he wrote), I have thought 
it better to include the compositions so qualified. On 
the other hand, my MS. researches have often furnished 
me with poems which I treasure most highly, and which 
I cannot doubt will dwell in many memories as they do 
in mine. But, as regards the varying claims of these 
selections, it should be borne in mind that an attempt is 
made in the present volume to produce, after a long 
period of neglect, as complete a record as might be of 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILUAM BLAKB. 459 

Blake and his works ; and that, while any who can here 
find anything to love will be the poet-painter's wdcome 
guests, still such a feast is spread first of all for those 
who can know at a glance that it is theirs and was meant 
for them ; who can meet their host's e3Fe with sympathy 
and recognition, even when he offers them the new strange 
fruits grown for himself in far-off gardens where he has 
dwelt alone, or pours for th^n the wines which he has 
learned to love in lands where they never travelled. 



From thb Poetical Sketches. 

[Printed in 1783. Wrimn 1768-77. igt Il~20.] 

There is no need for many further critical remarks on 
these selections from the Poetical Sketches, which have 
already been spoken of in Chap. VI. oftheZ(^. Among 
the lyrical pieces here chosen, it would be difficult to 
award a distinct preference. These Songs are certainly 
among the small class of modem times which recall 
the best period of Engli^ song writing, whose rarest 
treasures lie scattered among the plays of our Elizabethan 
dramatists. They deserve no less than very high admi- 
ration in a quite positive sense, whidi cannot be even 
qualified by the slight, hasty, or juvenile imperfections 
of execution to be met with in some of them, though by 
no means in all. On the other hand, if we view them 
comparatively; in relation to Blake's youth when he 
wrote them, or the poetic epoch in which they were 
produced ; it would be hardly possible to overrate their 
astonishing merit. The same return to the diction and 
high feeling of a greater age is to be found in the un- 
finished play of Edward the Thirds from which some 
fragments are included here. In the original edition, 
however, these are marred by frequent imperfections in 
the metre (partly real and partly dependent on careless 
printing), which I have thought it best to remove^ as I 



Digitized 



by Google 



46o UTERAR Y PAPERS. 

found it possible to do so without once, in the slightest 
degree, affecting the originality of the text The same 
has been done in a few similar instances elsewhere. 
The poem oi Blind-man^ s Buff stands in curious contrast 
with the rest, as an effort in another manner, and, though 
less excellent, is not without interest Besides what is 
here given, there are attempts in the very modem-antique 
style of ballad prevalent at the time, and in Ossianic 
prose, but all naturally very inferior, and probably 
earlier. It is singular that, for formed style and purely 
literary qualities, Blake perhaps never afterwards 
equalled the best things in this youthful volume, though 
he often did so in melody and feeling, and more than 
did so in depth of thought 



Songs of Innocbncb and Songs of Expbribncb. 

[Engrawd 1789.] 

Here again but little need be added to what has 
already been said in the Life respecting the Sopi^ of 
Innocma and Experience, The first series is incom- 
parably the more beautiful of the two, being indeed 
almost flawless in essential respects ; while in the second 
series, the five years intervening between the. two had 
proved sufiicient for obscurity and the darker mental 
phases of Blake's writings to set in and greatly mar its 
poetic value. This contrast is more especially evident 
in those pieces whose subjects tally in one and the other 
series. For instance, there can be no comparison 
between the first Chimney Sweeper, which touches with 
such perfect simplicity the true pathetic chord of its 
subject, and the second, tinged somewhat with the 
commonplaces, if also with the truths, of social discon- 
tent However, very perfect and noble examples of 
Blake's metaphysical poetry occur among the Softgs 
of Experience, such as Christian Forbearance, and The 
Human Abstract. One piece, the second Crcutle Song^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 461 

I have myself introduced from the MS. Note-book often 
referred to, since there can be no doubt that it was 
written to match with the first, and it has quite sufficient 
beauty to give it a right to its natural place. A few 
alterations and additions in other poems have been made 
from the same source. 



Ideas of Good and Evil. 

In the MS. Note-book, to which frequent reference has 
been made in the Life^ a page stands inscribed with the 
heading given above. It seems uncertain how much of 
the book's contents sudi title may have been meant to 
include ; but it is now adopted here as a not inappro- 
priate summarizing endorsement for the precious section 
which here follows. In doing so, Mr. Swinburne's 
example (in his Essay on Bkike) has been followed, as 
regards pieces drawn from the Note-book. 

The contents of the present section are derived partly 
from the Note-book in question, and partly from another 
small autograph collection of different matter, somewhat 
more fairly copied. The poems have been reclaimed, as 
regards the first-mentioned source, from as chaotic a mass 
as could well be imagined ; amid whidi it has sometimes 
been necessary either to omit, transpose, or combine, 
so as to render available what was very seldom found 
in a final state. And even in the pieces drawn fi-om the 
second source specified above, means of the same kind 
have occasionally been resorted to, where they seemed 
to lessen obscurity or avoid redundance. But with all 
this, there is nothing throughout that is not £uthfully 
Blake's own. 

One piece in this series (The Two Songs) may be 
regarded as a different version of The Human Abstract, 
occurring in the Songs of Experience. This new form is 
certainly the finer one, I think, by reason of its personified 
character, which adds greatly to the force of the impres- 
sion produced. It is, indeed, one of the finest things 



\ 



Digitized 



by Google 



4S8 UTRRAR Y PAPERS. 

Blake ever did, really belongiiig, by its vivid complete- 
ness, to die order of perfect short poems, — never a very 
lai^ge band, even when the best poets are ransacked to 
recruit it. Others among the longer poems of this 
section, which are^ each in its own way, truly admirable, 
are Broken Love, Mary, and Auguries t^ Innocettce. 

It is but too probable that the piece called Broken Love 
has a recondite bearing on the bewilderments of Blake's 
special mythology. But besides a soul suffering in such 
limbo, this poem has a recognizable body penetrated 
wi^ human passion. From this point of view, never, 
perhaps, have the agony and perversity of sundered 
affection been more powerfully (however singularly) 
expressed than here^ 

The speaker is one whose soul has been intensified by 
pain to be his only world, among the scenes, figures, 
and events of which he moves as in a new state of being. 
The emotions have been quickened and isolated by con- 
flicting torment, till each is a separate companion. There 
is his *^ spectre," the jealous pride which scents in the 
snow the footsteps of the beloved rejected woman, but 
is a wild beast to guard his way fix)m reaching her ; his 
** emanation " which silently weeps within him, for has 
not he also sinned ? So they wander together in '' a 
fathomless and boundless deep," the mom full of tempests 
and tile night of tears. Let her weep, he says, not for 
his sins only, but for her own ; nay, he will cast his sins 
upon her shoulders too ; they shall be more and more 
till she come to him again. Also this woe of his can 
array itself in stately imagery. He can count separately 
how many of his soul's affections the knife she stabbed 
it with has slain, how many yet mourn over the tombs 
which he has built for these : he can tell too of some 
that still watch arotmd his bed, bright sometimes with 
ecstatic passion of melancholy and crowning his mournful 
head with vine. All these living forgive her transgres- 
sions : when will she look upon tiiem, that the dead may 
live agam ? Has she not pity to give for pardon ? nay, 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILUAM BLAKE. 463 

does he not need her pardon too ? He cannot sed^ her, 
but oh ! if she would return. Surely her place is ready 
for hesc^ and bread and wine of foi^giveness of sins. 

The QyskU Cabm$i and the Mtniai Traveller belong 
to a truly mystical order of poetry. The former b a 
lovely piece of lyrical writing, but certainly has not the 
deamess of crystal. Yet the meaning of such among 
Blaie^ compositions as this is may sometimes be 
missed diiefly through seeking for a sense more re- 
condite than was really meant A rather intricate 
interpretation was attempted here in the first edition 
of these Selections. Mr. W. M. Rossetti has probably 
since found the true one in his simple sentence : '* This 
poem seems to me to represent, under a very ideal form, 
the i^enomena of gestation and birth " (see the Aldine 
edition of Blake's PoemSf page 1 74). The singular stanza 
oommendng ''Another England there I saw," etc, 
may thus be taken to indicate quaintly that the un- 
developed creature, half sentient and half conscious, has 
a world of its own akin in some wise to the coun^ of 
itsbirtii. 

The Mental Traveller seemed at first a hopeless riddle ; 
and the editor of these Sdections must confess to having 
been on the point of omitting it, in spite of its high poetic 
beauty, as incomprehensible. He is again indebted to 
his brotiier for the dear-sighted, and no doubt correct, 
exposition which is now printed with it, and brings its 
full value to light 

The poem of Mary appears to b^ on one side, an 
allegory of the poetic or spiritual mind moving unre- 
cognized and reviled among its fellows; and this view 
of it is corroborated when we find Blake applying to 
himself two lines almost identically taken from it, in the 
last of the Letters to Mr. Butts printed in the U/e. But 
the literal meaning may be accepted, too, as a hardly 
extreme expression of the rancour and envy so constantly 
attending pre-eminent beauty in women. 

A most noble, thou|^ surpassingly quaint example of 



Digitized 



by Google 



4^4 LITERARY PAPERS. 

Blake's loving sympathy with all forms of created life, 
as well as of the kind of oracular power which he 
possessed of giving vigorous expression to abstract or 
social truths, will be found in the Auguries of Itmounce, 
It is a somewhat tangled skein of thought, but stored 
throughout with the riches of simple wisdom. 

Quaintness reaches its climax in William Bond, which 
may be regarded as a kind of glorified street-ballad. 
One point that requires to be noted is that the term 
" fairies " is evidently used to indicate passionate emo- 
tions, while " angels " are spirits of cold coercion. The 
close of the ballad is very b^utifuL It is not long since 
there seemed to dawn on the present writer a mean- 
ing in this ballad not discovered before. Should we 
not connect it with the lines In a Myrtle Shade the 
meaning of which is obvious to all knowers of Blake 
as bearing on marriage? And may not "William 
Bond" thus be William Blake, the bondman of the 
"lovely myrtle tree"? It is known that the shadow 
of jealousy, far from unfounded, fell on poor Catherine 
Blake's married life at one moment, and it has been 
stated that this jealousy culminated in a terrible and 
difficult crisis. We ourselves can well imagine that this 
ballad is but a literal relation, with such emotional 
actors, of some transfiguring trance and passion of 
mutual tears from which Blake arose no longer " bond " 
to his myrtle-tree, but with that love, purged of all 
drossier element, whose last death-bed accent was, 
"Kate, you have ever been an angel to me!" 

The ballad of William Bond has great spiritual 
beauties, whatever its meaning ; and it is one of only 
two examples, in this form, occurring among Blake's 
lyrics. The other is called Long John Broum and LslUe 
Maty Bell, and perhaps the reader may be sufficiently 
surprised without it. 

The shorter poems, and even the fragments^ a£ford 
many instances of that exquisite metrical gift and right- 
ness in point of form which constitute Blake's special 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 465 

glory among his contemporaries^ even more eminently 
perhaps than the grander command of mental resources 
which is also his. Such qualities of pure perfection in 
writing verse as he perpetually without effort displayed 
are to be met with among those elder poets whom he 
loved, and such again are now looked upon as the 
peculiar trophies of a school which has arisen since his 
time ; but he alone (let it be repeated and remembered; 
possessed them then, and possessed them in dear com- 
pleteness. Colour and metre, these are the true patents 
of nobility in painting and poetry, taking precedence of 
all intellectual claims ; and it is by virtue of these, first 
of all, that Blake holds, in both arts, a rank which cannot 
be taken from him. 

Of the Epigrams on Art, which conclude this section, 
a few are really pointed, others amusingly irascible, — 
all more or less a sort of nonsense verses, and not even 
pretending to be much else. To enter into their reckless 
spirit of doggrel, it is almost necessary to see the original 
note-book in which they occur, which continually testifies, 
by sudden exclamatory entries, to the curious degree of 
boyish impulse which was one of Blake's characteristics. 
It is not improbable that such names as Rembrandt, 
Rubens, Correggio, Reynolds, may have met the reader's 
eye before in a very different sort of context from that 
which surrounds them in the surprising poetry of this 
their brother artist ; and certainly they are made to do 
service here as scarecrows to the crops of a rather jealous 
husbandman. And for all that, I have my strong suspi- 
cions that the same amount of disparagement of them 
uttered to instead of by our good Blake, would have 
elicited, on his side, a somewhat different estimate. 
These phials of his wrath, however, have no poison, but 
merely some laughing gas in them ; so now that we are 
setting the laboratory a little in order, let these, too, 
come down from their dusty upper shelf. 



30 



Digitized 



by Google 



466 LITERARY PAPERS. 



Prose Writinos. 

Of the prose writings which now follow, the only ones 
already in print are the Descriptive Catalogue and the 
Sibylline Leaves, To the former of these, the Public 
Address, which here succeeds it, forms a fitting and most 
interesting pendant. It has been compiled from a very 
confused mass of MS. notes ; but its purpose is unmis- 
takable as having been intended as an accompaniment 
to the engraving of Chaucer's Pilgrims. Bodi the 
Catalogue and Address abound in critical passages on 
painting and poetry, which must be ranked without 
reserve among the very best things ever said on either 
subject Such inestimable qualities afford quite sufficient 
ground whereon to claim indulgence for eccentricities 
which are here and there laughably excessive, but v^ich 
never foil to have a personal, even where they have no 
critical, value. As evidence of the writer's many moods, 
these pieces of prose are much best left unmutilated : 
let us, therefore, risk misconstruction in some quarters. 
There are others where even the whimsical onslaughts 
on names no less great than those which the writer 
most highly honoured, and assertions as to thb or that 
component quality of art being everything or nothing 
as it served the fiery plea in hand, will be discerned as 
the impatient extremes of a man who had his own work 
to do, which was of one kind, as he thought, against 
another; and who mainly did it too, in spite of that 
injustice without which no extremes might ever have 
been chargeable against him. And let us remember 
that, after all, ha^dng greatness in him, his practice of art 
included all great aims, whether they were sudi as his 
antagonistic moods railed against or no. 

The Vision of the Last Judgment is almost as much a 
manifesto of opinion as either the Catalogue or Address. 
But its work is in a wider field, and one which, where 
it stretches beyond our own clear view, may not neces- 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILUAM BLAKE. 467 

sarily dierefore have been a lost road to Blake himself. 
Certainly its grandeur and the sudden great things greatly 
said in it, as in all Blake's prose, constitute it an addition 
to our opportunities of communing with him, and one 
which we may prize highly. 

The constant decisive words in which Blake alludes, 
throughout these writings, to the plagiarisms of his con- 
temporaries, are painful to read, and will be wished 
away ; but, still, it will be worth thinking whether their 
being said, or the need of their being said, is the greater 
cause for complaint Justice, looking through surface 
accomplishments, greater nicety and even greater occa- 
sional judiciousness of execution, in the men whom Blake 
compares with himself, still perceives these words oi 
his to be true. In each style of the art of a period, and 
more especially in the poetic style, there is often some 
one cenU^ initiatory man, to whom personally, if not to 
the care of the world, it is important that his creative 
power should be held to be his own, and that his ideas 
and slowly perfected materials should not be caught up 
before he has them ready for his own use. Yet, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, such an one's treasures and 
possessions are, time after time, while he still lives and 
needs them, sent forth to the world by others in forms 
from which he cannot perhaps again clearly claim what 
b his own, but which render the material useless to him 
henceforward. Hardly wonderful, after all, if for once 
an impetuous man of this kind is found raising the hue 
and cry, careless whether people heed him or no. It is 
no small provocation, be sure, v^en the gazers hoot you 
as outstripped in your race, and you know all the time 
thi^ the man ahead, whom they shout for, is only a 
flying thief. 



The Inventions to the Book of Job. 

Thbsb InvifUums to the Book of Job, which may be 
r^^rded as the works of Blake's own hand in which he 



Digitized 



by Google 



468 LITER AR Y PAPERS. 

most unreservedly competes with others — belonging as 
they do in style to the accepted category of engraved 
designs— consbt of twenty-one subjects on a considerably 
smaller scale than those in The Grave, each highly 
wrought in light and shade, and each surrounded by a 
border of allusive design and inscription, executed in a 
slighter style than the subject itself Perhaps this may 
fairly be pronounced, on the whole, the most remark- 
able series of prints on a scriptural theme which has 
appeared since the days of Albert DOrer and Rembrandt, 
widely diflfering too from either. 

Except The Grave, these designs must be known to a 
lai^er circle than any other series by Blake; and yet 
they are by no means so familiar as to render unneces- 
sary such imperfect reproduction of their intricate beau- 
ties as the scheme of this work made possible, or even 
the still more shadowy presentment of verbal description. 

The first among them shows us the patriarch Job 
worshiping among his family under a mighty oak, 
surrounded by feeding flocks, range behind range, as far 
as the distant homestead, in a landscape glorified by 
setting sun and rising moon. " Thus did Job continually," 
the leading motto tells us. In the second plate we see 
the same persons grouped, still full of happiness and 
thanksgiving. But this is that day when the sons of 
God came to present themselves before the Lord, and 
Satan came also among them ; and above the happy group 
we see what they do not see, and know that power is 
given to Satan over all that Job has. Then in the two 
next subjects come the workings of that power; the 
house falling on the slain feasters, and the messengers 
hurrying one after another to the lonely parents, still 
with fi-esh tidings of ruin. The fifth is a wonderful 
design. Job and his wife still sit side by side, the closer 
for their misery, and still, out of the little left to them, 
give alms to those poorer than themselves. The angels 
of their love and resignation are ever with them on 
either side; but above, again, the unseen Heaven lies 



■Digitized by VjOOQIC 



WILLIAM BLAKE. 469 

open. There sits throned that Ahnighty figure, filled 
now with inexpressible pity, almost with compunction. 
Around Him His angels shrink away in horror ; for now 
the fires which clothe them — the very fires of God — ^are 
compressed in the hand of Satan into a phial for the 
devoted head of Job himself. Job is to be tried to the 
utmost; only his life is withheld from the tormentor. 
How this is wrought, and how Job's friends come 
to visit him in his desolation, are the subjects which 
follow; and then, in the eighth design, Job at last 
lifls up his voice, with arms uplifted too, among his 
crouching, shuddering friends, and curses the day when 
he was bonu The next, again, is among the grandest 
of the series. Eliphaz the Temanite is telling Job of the 
thing which was secretly brought to him in the visions 
of the night; and above we are shown the matter of 
his words, the spirit which passed before his face ; all 
blended in a wondrous partition of light, cloud, and mist 
of light. After this. Job kneels up and prays his re- 
proachful friends to have pity on him, for the hand of 
God has touched him. And next — most terrible of all 
— we see embodied the accusations of torment which Job 
brings against his Maker : a theme hard to dwell upon, 
and which needs to be viewed in the awful spirit in 
which Blake conceived it. But in the following subject 
there comes at last some sign of soothing change. The 
sky, till now full of sunset and surging cloud, in which 
the stones of the ruined home looked as if they were 
still burning, has here given birth to the large peaceful 
stars, and under them the young Elihu begins to speak : 
" Lo I all these things worketh God oftentimes with man, 
to bring forth his soul from the pit" The expression of 
Job, as he sits with folded arms, beginning to be recon- 
ciled, is full of delicate familiar nature; while the look 
of the three unmerciful friends, in their turn reproved, 
has something in it almost humorous. And then the 
Lord answers Job out of the whirlwind, dreadful in its 
resistless force, but full also of awakening life, and rich 



Digitized 



by Google 



470 UTERARY PAPERS. 

with lovely clinging spray. Under its influence, Job and 
his wife kneel and listen, with faces to which the blessing 
of thankfulness has almost returned. In the next sub- 
ject it shines forth fully present again, for now God 
Himself is speaking of His own omnipotence and right 
of judgment— of that day of creation " when the morning 
stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for 
joy." All that He says is brought before us, surround- 
ing His own glorified Image ; while below, the hearers 
kneel rapt and ecstatic. This is a design which never 
has been surpassed in the whole range of Christian art 
Very grand too is the next, where we see Behemoth, 
chief of the ways of God, and Leviathan, king over the 
children of pride. The sixteenth plate, to which we 
now come, is a proof of the clear dramatic sense with 
which BlaJce conceived the series as a whole. It is 
introduced in order to show us the defeat of Satan in his 
contest against Job's uprightness. Here, again, is the 
throned Cre'itor among His angels, and beneath Him the 
Evil One l**ils with tremendous plummet-force; Hell 
naked before His face, and Destruction without a cover- 
ing. Job with his friends are present as awe-strudc 
witnesses. In the design which follows. He who has 
chastened and consoled Job and his wife is seen to be- 
stow His blessing on them ; while the three friends, 
against whom " His wrath is kindled," cover their feces 
with fear and trembling. And now comes the acceptance 
of Job, who prays for his friends before an altar, from 
which a heart-shaped body of flame shoots upward into 
the sun itself; the background showing a distant evening 
light through broad tree-stemsr— the most peaceful sight 
in the world. Then Job's kindred return to him : " every 
one also gave him a piece of money and every one an 
earring of gold." Next he is seen relating his trials and 
mercies to the new daughters who were bom to him — 
no women so fair in the land. And, lastly, the series 
culminates in a scene of music and rapturous joy, which, 
contrasted with the calm thanksgiving of the opening 



Digitized 



by Google 



WIUJAM BLAKE. 47* 

design, gloriously embodies the words of its text, ^ So 
the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than the 
beginning." \ 

In these three last designs, I would specially direct ^ 
attention to the exquisite beauty of the iemale figures. 
Nothing proves more thoroughly how free was the 
spiritualism of Blake's art from any ascetic tinge. These 
women are given to us no less noble in body than in 
soul ; large-eyed, and large-armed also ; such as a man 
may love with all his tife. 

The angels (and especially those in plate 14, ''When 
the morning stars sang together/') may be equally cited 
as proofs of the same great distinctive quality. These 
are no flimsy, filmy creatures, drowsing on feather-bed 
wings, or smothered in draperies. Here the utmost 
amount of vital power is the heavenly glory they dis- 
play ; faces, bodies, and wings, all living and springing 
fire. And that the ascetic tendency, here happily absent, 
is not the inseparable penalty to be paid for a love of the 
Gothic forms of beauty, is evident enough, when we see 
those forms everywhere rightly mingling with the artist's . 
conceptions, ais the natural breath of sacred art WiQT 
the true daring of genius, he has even introduced a Gothic 
cathedral in the background of the worshiping group in 
plate I, as the shape in which the very soul oS. worship 
is now for ever embodied for us. It is probably with 
the fine intention of symbolizing the unshaken piety of 
Job under heavy afiliction that a similar building is still 
seen pointing its spires heavenward in the fourth plate, 
where the messengers of ruin follow close at one anr- 
other's heels. We may, perhaps, even conjecture that 
the shapeless buildings, like rude pagan cairns, which 
are scattered over those scenes of the drama which refer 
to the gradual darkening of Job's soul, have been intro- 
duced as forms suggestive of error and the shutting out 
of hope. Everywhere throughout the series we meet 
with evidences of Gothic feeling. Such are the recessed 
settle and screen of trees in plate 2, much in the spirit 



Digitized 



by Google 



47^ UTERARY PAPERS, 

of Orcagna; the decorative character of the stars in 
plate 12; tiie Leviathan and Behemoth in plate 151 
grouped so as to recall a mediaeval medallion or wood- 
carving; the trees, drawn always as they might be carved 
in the woodwork of an old church. Further instances 
of the same kind may be found in the curious sort of 
painted chamber, showing the themes of his discourse, 
in which Job addresses his daughters in plate 20 ; and 
in the soaring trumpets of plate 21, which might well be 
one of the rich conceptions of Luca della Robbia. 

Nothing has yet been said of the borders of illustrative 
design and inscription which surround each subject in 
theyoA. These are slight in manner, but always thought- 
ful and appropriate, and often very beautiful. Where 
Satan obtains power over Job, we see a terrible serpent 
twined round tree-stems among winding fires, while 
angels weep, but may not quench them. Fungi spring 
under baleful dews, while Job prays that the night may 
be solitary, and the day perish wherein he was bom. 
Trees stand and bow like ghosts, widi bristling hair of 
branches, round the spirit which passes before the face 
of Eliphaz. Fine examples also are the prostrate rain- 
beaten tree in plate 13 ; and, in the next plate, the map 
of the days of creation. In plate 18 (the sacrifice and 
acceptance of Job), Blake's psdette and brushes are ex- 
pressively introduced in the border, lying, as it were, 
on an altar-step beside the signature of his name. That 
which possesses the greatest charm is perhaps the border 
to plate 2. Here, at the base, are sheepfolds watched 
by shepherds ; up the sides is a trellis, on whose lower 
rings birds sit upon their nests, while angels, on the 
higher ones, worship round flame and cloud, till it arches 
at the summit into a sky full of the written words of 
God. 

Such defects as exist in these designs are of the kind 
usual with Blake, but far less firequent than in his more 
wilful works; indeed, many among them are entirely 
free from any damaging peculiarities. Intensely mus- 



Digitized 



by Google 



WXLUAM BLAKE. 473 

cular figures, who surprise us by a sort of line round 
the throat, wrists, and ankles, but show no other sign 
of being draped, are certainly to be sometimes found 
here as elsewhere, but not many of them. The lifted 
arms and pointing arms in plates 7 and 10 are pieces of 
mannerism to be r^retted, the latter even seeming a 
reminiscence of Macbeth's Witches by Fuseli : and a 
few other slight instances might, perhaps, be cited. 
But, on the whole, these are designs no less well and 
clearly considered, however highly imaginative, than the 
others in the small highest class of original engraved 
inventions, which comprises the works of Albert DQrer, 
of Rembrandt, of Hogarth, of Turner, of Cruikshank in 
his best time, and some few others. Like all these they 
are incisive and richly toned to a degree which can only 
be attained in engraving by the original inventor, and 
have equally a style of execution all their own. In spirit 
and character they are no less independent, having more 
real affinity, perhaps, with Orcagna than with any other 
of the greatest men. In their unison of natural study 
with imagination, they remind one decidedly of him; 
and also of Giotto, himself the author of a now almost 
destroyed series of frescoes from Job, in the Campo Santo 
at Pisa, which it* would be interesting to compare, as far 
as possible, with these inventions of Blake. 



Jerusalem. 



Of the pictorial part of the Jerusalem much might be 
said which would merely be applicable to all Blake's 
works alike. One point perhaps somewhat distinctive 
about it is an extreme largeness and decorative character 
in the style of the drawings, which are mostly made up 
of a few massive forms, thrown together on a grand, 
equal scale. The beauty of the drawings varies much, 
according to the colour in which they are printed. One 
copy, possessed by Lord Houghton, is so incomparably 



Digitized 



by Google 



474 LITERARY PAPERS. 

superior, from this cause, to any other I have seen, that 
no one could know the work properly without having 
examined this copy. It is printed in a vtmrm reddish 
brown, the exact colour of a very fine photograph ; and 
the broken blending of the deeper tones with the more 
tender shadows, — all sanded over With a sort of golden 
mist peculiar to Blake's mode of execution, — makes still 
more striking the resemblance to the then undiscovered 
" handling " of Nature hersel£ The extreme breadth of 
the forms throughout, when seen through the medium 
of this colour, shows sometimes, united with its grandeur, 
a suavity of line which is almost Venetian. 

The subjects are vague and mystic as the poem itselt 
Female figures lie among waves full of reflected stars : 
a strange human image, with a swanks head and wings, 
floats on water in a kneeling attitude, and drinks : lovers 
embrace in an open water-lily : an eagle-headed creature 
sits and contemplates the sun : serpent-women are coiled 
with serpents : Assyrian-looking, human-visaged lions are 
seen yoked to the plough or the chariot : rocks swallow 
or vomit forth human forms, or appear to amalgamate 
with them : angels cross each other over wheels of flame : 
and flames and hirrrying figures wreathe and wind among 
the lines. Even such slight things as these rough inter- 
secting circles, each containing some hint of an angel, 
even these are made the unmistakable exponents of 
genius. Here and there some more familiar theme meets 
us, — the creation of Eve, or the Crucifixion ; and then 
the thread is lost again. The whole spirit of the designs 
might seem well symbolized in one of the finest among 
them, where we see a triple-headed and triple-crowned 
figure embedded in rocks, from whose breast is bursting 
a string of youths, each in turn bom from the other's 
breast in one sinuous throe of mingled life, while the 
life of suns and planets dies and is bom and rushes 
together around them. 

There is an ominous sentence in one of the letters of 
Blake to Mr. Butts, where, speaking of the Jerusalem, he 



Digitized 



by Google 



i 



WILUAM BLAKE. 475 

says, '' the persons and machinery entirely new to the 
inhabitants of earth {some of the persons excepted),** The 
italics are mine, and alas I to what wisp-led flounderings 
of research might they not lure a reckless adventurer. 
The mixture of the unaccountable with the familiar in 
nomenclature which occurs towards the close of a pre- 
ceding extract from the Jerusalem is puzzling enough 
in itself; but conjecture attains bewilderment when we 
realize that one of the names, " Scofield " (spelt, perhaps 
more properly, Scholfield, but pronounced no doubt as 
above), was that of the soldier who had brought a charge 
of sedition against Blake at Felpham. Whether the 
other English names given were in some way connected 
with the trial would be worth any practicable inquiries. 
When we consider the mystical connection in which 
this name of Scofield is used, a way seems opened into 
a more perplexed region of morbid analogy existing in 
Blake's brain than perhaps any other key could unlock. 
It is a minute point, yet a significant and amazing one. 
Further research discovers further references to "Sco- 
field," for instance, 

"GothoutoSkofield: 
Ask him if he is Bath or if he is Canterbury : 
Tell him to be no more dubious : demand explicit words : 
Tell him I will dash him into shivers where and at what time 
I please. Tell him, Hand and Skofield, they are ministers of 

evil 
To those I hate : for I can hate also as well as they.** 

Again (not without Jack the Giant Killer to help) : — 
•* Hark ! hear the giants of Albion cry at night, — 
We smell the blood of the English, we delight in their blood on 

our altars ; 
The living and the dead shall be ground in our crumbling mill. 
For bread of the sons of Albion, of the giants Hand and Skofield : 
Skofield and Cox are let loose upon the Saxons; they accumu- 
late. 
A world in which man is, by his nature, the enemy of man." 

Again (and woe is the present editor I) : — 
** These are the names of Albion's twelve sons and of his twelve 
daughters : — ^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



476 LITERARY PAPERS. 

(Then follows a long enumeration, — ^to each name certain 
coimties attached) : — 

<'Skofield had Ely, Rutland, Cambridge, Huntingdon, 
Norfolk, Suffolk, Hertford, Essex, and his emanation is Guini- 
vere/O!!) 

The first of the three above quotations seems meant 
really as a warning to Scholfield to be exact in evidence 
as to his place of birth or other belongings, and as to 
the "explicit words" used by Blake. G>x and Court- 
hope are Sussex names : can these be the " Kox " and 
"Kotope" of the poem, and names in some way con- 
nected, like Scholfield's, with the trial ? 

Is the wild, wild tale of Scofield exhausted here? 
Alas no I At leaf 51 of the Jerusalem occurs a certain 
design. In some, perhaps in all, copies of the Jerth 
salem, as a whole, the names inscribed above the figures 
are not given, but at least three examples of water- 
colour drawings or highly-coloured reproductions of 
the plate exist, in which the names appear. Who 
"Vala" and "Hyle" may personify I do not pretend 
to conjecture, though dim surmises hurtle in the 
mind, which, like De Quincey in the catastrophe of 
the Spanish Nun, I shall keep to mysel£ These two 
seem, pretty clearly, to be prostrate at the discomfiture 
of Scofield, who is finally retiring fettered into his 
native element As a historical picture, then, Blake felt 
it his duty to monumentalize this design with due in- 
scription. Two of the three hand-coloured versions, 
referred to above, are registered as Nos. 50 and 51 of 
the Catalogue in Vol. II., and the third version appears 
as No. 108 in the Burlington Catalogue. 

I may note another point bearing on the personal 
grudges shadowed in the Jerusalem, In Blake's Public 
Address he says : — " The manner in which my character 
has been blasted these thirty years, both as an artist and 
a man, may be seen, particularly in a Sunday paper called 
the Examiner, published in Beauforf s Buildings (we all 



Digitized 



by Google 



WILUAM BLAKE. 477 

know that editors of newspapers trouble their heads 
very little about art and science, and that they are 
always paid for what they put in upon these ungracious 
subjects); and the manner in which I have rooted out 
the nest of villains will be seen in a poem concerning 
my three years' Herculean labours at Felpham, which I 
shall soon publish. Secret calumny and open profes- 
sions of friendship are common enough all the world 
over, but have never been so good an occasion of poetic 
imagery." Thus we are evidently to look (or sigh in 
vain) for some indication of Blake's wrath against the 
Elxaminer in the vast Jerusalem, It is true that the 
Examiner persecuted him, his publications and exhibi- 
tion, and that Leigh Hunt was prone to tell "good 
stories " of him ; and in some MS. doggrel of Blake's 
we meet with the line, 

"The Examiner whose very name b Hunt." 

But what form can the irate allegory be supposed to 
take in the Jerusalem? Is it conceivable that that 
mysterious entity or non-entity, "Hand," whose name 
occurs sometimes in the poem, and of whom an inscribed 
spectrum is there given at fall length, can be a hiero- 
glyph for Leigh Hunt? Alas! what is possible or 
impossible in such a connection ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



478 



EBENEZER JONES. 

(from notes and queries, 187a) 

I HOPE Mr, Gledstanes-Waugh may receive from other 
sources a more complete account than I can give of this 
remarkable poet, who afifords nearly the most striking 
instance of neglected genius in our modem school of 
poetry. This is a more important fact about him than 
his being a Chartist, which however he was, at any rate 
for a time. I met him only once in my life, I believe 
in 1848, at which time he was about thirty, and 
would hardly talk on any subject but Chartism. His 
poems (the Studies of Sensation and Event) had been 
published some five years before my meeting him, and 
are full of vivid disorderly power. I was little more 
dian a lad at the time I first chanced on them, but they 
struck me greatly, though I was not blind to their 
glaring defects and even to the ludicrous side erf" their 
wilful "newness"; attempting, as they do, to deal 
recklessly with those almost inaccessible combinations 
in nature and feeling which only intense and oil-renewed 
effort may perhaps at last approach. For all this, these 
Studies should be, and one day will be, disinterred 
from the heaps of verse deservedly buried. 

Some years after meeting Jones, I was much pleased 
to hear the great poet Robert Browning speak in warm 
terms of the merit of his work ; and I have understood 
that Monckton Milnes (Lord Houghton) admired the 
Studies, and interested himself on their author's 
behalf. The only other recognition of this poet which 
I have observed is the appearance of a short but 
admirable lyric by him in the collection called Nightin^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



EBENEZER JONES. 479 

gdU Valliy, edited by ^^liam AllinghaixL I believe 
that some of Jones's unpublished MSS. are still in the 
possession of his friend Mr. W. J. Linton, the eminent 
wood-engraver, now residing in New York, who cotdd 
no doubt furnish more facts about him than any one 
else. It is ftdly time that attention should be called 
to this poet's name, which is a noteworthy one. 

It may not be out of place to mention here a much 
earlier and still more striking instance of poetic genius 
which has hitherto failed of due recognition. I allude 
to Charles J. Wells, the author of the blank verse 
scriptural drama oi Joseph and his Brethren^ published 
under the pseudonym of ''Howard" in 1824, and of 
Siories after Nature (in prose, but of a highly poetic 
cast), pubhshed anonymously in 1822. This poet was 
a friend of Keats, who addressed to him one of the 
sonnets to be found in his works — "On receiving a 
present of roses." Wells's writings — ^youthful as they 
are— deserve to stand beside any poetry, even of that 
time, for original genius, and, I may add, for native 
structural power, though in this latter respect they bear 
marics of haste and n^ect Their time will come yet 



Digitized 



by Google 



480 



THE STEALTHY SCHOOL OF 
CRITICISM. 

(from the athenjeum, 187 1.) 

Your paragraph, a fortnight ago, relating to the pseu- 
donymous authorship of an article, violently assailing 
myself and other writers of poetry, in the Contemporary 
Review for October last, reveals a species of critical 
masquerade which I have expressed in the heading 
given to this letter. Since then, Mr. Sidney Colvin's 
note, qualifying the report that he intends to " answer " 
that article, has appeared in your pages ; and my own 
view as to the absolute forfeit, under such conditions, of 
all claim to honourable reply, is precisely the same as 
Mr. Colvin's. For here a critical organ, professedly 
adopting the principle of open signature, would seem, 
in reality, to assert (by silent practice, however, not by 
enunciation,) that if the anonymous in criticism was — as 
itself originally inculcated — but an early caterpillar stage, 
the nominate too is found to be no better than a homely 
transitional chrysalis, and that the ultimate butterfly 
form for a critic who likes to sport in sunlight and yet 
to elude the grasp, is afler all the pseudonymous. But, 
itideed, what I may call the *' Siamese " aspect of the 
entertainment provided by the Review will elicit but one 
verdict. Yet I may, perhaps, as the individual chiefly 
attacked, be excused for asking your assistance now in 
giving a specific denial to specific charges which, if 
tmrefuted, may still continue, in spite of their author's 
strategic fiasco, to serve his purpose against me to some 
extent. 

The primary accusation, on which this writer grounds 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STEALTHY SCHOOL OF CRITICISM. 481 

all the rest, seems to be that others and myself " extol 
fleshliness as the distinct and supreme end of poetic 
and pictorial art ; aver that poetic expression is greater 
than poetic thought; and, by inference, that the body 
is greater than the soul, and sound superior to sense." 

As my own writings are alone formally dealt with in 
the article, I shall confine my answer to myself; and 
this must first take unavoidably the form of a challenge 
to prove so broad a statement. It is true, some frag- 
mentary pretence at proof is put in here and there 
throughout the attack, and thus far an opportunity is 
given of contesting the assertion. 

A Sonnet entitled Nuptial Sleep is quoted and 
abused at page 338 of the Review, and is there dwelt 
upon as a "whole poem," describing "merely animal 
sensations."/ It is no more a whole poem, in reality, 
than is any single stanza of any poem throughout the 
book. The poem, written chiefly in sonnets, and of 
which this is one sonnet-stanza, is entitled 2%e House 
of Life; and even in my first published instalment of 
tfie whole work (as contained in the volume under 
notice) ample evidence is included that no such passing 
phase of description as the one headed Nuptial Sleep 
could possibly be put forward by the author of The 
House of Life as his own representative view of the 
subject of love./ In proof of this, I will direct attention 
(among the love-sonnets of this poem) to Nos. 2, 8, 1 1, 
17, 28, and more especially 13, which, indeed, I had 
better print here. 

XX>VE-SWEETNES8. 

''Sweet dimness of her loosened hair's downfall 
About thy face ; her sweet hands round thy head 
In gracious fostering union garlanded ; 

Her tremulous smiles ; her glances' sweet recall 

Of love ; her murmuring sighs memorial ; 
Her mouth's culled sweetness by thy kisses shed 
On cheeks and neck and eyelids, and so led 

Back to her mouth which answers there for all : — 

31 



Digitized 



by Google 



4S2 LITERARY PAPERS. 

"What sweeter than diese things, except the thing 
In lacking which all these would lose their sweet v— 
The confident heart*s still fervour ; the swift beat 
And soft subsidence of the spirifs wing 
Then when it feels, in cloud-girt way&rmg^ 
The breath of kindred phimes against its feet ? " 

l/l^ y reader may bring any artistic charge be [leases 
against the above sonnet; but one cfaai^ge it would be 
impossible to maintain against the writer of the sqjc a 
in which it Occurs, and that is, the wi^ Qikhis partto 
assert that the body is greater than the so^ For here 
all the passionate and just delights of tSe body are 
declared — somewhat figuratively, it is true, but unmis- 
takably — to be as naught if not eimobled by the concur^- 
rence of the soul at all times. JMoreover, nearly one 
half of this series of sonnets has nothing to do with love, 
but treats of quite other life-influenc^ I would defy 
any one to couple vnth fair quotation of Sonnets 29, 
30, 31, 39, 40, 41, 43, or others, the slander that th^ 
author was not impressed, like all other thinking meo, 
with the responsibilities and higher mysteries of life; 
while Sonnets 35, 36, and 37, entitled Thi Ckoioi, 
sum up the general view taken in a manner only to be 
evaded by conscious insincerity. Thus much for The 
House of Life, of which the sonnet Nuptial Sleep is 
one stanza, embodying, for its small constituent share, 
*a beauty of natural universal functionj'only to be repio- 
bated in art if dwelt on (as I have shown that it is not 
here) to the exclusion of those other highest tbings of 
which it is the harmonious concomitant 

At page 342, an attempt is made to stigmatize four 
short quotations as being specially '' my own property," 
that is, (for the context shows die meaning,) as being 
grossly sensual; though all guiding reference to any 
precise page or poem in my book is avoided here. The 
first of these unspecified quotations is from the Last v 
Confession; and is the descripticm referring to the 
harlot's laugh, die hideous character of i^diich, together 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STEALTHY SCHOOL OF CRITICISBi. 483 

with its real or imagined resemblance to the laugh 
heard soon afterwards from the lips of one long cherished 
as an ideal, is the immediate cause which makes the 
maddened hero of the poem a murderer. Assailants 
may say what they please ; but no poet or poetic reader 
will blame me for making the incident recorded in these 
seven lines as repulsive to the reader as it was to the 
hearer and beholder. Without this, the chain of motive 
and result wotdd remain obviously incomplete. Observe 
also that these are but seven lines in a poem of some 
five hundred, not one other of which could be classed 
with them. 

A second quotation gives the last two lines only of the 
following sonnet, which is the first of four sonnets in 
The House of Life jointly entitled Willowwood : — 

'' I aat with Love upon a woodside well, 

Leaning across the water, I and he ; 

Nor ever did he speak nor looked at me^ 
But touched bis lute wherein was audible 
The certain secret thing he had to tell : 

Only our mirrored eyes met silently 

In the low wave ; and that sound seemed to be 
The passionate voice I knew ; and my tears felL 

" And at their fall, his eyes beneath grew hers; 
And with his foot and with his wing-feathers 

He swept the Spring that watered my heart's drouth. 
Then the dark ripples spread to waving hair, 
And as I stooped, her own lips rising there 

Bubbled with brimming kisses at my mouth." 

The critic has quoted (as I said) only the last two 
Unes, end he has italicized the second as something 
unbearable and ridiculous. Of course the inference 
would be that this was really my own absurd bubble- 
and-squeak nolion of an actual kiss. The reader will* 
perceive at once> from the whole sonnet transcribed 
above, how untrue such an inference would be. The 
sonnet describes ^a dream or trance of divided love 
momentarily re-united by the longing fiincy;"and in 
the imagery of tlM dream, the face of the beloved rises 



Digitized 



by Google 



4S4 LITERAR Y PAPERS. 

through deep dark waters to kiss the lover. Thus tiie 
phrase, "Bubbled with brimming kisses/' etc., bears 
purely on the special S3rmbolism employed, and from 
Aat point of view will be found, I believe, perfectly 
simple and just. 

A third quotation is from Eden Bower, and says, 

" What more prize than love to impel thee ? 
Grip and lip my limbs as I tell thee I " 

Here again no reference is given, and naturally the 
reader would suppose that a human embrace is described. 
The embrace, on the contrary, is thatof a fabled snake- 
woman and a snake. It would be possible still, no 
doubt, to object on other grounds to this conception ; but 
the ground inferred and relied on for full effect by the 
critic is none the less an absolute misrepresentation. 
These three extracts, it will be admitted, are virtually, 
though not verbally, garbled with malicious intention; 
and the same is the case, as I have shown, with the 
sonnet called Nuptial Sleep when purposely treated as a 
" whole poem." 

The last of the four quotations grouped by the critic 
as conclusive examples consists of two lines from 
Jenny. Neither some thirteen years ago, when I wrote 
this poem, nor last year when I published it, did 
I fail to foresee impending charges of recklessness and 
aggressiveness, or to perceive that even some among 
those who could really read the poem, and acquit me on 
these grounds, might still hold that the thought in it had 
better have dispensed with the situation which serves 
it for framework. Nor did I omit to consider how far 
a treatment from without might here be possible. But 
the motive powers of art reverse the requirement of 
science, and demand first of all an inner standing-point. 
The heart of such a mystery as this must be plucked 
from the very world in which it beats or bleeds; and 
the beauty and pity, the self-questionings and all-ques- 
tionings which it brings with it, can come with full force 
only from the mouth of one alive to its whole appeal. 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STEALTHY SCHOOL OF CRITICISM. 485 

such as the speaker put forward m the poem, — ^that is^ 
of a young and thoughtftd man of the world. To such 
a speaker, many half-cynical revulsions of feeling and 
reverie, and a recurrent presence of the impressions of 
beauty (however artificial) which first brought him with- 
in such a circle of influence, would be inevitable features 
of Ae dramatic relations portrayed. Here again I can 
give tile lie, in hearing of honest readers, to the base or 
trivial ideas which my critic labours to connect with the 
poem. There is another little charge, however, which 
this minstrel in mufti brings against Jenny^ namely, 
one of plagiarism from that very poetic self of his which 
the tutelary prose does but enshroud for the moment 
This question can, fortunately, be settled with ease by 
others who have read my critic's poems; and thus I 
need the less regret that, not happening myself to be in 
that position, I must be content to rank with those who 
cannot pretend to an opinion on the subject. 

It would be humiliating, need one come to serious 
detail, to have to refute such an accusation as that of 
"binding oneself by solemn league and covenant to 
extol lleshliness as the distinct and supreme end of 
poetic and pictorial art'' ; and one cannot but feel that 
here every one will think it allowable merely to pass by 
with a smile the foolish fellow who has brought a charge 
thus framed against any reasonable man. Indeed, what 
I have said already is substantially enough to refute it, 
even did I not feel sure that a fair balance of my poetry 
must, of itself, do so in the eyes of every candid reader. 
I say nothing of my pictur^; but those who know 
them will laugh at the idea, u^hat I may, nevertheless, 
take a wider view than some poets or critics, of how 
much, in the material conditions absolutely given to 
man to deal with as distinct from his spiritual aspira- 
tions, is admissible within the limits of Art, — this, I say, 
is possible enough ; nor do I wish to shrink from such 
responsibility. But to state that I do so to the ignoring 
or overshadowing of spiritual beauty, is an absolute 



Digitized 



by Google 



486 LITER A R Y PAPERS. 

&lsehoody impossible to be put forward except in the 
indulgence of prejudice or rancouK[ 

I have selected, amid much railing on my critic's part^ 
I what seemed th e most represen^ tjYf '"^iV tinent ag ainst 
I me, a nd have, so far, answered iC Ite remaining cunises 
set forth how others and myself " aver that poetic ex- 
pression is greater than poetic thought . • . and sound 
superior to sense " — an accusation elsewhere, I observe, 
expressed by saying that we "wish to create form for its 
own sake." If writers of verse are to be listened to in 
such arraignment of each other, it might be quite com- 
petent to me to prove, from the worics of my firiends in 
questicHi, that no such thing is the case with them ; but 
my present function is to confine myself to my own 
defence. This, again, it is difficult to do quite seriously. 
It is no part of my undertaking to dispute the verdict 
of any "contemporary," however contemptuous or con- 
temptible, on my own measure of executive^* success; 
but the accusation cited above is not against the poetic 
value of certain work, but against its primary and (by 
assumption) its admitted aim. And to this I must reply 
that so far, assuredly, not even Shakspeare himself 
could desire more arduous human tragedy for develop- 
ment in Art than belongs to the themes I venture to 
embody, however incalculably higher might be his power 
of dealing with them. What more inspiring for poetic 
effort than the terrible Love turned to Hate, — perhaps 
the deadliest of all passion-woven complexities, — ^which 
is the theme of Sisfer Helen, and, in a more fimtastic 
form, of Eden Bower — the surroundings of both poems 
being the mere machinery of a central universal 
meaning? What, again, more so than the savage 
penalty exacted for a lost ideal, as expressed in the 
Last Confession; — than the outraged love for man 
and burning compensations in art and memory of 
Danfe at Verona; — than the baffling problems which 
the face of Jenny conjures up ; — or than the analysis 
of passion and feeling attempted in The House of Ufe, 



Digitized 



by Google 



THE STEALTHY SCHOOL OF CRITICISM. 487 

and others among the more purely YfnssX poems? 
I speak here, as does my critic in the clause adduced, of 
omit not of achievement; mid so far, the mere summary 
is instantly subversive of the preposterous imputation. 
To assert that the poet whose matter is such as this 
aims chiefly at " creating form for its own sake/' is^ in 
&ct, almost an ingenuous kind of dishonesty ; for surely 
it delivers up the asserter at once, bound hand and foot, 
to the tender mercies of contradictory proof. Yet this 
may fairly be taken as an example of the spirit in which 
a constant effort is here made s^inst me to appeal to 
those who either are ignonmt of what I write, or else 
belong to the large class too easily influenced by an 
assumption of authority in addressing them. The false 
name appended to the article must, as is evident, aid 
this position vastly ; for who, after all, would not be apt 
to laugh at seeing one poet confessedly come forward 
as aggressor against another in the field of criticism ? 

It would not be wordi while to lose time and patience 
in noticing nunutely how the system of misrepresenta* 
tion is carried into points of artistic detail, — giving us, 
for example, such statements as that the burthen em- 
ployed in the ballad of SisUr Helen "is repeated 
with little or no alteration through thirty-four verses," 
whereas the fact is, that the alteration of it in every, 
verse is the very scheme of the poem. But these are 
DEiinor matters quite thrown into the shade by the critic's 
more daring sallies. In addition to the class of attack I ^ 
have answered above, the article contains, of course, an 
i mmense amount of persoiuU palHiliesa, : as^formsiance. 
attributions of my work to this, that, or the other absurd 
derivative source; or again, pure nonsense (which can 
have no real meaning even to the writer) about "one 
art getting hold of another, and imposing on it its con- 
ditions and limitations " ; or, indeed, what not besides ? 
However, to such antics as this, no more attention is 
possible dian that which Virgil enjoined Dante to bestow 
on the meaner phenomena of his pilgrimage. 



Digitized 



by Google 



488 UTEBAR Y PAPERS. 

Thus far, then, let me thank you for the opportuniQr 
afforded me to jom issue with the Stealthy School of 
Criticism. As for any literary justice to be done on 
this particular Mr. Robert-Thomas, I will merely ask 
the reader whether, once identified, he does not become 
manifestly his own best "sworn tormentor**? For 
who will then fail to discern all the palpitations which 
preceded his final resolve in the great question whether 
to be or not to be his acknowledged self when he became 
an assailant ? And yet this is he who, from behind his 
mask, ventures to charge another with "bad blood," 
with " insincerity," and the rest of it (and that where 
poetic fancies are alone in question) ; while every word 
on his own tongue is covert rancoun and every stroke 
from his pen perversion of truth, ^et, after all, there 
is nothing wonderful in the lengths to which a fretful 
poet-critic will carry such grudges as he may bear, while 
publisher and editor can both be found who are willing 
to consider such means admissible, even to the clear 
subversion of first professed tenets in the Review which 
they conduct. 

In many phases of outward nature, the principle of 
chaff and grain holds good, — the base enveloping the 
precious continually ; but an untruth was never yet the 
husk of a truth. Iliresh and riddle and winnow it as 
you may, — let it fly in shreds to the four winds, — ^false- 
hood only will be that which flies and that which stays. 
And thus the sheath of deceit which this pseudon3rmous 
undertaking presents at the outset insures in fact what 
will be found to be its real character to the core. 



Digitized 



by Google 



489 



HAKFS MADELINE, AND OTHER POEMS. 

Above all ideal personalities with which the poet must 
learn to identify himself, there is one supremely real 
which is the most imperative of all ; namely, that of his 
reader. And the practical watchfulness needed for such 
assimilation is as much a gift an^^ instinct as is the 
creative grasp of alien character, lit is a spiritual con- 
tact, hardly conscious yet ever^ltiicwed, aijd which 
must be a part of the very act of productionfj Among 
the greatest English singers of the past, j^STnaps four 
only have possessed this assimilative power in pure 
perfection. These are Chaucer, Shakespeare, Byron, 
and Burns ; and to their names the world may probably 
add in the future that of William Morris. 

We have no thought of saying that not to belong to 
this circle, widest in range and narrowest in numbers, is 
to be but half a poet. It is with the poetic glory as 
with the planetary ones; this too has satellites called 
into being by the law of its own creation. Not every 
soul specially attuned to song is itself a singer; but 
the productive and the receptive poetic mind are mem- 
bers of one constellation ; and it may be safely asserted 
that to take rank in the exceptional order of those 
bom with perfect though passive song-perception is to 
be even further removed from the "general reader" 
on the one hand than from the producer of poetry on 
the other. 

But some degree, entire or restricted, of relation to 
the outer audience, must be the test of every poef s voca- 
tion, and has to be considered first of all in criticizing his 
work. The book under notice has perhaps as limited a 



Digitized 



by Google 



490 LITERARY PAPERS. 

reach of appeal as can well be imagined, and the writer's 
faculty of rapport seems on the whole imperfect ; yet 
there are qualities in what he has written which no true 
poetic reader can regard with indifference. 

The best and most sympathetic part of Dr. Hake's 
volume is decidedly its central division — the one 
headed Parables, Had one poem of this section, 
quaintly called Old Souls, come first in the book, 
the favourable impression on opening it must have 
been immediate and conchisive. The poem is a sym- 
bolic expression of the humility of Christ in His personal 
ministering to man's needs and renewal of hllen 
humanity; and the subject is carried out with great 
completeness as regards the contrast between Christ 
Himself and His earthly representatives, His relation to 
all classes of men, and the deliberate simplicity of His 
beneficent labour in the soul. The form of expression 
adopted in this poem is of the highest order of homely- 
pathos, to which no common word comes amiss, and yet 
in which the sense of reverence and appropriateness is 
everywhere perfect. The piece is so hi^ in theme, and 
so utterly good of its class, that we shall not attempt to 
extract from it, as its unity of purpose and execution 
throughout is the leading quality without which no idea 
of its merit can be conveyed. 

Two others among the four Parables, — TMe Lify 
of the Valley and The Deadly Nightshade^ihovLgYi 
somewhat less perfect successes ttian this, rival it in 
essential value. They are contrasted pictures ; the first, 
of poverty surrounded by natural influences and the com- 
pensations of universal endowment ; the other, of poverty 
surrounded in the life of cities by social rejection only, 
and endlessly instigated to snatch some share of good by 
the reiterated scoff) " This is not for thee." In the first 
poem a young forest-bred girl, in the second a boy reared 
in the fetid life of courts and alleys, is the medium 
through which the lesson is developed. Here, again, we 
are at some loss to express the poems by extract ; but 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKE'S MADELmE, AND OTHER POEMS. 491 

with this proviso we may take from the Lify of the 
Valhy a few sweet stanzas of simple description :— 

•• The wood is what it was of old, 

A timber-farm where wild flowers grow : 
There woodman's axe is never cold, 

And lays the oaks and beeches low : 
But though the hand of man deface» 
The lily ever grows in grace. 

"Of their sweet loving natures proud, 
The stock-doves sojourn in the tree : 
With breasts of feathered sky and cloud, 
And notes of soil though tuneless glee, 
Hid in the leaves they take a spring. 
And crush the stillness with their wing. 

" The wood to her was the old wood. 

The same as in her father's time ; 
Nor with their sooths and sayings good 

The dead told of its youth or prime. 
The hollow trunks were hollow then. 
And honoured like the bones of men." 



This simple story of parable has great beauties, especi- 
ally at the point where the first acquaintance with death 
among those she loved causes the child to wander forth 
bewildered, and at last, weary and asleep in the wood, to 
find the images of terror and decay hitherto overlooked 
in nature assume prominence for the first time in her 
dreams. This is very subtle and lovely ; but it must be 
added that even this poem, which is among the least 
difficult in the book, needs some re-reading before it is 
mastered, and leaves an impression — if not of artifici- 
ality, to. which the author's mind is evidently superior — 
yet of a singular native tendency to embody all concep- 
tions through a remote and reticent medium. This, 
however, is much less apparent in the Deadly Night- 
shadey which approaches Old Souls in clearness and 
mastery, tiiough not essentially finer than its companion 
poem, die Lily. The description here of the poor 
beggar-boy's drunken mother is in a vein of true realistic 



Digitized 



by Google 



492 LITERARY PAPERS. 

tragedy ; and the dire directness of treatment is carried 
on throughout : — 

** Then did he long for once to taste 

The reeking viands, as their smell 
From cellar-gratings ran to waste 

In gusts that sicken and repel. 
Like Beauty with a rose regaled^ 
The grateful vapours he inhaled. 

''So oft a-hungered has he stood 

And yam of fasting fancy spu% 
As wistfully he watched the food 

"With one foot out away to run, 
Lest questioned be his only right 
To revel in the goodly si|ht. 

** Lest justice should detect within 

A blot no human eye could see, 
He dragged his rags about his skin 

To hide from "view his pedigree : 
He deemed himself a thief by law. 
Who stole ere yet the light he saw, 

•* His theft, the infancy of crime. 

Was but a sombre glance to steal. 
While outside shops he spent his time 

In vain imaginings to deal, 
With looks of awe to speculate 
On all things good, while others ate. 

" No better school his eyes to guide, 

He lingers by some savoury mass, 
And watches mouths that open wide. 

And sees them eating through the glass : 
Oft his own lips he opes and shuts,—- 
With sympathy his fancy gluts. 

" Yet he begs not, but in a trance 

Admires the scene where numbers throng; 
And if on him descends a glance. 

He is abashed and slinks along ; 
•Nor cares he more, the spell once broke, 
Scenes of false plenty to invoke.** 

The fourth Parable, called Immortalify, deals with 
the course of an elevated soul in which thwarted 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKE'S MADELINE, AND OTHER POEMS. 493 

ambition is tempered by resignation, and which looks 
into the future of eternity for free scope and for a re- 
versed relation between itself and antagonistic natures. 
This, however, is somewhat obscurely rendered, and 
must be pronounced inferior to the other three. Of 
these three, we may say that, if they are read first in the 
book, the fit reader cannot but be deeply moved by their 
genuine human and spiritual sympathy, and by their 
many beauties of expression ; and will be prepared to 
look thenceforward past his author's difficulties to the 
spirit which shines through them, with a feeling of 
enthusiastic confidence. 

We may turn next to the last section of the volume — 
the series of sixty-five short poems entitled in the 
aggregate The WorlcCs Epitaph, Many of these 
reveal the same tender thought for human suffering 
which is the great charm of the Parables^ and it is 
sometimes expressed with equal force and beauty. 
Such pre-eminently are those On the Outcast and 
On the Saint ; the last conveying a picture which has 
something startlingly imaginative, of a member of the 
commxmion of saints presenting before the supreme 
Tribunal, as an appeal for pity, some poignant persona- 
tion of tfie anguish endured on earth. However, here 
again the order of the poems seems unfortunate, the 
series opening with some of the weakest Many of 
the "epitaphs" have appended to them an "epode," 
which appears to be, generally or always, the rejoinder 
of the world to the poet's reflection ; but perhaps these 
do not often add much to the force of the thing said. 
Such a scheme as this series presents is obviously not to 
be fairly discussed in a brief notice like the present ; but 
we may note as interesting examples, in various degrees, 
of its plan, the epitaphs On the Sanctttary, On Time, 
On the Soul, On the Valley of the Shadow, On Life, On 
the Seasons of Life, On the Window, On Early Death, On 
the Deserted, On Dissipated Youth, On the Statesman, On 
Old Age, oil Penitence, and On the Struggle for Immor- 



Digitized 



by Google 



494 LITEM AR Y PAPERS. 

talify. As a specimen of this section of the book we 
e^ctract the following brief poem On the Sotd }-* 

^ Free as the soul, the spire ascends ; 

Heaven lets it in her presence ait; 
Yet ever back to earth it tendS) — 

The tranquil waters echo it 
So falls the future to the past ; 
So the high soul to earth is cast 

M But though the soul thus nobly fisil^ 
Not long it borders on despair; 
It still the fallen glory hails, 

Though lost its conquests in the air« 
While truth is yet above, its good 
Is measured in the spirit's flood. 

** Though not at first its holy U^ht 

Is figured in that mirror's mcc^ 
It scarce returns a form less bright 

Than fills above a higher place. 
The one was loved though little known, 
The other is the spirits' own." 

This little piece, in spite of some uncertainty in the 
arrangement of its last stanza, has the dignity and 
ordered compass of a mind natm'ally empowered to deal 
with high things; and this is often equally evident 
throughout the series. Still we have to regret that even 
complete obscurity is a not uncommon blemish, while 
imperfect expression seems too often to be attributable 
to a neglect of means ; and this despite the fact that a 
sense of style b certainly one of the first impressions 
derived from Dr. Hake's writings. But we fear that a 
too great and probably oiganic abstraction of mind 
interferes continually with the projection of his thoughts ; 
and we are frequently surprised to meet, amid the 
excellence and fluent melody of his rhythm, with some 
sudden deviation frc«n the structure of the metre em- 
ployed, which can be attributable only to carelessness 
ana want of watchful revision. It needs such practical 
and patent proofs as this to convince one of neglect where 
the instinct of structure exists so unmistakably ; and it is 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKES MADELINE, AND OTHER POEMS. 495 

then Ihat we be^n to perceive the cause of much tiiat 
is imperfect in the author's intellectual self-expression. 
This is no doubt the absence of that self-examination and 
self-confronting with the reader which are in an abso- 
lutely unwearied degree necessary in art; and the 
question only remains whether the poet's nature will or 
will not for the future admit of his applying at ail times 
a rigorous remedy to this mental shortcoming. 

The same difficulty meets us in excess when we come 
to the poem which stands first on Dr. Hake's titie-page — 
Madeline. With this our remaining space is far fnom 
permitting us to deal at such length as could alone give 
any true idea of its involved and somewhat bewildering 
elements. Its unexplained form is a puzzle at the out- 
set It is delivered in a kind of sdtemating recitative 
between Vakiusa, the name of the perscmified district 
in which the action is laid, and a Ckorm of Nymphs. 
The argument may be summed op somewhat to this 
effect Hermes, a beneficent magician and poet, has 
been enamoured of Daphne, who has since died and 
become to him a ministering spirit and his coadjutress in 
the hallowed ex^dse of his art He has been made 
aware of the seduction of a young girl, Madeline, by the 
lord of the land, and has in vain laboured to prevent it, 
but now calls Daphne to his aid in consoling the outcast 
This angelic spirit conveys her to the magician's home, 
where a sort of heavenly encampment is £M*med, in the 
midst of which Madelinf? lies in magic slumbers watched 
by her protectress. Glad and sad visions succeed each 
other in her sleep, varied but not broken by conference 
with Daphne, who urges her to forgiveness of her 
betrayer. But she has been chosen by a resistless 
power as the avenger of her own wrong; and as this 
ever-recurring phantom of vengeance gains gradual pos- 
session of her whole being, the angelic comforter, who 
has taken on herself some expiatory conmiunion in 
MadeHae's agony, is so wrung by the human anguish 
that she uttdei:goe8 the last pain df humanity in a simu- 



Digitized 



by Google 



496 LITER A R Y PAPERS. 

lated death. Madeline then fulfib her destiny, and 
makes her way, still in a trance of sleep, by stormy 
mountain passes to the castle of him who had wrought 
her ruin ; passes through his guards, finds him among 
his friends, and slays him. She then returns to the 
magic encampment, and lying down by the now un- 
conscious Daphne, is in her turn released by death. 
The poem closes with the joint apotheosis of the consoler 
and the consoled, together with a child, the unborn fruit 
of Madeline's wrong. 

This conception, singular enough, but neither devoid 
of sublimity nor of real relation to human passion and 
pity, is .carried out with great structural labour, and 
forms no doubt the portion of the volume on which 
Dr. Hake has bestowed his most conscientious care. 
But our rough argument can give no idea of the bafQing 
involutions of its treatment and diction, rendering it, we 
fear, quite inaccessible to most readers. The scheme 
of this strange poem is as literal and deliberate in a 
certain sense as though the story were the simplest in 
the world; and so far it might be supposed to fulfil 
one of the truest laws of the supernatural in art — that 
of homely externals developing by silent contrast the 
inner soul of the subject But here, in fact, the outer 
world does not once afiect us in tangible form. The 
efiect produced is operatic or even ballet-like as regards 
mechanical environment and course of action. This is 
still capable of defence on very peculiar ideal grounds ; 
but we fear the reader will find the sequence of the whole 
work much more difficult to pursue than our summary 
may promise. 

The structure of the verse is even exceptionally grand 
and well combined ; but the use of language, though 
often extremely happy, is also too frequently vague to 
excess; and the employment of one elaborate lyrical 
metre throughout a long dramatic action, only varied 
by occasional passages in the heroic couplet, conveys a 
certain sense of oppression, in spite of the often felicitous 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKE:S MADELINE, AND OTHER POEMS. 497 

workmanship. Moreover a rigid exactness in the rhymes 
— ^without the variation of assonance so valuable or even 
invaluable in poetry — is apt here to be preserved at the 
expense of meaning and spontaneity^ Nevertheless, 
when all is said, there can be no doubt that the same 
reader who at one moment lays down a poem like this 
in hopeless bewilderment might at another, when his 
mind is lighter and clearer, and he is at a happier junc- 
ture of rapport with its author, take it up to much more 
luminous and pleasurable results, and find it really im- 
pressive. One point which should not be overlooked 
in reading it is, that there is an evident intention on 
Dr. Hake's part to make hysterical and even mesmeric 
phenomena in some degree the groundwork of his concep- 
tion. The fitness of these for poetry, particularly when 
thus minutely dealt with, may indeed a£ford matter for 
argument, but the intention must not be lost sight of. 
Lastly, to deny to Madeline a decided element of 
ideal beauty, however unusually presented, would be 
to demonstrate entire unfitness for judgment on the 
work. 

We have left ourselves no room to extract from 
Madeline in any representative way ; but the following 
two stanzas (the second of them extremely fine) may 
serve to give an idea of the metre in which it is written, 
and afibrd some glimpse of its uniquely fantastic elabora- 
tion. The passage is from the very heart of the poem • 
where Madeline is overshadowed in sleep by the vision 
of her seducer's castle, rousing half-formed horror and 
resolve ; till all things, even to the drapery which clothes 
her body, seem to take part in the direful overmaster- 
ing hour. 

"The robe that round her flows 
Is stirred like drifted snows ; 
Its restless waves her marble figure drape, 

And all its charms express, 
In ever-changing shape^ 
To zephyrs that caress 

32 



Digitized 



by Google 



498 LITERARY PAPERS. 

Her limbs, and lay them bare, 

And all their grace and loveliness declare. 

Nor modesty itself could chide 
The soft enchanters as they past her breathe 
And beauty wreathe 

In rippling forms that ever onward glide. 

" Breezes from yonder tower, 
Loosed by the avenging power, 
Her senses hurry and a dread impart 

In terror she beholds 
Her fluttering raiment start 

In ribbed and bristled folds. 
Its texture close and fine 
With broidery sweeps the bosom's heaving line, 

Then trickles down as fi:x)m a wound, 
Curdling across the heart as past it steals, 
Where it congeals 

In horrid clots her quivering waist around." 

We have purposely avoided hitherto any detailed 
allusion to what appear to us grave verbal defects of 
style in these poems ; nor shall we cite such instances 
at ally as things of this kind, detached from their context, 
produce often an exaggeratedly objectionable impression. 
Suffice it to say that, for a writer who displajrs an 
undoubted command over true dignity of language. 
Dr. Hake permits himself at times the most extra- 
ordinarily conventional (or once conventional) use of 
Della-Cruscan phrases, that could be found in any poet 
since the wonderful days when Hayley wrote the 
Triumphs of Temftr, And this leads us . to a few 
final words on his position as a living writer. 

It appears to us then that Dr. Hake is, in relation to 
his own time, as original a poet as one can well conceive 
possible. He is uninfluenced by any styles or manner- 
isms of the day to so absolute a degree as to tempt one 
to believe that the latest English singer he may have 
even heard of is Wordsworth ; while in some respects his 
ideas and points of view are newer than the newest in 
vogue ; and the external afiSnity frequently traceable to 
elder poets only throws this essential independence into 



Digitized 



by Google 



EAKBS MADELINE, AND OTHER POEMS. 499 

Startling and at times almost whimsical relief. His 
style, at its most characteristic pitch, is a combination of 
extreme homeliness, as of Quarles or Bunyan, with a 
formality and even occasional courtliness of diction 
which recall Pope himself in his most artificial flights ; 
while one is frequently reminded of Gray by sustained 
vigour of declamation. This is leaving out of the ques- 
tion the direct reference to classical models which is 
perhaps in reality the chief source of what this poet has 
in common with the eighteenth century writers. The 
resemblance sometimes apparent to Wordsworth may be 
more on the surface than the influences named above ; 
while one might often suppose that the spiritual tender- 
ness of Blake had found in our author a worthy disciple, 
did not one think it most probable that Blake lay out of 
his path of study. With all his peculiarities, and all the 
obstacles which really stand between him and the read- 
ing public, he will not fail to be welcomed by certain 
readers for his manly human heart, and genuine if not 
fuUy subjugated powers of hand* 



Digitized 



by Google 



500 



HAKFS PARABLES AND TALES. 

The quality of finish in poetic execution is of two kinds. 
The first and highest is that where the work has been 
all mentally '^ cartooned," as it were, beforehand, by a 
process intensely conscious, but patient and silent, — an 
occult evolution of life : then follows the glory of wield- 
ing words, and we see the hand of Dante, as that of 
Michelangelo,— -or almost as that quickening Hand 
which Michelangelo has dared to embody, — sweep 
from left to right, fiery and final. Of this order of 
poetic action, — the omnipotent freewill of the artist's 
mind,— -our curbed and slackening world may seem to 
have seen the last It has been succeeded by another 
kind of " finish," devoted and ardent, but less building 
on ensured foundations than self-questioning in the very 
moment of action or even later : yet by such creative 
labour also the evening and the morning may be blent 
to a true day, though it be often but a fitful or an un- 
glowing one. Not only with this second class, but even 
with those highest among consummate workers, produc- 
tiveness must be found, at the close of life, to have been 
comparatively limited; though never failing, where a 
true master is in question, of such mass as is necessary 
to robust vitality. 

That Dr. Hake is to be ranked with those poets who, 
in striving to perfect what they do as best they may, 
resolve to have a tussle for their own with Oblivion, is 
evident on comparison of his present little volume whh 
its predecessor of a year or two ago. A portion of its 
contents is reproduced firom that former book, but so 
remoulded by a searching self-criticism as to give the 
reader the b^t possible guarantee of its being worth his 



Digitized 



by Google 



BAKERS PARABLES AND TALES. 501 

while to follow the author in his future course. We 
believe, on the whole, that Dr. Hake will do well in 
cultivating chiefly, as he does here, the less intricate of 
his poetic tendencies. His former poem of Madeline, 
— a tragic narrative couched in a metre, and invested 
with an imagery, which recalled the Miltonic ode or the 
Petrarchian canzone, — presented, amid much that was 
unmanageable, some striking elements of success. But 
there were other compositions in the same volume to 
which some readers must have turned with astonish* 
ment, after reading Madeline^ and wondered that the 
writer who had so much genuine command over the 
heart as these displayed should be at pains to put his 
thoughts elsewhere in a difficult and exclusive form. 
Such a book does not get rapidly abroad, yet the piece 
called Old Souls is probably already secure of a 
distinct place in the literature of our day, and we believe 
the same may be predicted of other poems in the little 
collection just issued. 

The finest new poem here is The Blind Bay, which 
gives scope to all the poet's sympathies by summoning 
the beloved beauties of visible nature round the ideal of 
a mysterious exclusion and isolation* Speaking of the 
aim alone, we may say that perhaps there is hardly in 
Wordsworth himself any single poem of equal length 
which from so central a standpoint interpenetrates the 
seen with the unseen, bounded always in a familiar 
circle of ideas. The blind boy — heir to the lands and 
sea-coast which are dark to him alone — ^has their 
beauties transmitted to him by description through his 
loving sister's eyes and lips. Some of the opening 
stanzas, wherein the poet spreads the scenery before us, 
are very direct and spacious : — 

" Qoudfl^ folded round the topmost peaks. 

Shut out the gorges firom the sun 
Till midday, when the early streaks 

Of sunshine down the valley run ; 
But where the opening clifis expand, 
The early sea-light breaks on land* 



Digitized 



by Google 



50t LITERARY PAPERS. 

*< Before the sun, like golden shields, 

The clouds a lustre shed around ; 
V^d shadows gambolling o'er the fields, 

Tame shadows stretching o'er the ground. 
Towards noon the g^eat rock-shadow moves, 
And takes' slow leave of all it loves.** 

The descriptions become yet more beautiful, and 
assume an under-current of relative significance, when 
the sister and brother are the speakers : — 

'' She tells him how the mountains swell, 
How rocka and forests touch the skies ; 
He tells her how the shadows dwell 

In purple dimness on his eyes. 
Whose tremulous orbs the while he lifts. 
As round his smile their spirit drifts. 

<* More close around his heart to wind. 

She shuts her eyes in childish glee, 
' To share/ she said, ' his peace of mind ; 

To sit beneath his shadow-tree.' 
So, half in play, the sister tries 
To find his soul within her eyes. 

" His hand in hers, she walks along 
And leads him to the river's brink ; 
She stays to hear the water's song, 

Closing her eyes with him to tMnk. 
His ear, more watchful than her own, 
Caught up the ocean's distant moan. 

** *The river's flow is bright and dear,' 

The blind boy said, 'and were it dark 

We should no less its music hear : 
Sings not at eventide the lark ? 

Still when the ripples pause, they fade 

Upon my spirit IDec a shade.' 

** * Yet, brother, when the river stops, 

And in the quiet bay is hushed. 
E'en though its gentle murmur drops, 

*Tis bright as when by us it rushed ; 
It is not like a shade the more. 
Except beneath the wooded shore.* " 

The second stanza here has much of that colossal 
infancy of expression which we find in William Blake, 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKE'S PARABLES AND TALES, 503 

Such touches, sometimes quite masterly, as here, some- 
times striving with what yet remains but half said, are 
characteristic of this poet. 

The blind boy — blind early but not from his birth — 
speaks again : — 

" 'The waves with mingling echoes fall ; 

And memories of a long-lost light 
From for-off mornings seem to call, 

And what I hear comes into sight 
The beauteous skies flash back again, 
But ah I the light will not remain 1 '** 

The stanzas which follow are perhaps the most subtle 
and su^estive in the poem : — 

" Awhile he pauses ; as he stops, 
Her little hand the sister moves, 
And pebbles on the water drops. 

As it runs up the sandy grooves ; 
Or to her ear a shell applies, 
With parted lips and dreaming eyes. 

** ' That noise 1 ' said he, with lifted hand. 
' The sea-gull's scream and flapping wing& 
Before the wind it flies to land, 

And omens of a tempest brings.' 
She tells him how the sea-bird pale 
Whirls wildly on the coming gale. 

'' ' And is the sea alone ? Even now 

I hear faint mutterings.' ' Tis the waves.* 
' It seems a murmur sweeping low 
And hurrying through the distant caves. 
I hear again that smothered tone, 
As if the sea were not alone.'* 

Less elevated in tone than The Blind Bey, but 
perhaps still more complete from the artistic point of 
view, in the clear flow of its familiar observation and 
homely pathos, is the poem entitled The Cripple. We 
have given The Blind Boy the higher place on account 
of its more ideal treatment ; but a careful reading of The 
Cripple will show it to be nothing less than a master- 
piece in its simple way, and so blended together in its 
parts that it is very difficult to extract ih>m it so as to 



Digitized 



by Google 



504 LITERARY PAPERS. 

convey the emotional impression which the verses pro- 
duce when read in sequence. The cripple is the helpless 
son of a poor village widow, charwoman or washer- 
woman as the chance presents itself. 

** As a wrecked vessel on the sand, 

The cripple to his mother clung : 
Qose to the tub he took his stand 

While she the linen washed and wrung; 
And when she hung it out to dry 
The cripple still was standing by. 

** When she went out to char, he took 

His fife, to play some simple snatch 
Before the inn hard by the brook, 

While for the traveller keeping watch, 
Against the horse's head to stand, 
Or hold its bridle in his hand. 

** Sometimes the squire his penny dropped 

Upon the road for him to clutch, 
Which, as it rolled, the cripple stopped, 

Striking it nimbly with his crutch. 
The groom, with leathern belt and pad, 
E'en found a copper for the lad. 

" The farmer's wife her hand would dip 

Down her deep pocket with a sigh ; 
Some halfpence in his hand would slip. 

When there was no observer nigh ; 
Or give him apples for his lunch, 
That he loved leisurely to munch. 

" But for the farmer, what he made^ 
At market table he would spend. 
And boys who used not plough or spade 

Had got the parish for their fi-iend : 
He paid his poor-rates to the day, 
So let the boy ask parish-pay. 

"Yet would the teamster fed his fob» 

The little cripple's heart to cheer, 
Himself of penny pieces rob. 

That he begrudged to spend in beer. 
His boy, too, might be sick or sore^ 
So gave he of his thrifty store." 

All this is a good deal lost without the aid of the 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKBS PARABLES AND TALES, 505 

preceding introductory picture of village life. The above 
passage is succeeded by a charming brookside description 
of the cripple's favourite haunt. What follows we must 
pursue to the close, though the extract be rather a long 
one: — 

" There with soft notes his fife he filled— 

A mere tin plaything from the mart, 
With holes at equal distance drilled, 

To which his fingers grace impart, 
While it obeys his lips' control, 
And is a crutch unto his souL 

** At church he longed his fife to try, 
Where oboe gave its doleful note^ 
Where fiddle scraped harsh melody, 

Where bass the rustic vitals smote. 
Such music then was all in vogue, 
And psalms were sung in village brogue 

" His cheerful ways gave many cause 

For wonder ; nay, his very joy 
To others' mirth would give a pause : 

His soul so like his body's toy, 
So childish, yet with fiice of age^ 
Beginning at life's latter stage. 

" Dead is his crutch on moping days^» 

Tis so they call his sickly fits» 
When by his side his crutch he laya^ 

And in the chimney-comer sits^ 
Hobbling in spirit near the yew 
Thgt in the village churchyard grew. 

"Ah 1 it befeU at harvest-time— 

Such are the ways of Providence,— 
That the poor widow in her prime 

Was fever-struck, and hurried hence; 
Then did he wish indeed to lie 
Between her arms and with her die. 

** Who shall the cripple's woes beguile ? 

Who earn the bread his mouth to feed ? 
Who greet him with a mother's smile ? 

Who tend him in his utter need 7 
Who lead him to the sanded floor ? 
Who put his crutch behind the door ? 



Digitized 



by Google 



5o6 LITERARY PAPERS. 

"Who set him in his wadded chair, 
And after supper say his grace ? 
Who to invite a loving air 

His fife upon the table place ? 
Who, as he plays, her eyes shall lift 
In wonder at a cripple's gift ? 

** Who ask him all the news that chanced— 
Of farmer's wife in coat and hat, 
Of squire who to the dty pranced— 

To draw him out in lively chat ? 
This flood of love, now but a surf 
Left on a nameless mound of turC 

"Some it made sigh, and some made talk, 

To see the guardian of the poor 
Call for the boy to take a walk, 

And lead him to the workhouse door: 
With lifted hands and boding look 
They watched him cross the village brooL" 

Old Morality is a poem differing much from the 
two already dwelt upon, as being a kind of light satirical 
allegory, yet having an affinity to them by its rustic 
surroundings, and producing much the same impression 
as the old verse-inscribed Emblems of a whole school 
of Dutch and English moralists. We hardly think it 
possible to extract from this piece ; nor, though full of 
thoughtful perceptive whimsicality, does it quite possess 
that consequent clear-headedness which must be the first 
principle of all all^ory, whether serious or humorous, 
whereof twilight is the true atmosphere, but fog the utter 
destruction. Nevertheless we may refer the reader to 
the poem itself, as one characterized by flashes of genial 
wisdom and by delicate and pleasurable execution. The 
sound of its title recalls rather awkwardly Scott's Old 
Mortality (a kind of trivial obstruction by no means 
beneath artistic notice) ; and for the symbolism of the 
poem it seems to us that another representative name — 
Old Veracity for instance — ^would have been actually 
more to the purpose than the word Morality, which 
men have long conspired to beset with endless ambi* 
guities. 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKES PARABLES AND TALES, 507 

We have not yet noticed the poem entitled Mother 
and Child which stands first in the volumei and which 
has a more distinctly dramatic aim than appears in its 
other contents. We must admit that this poem is far 
from satisfying us. Its subject is this. A young lady, 
leaving the Opera, sees suddenly in the street a mother 
and infant whose aspect — that of the child especially, 
which seems confused in her mind with the face of her 
affianced lover,-~continues to haunt her memory most 
painfully. Meeting them again by accident, she makes 
inquiry and finds that the child is in fact her lover's 
illegitimate ofispring; whereupon she expresses by 
words and by good deeds the gratitude due to the un- 
conscious agents of her own rescue from the hands of 
him who had ruined and abandoned another. This 
invention is striking and certainly not impossible ; but to 
reconcile us to its exceptional features, it requires much 
more individuality in the working out, and much more 
space for the purpose, than are here bestowed upon it. 
Its steady abruptness in disposing, one after another, of 
incidents sufficiently surprising to give us pause, recalls 
somewhat the pseudo-ballads of a past generation, and 
its execution is certainly stifier and more prosaic than is 
the case with any other piece in the series. However, 
it has, like all its author puts forth, the genuine charm 
of human sympathy, and on a wider canvas its concep- 
tion might probably have been developed to good 
purpose. 

The present writer has on a former occasion spoken 
elsewhere of several poems here reproduced from the 
earlier volume, — notably of Old Souls and the subtly 
exquisite IJfy of the Valley, He will here only note 
that — ^dth the exception of Old Souls, which needed 
and has received hardly any modification — every piece 
which Dr. Hake has presented for the second time has 
been made his own afinesh by that double of himself, the 
self-critic, who should be one always widi the poet. 
We do not venture to say that harmony of sound and 



Digitized 



by Google 



So8 LITERARY PAPERS. 

clearness of structure have been everywhere equally 
mastered throughout the present collection ; but so much 
has been done that to doubt further progress in fresh 
work would be unjust to the author. Though disposed 
to encourage him to the pursuit chiefly of the path in 
poetry which this volume follows, we should not regret 
to find his thoughts clothed sometimes in more varied 
and even more adventurous lyrical forms. 

Though much has been said concerning the matter-of- 
fact tendencies of the reading public which poets desire 
to enlist, it must we think be admitted that the simpler 
and more domestic order of themes has not been 
generally, of late years, the most widely popular. In- 
deed these have probably had less than their due in the 
balance of immediate acceptance. It would be easy to 
point to examples, — for instance, to the work which 
Mr. AUingham has done so well in this field, — above all, 
to his very memorable book, Laurence Bloomfield in 
Ireland^ — ^a solid and undeniable achievement, no less 
a historical record than a searching poetic picture of 
those manners which can alone be depicted with a 
certainty of future value, — the manners of our own time. 
Yet such a book as this seems yet to have its best day 
to come. Should Dr. Hake's more restricted, but lovely 
and sincere, contributions to the poetry of real Ufe, not 
find the immediate response they deserve, he may at 
least remember that others also have failed to meet at 
once with full justice and recognition. But we will hope 
for good encouragement to his present and future work ; 
and can at least assure the lover of poetry (but indeed 
we have proved it to him by quotation) that in these 
simple pages he shall find not seldom a humanity limpid 
and pellucid,^— the well-spring of a true heart, with 
which his heart must mingle as with their own element 

Dr. Hake has been fortunate in the beautiful drawings 
which Mr. Arthur Hughes has contributed to his little 
volume. No poet could have a more congenial yoke- 
fellow than this gifted and imaginative artist The iovely 



Digitized 



by Google 



HAKE^S PARABLES AND TALES. 509^ 

little picture which heads the Lily of the Valley must 
satisfy even the most jealous admirer of the j>oem, and 
that to the Blind Bey leaves nothing to desire, full 
as it is of a gracious and kindred melancholy. The 
illustration to Old Morality is another decided success, 
except perhaps for the too plump and juvenile sexton ; 
and that to the Cripple has great sweetness, only the 
poor widow here is hardly ** in her prime " as described 
in the text, and her son thus looks more like her grand- 
son. We should be glad to find the poet and the artist 
again in company. 



Digitized 



by Google 



510 



III.— SENTENCES AND NOTES. 



' — 1866. — ^Thinking in what order I love colours, found 
the following : — 

1. Pure light warm green. 

2. Deep gold-colour. 

3. Certain tints of grey. 

4. Shadowy or steel blue. 

5. Brown, with crimson tinge. ♦ 

6. Scarlet 

Other colours (comparatively) only loveable according 
to the relations in which they are placed. 

The true artist will first perceive in another's work 
the beauties, and in his own the defects. 

There are few indeed whom the facile enthusiasm 
for contemi>orary models does not deaden to the truly- 
balanced cledms of successive effort in art 

— The critic of the new school sits down before a picture 
and saturates it with silence. 

If one painted Boors drinking^ and even were refined 
oneself, they would pardon and in some degree revere 
one. Or, if one were a drinking boor oneself, and painted 
refinements, they would condone the latter. But the 
refined, painted by the refined, is unpardonable. 

Picture and poem bear the same relation to each other 
as beauty does in man and woman : the point of meeting 
where the two are most identical is the supreme perfec- 
tion. 



Digitized 



by Google 



SENTENCES AND NOTES. $11 

Poetry should seem to the hearer to have been always 
present to his thought, but never before heard. 

The Elizabethans created a style in poetry, and by mis- 
applying some of its qualities formed their prose. The 
Annians created a style in prose, and wrenched its 
characteristics to form their poetry. 

Chatterton can only be underrated if we expect that 
he should have done by intuition all that was accom- 
plished by gradual inheritance from him half a century 
later. 

Invention absolute is slow of acceptance, and must be 
so. This Coleridge and others have found. Why make 
a place for what is neither adaptation nor reproduction ? 
Let it hew its way if it can. 

Moderation is the highest law of poetry. Experimen- 
tal as Coleridge sometimes becomes, his best work is 
tuned but never twanged ; and this is his great distinc- 
tion from almost all others who venture as far. 

The sense of the momintous is strongest in Coleridge ; 
not the weird and ominous only, but the value of monu- 
mental moments. 

The deepest trait of nature in fiction will appear as if 
nothing but fact could have given it birth, and will yet 
show that consummate art is its true source. 

Conceit is not so much the over-value of a man's own 
work as the fatal capacity for abstracting, from his in- 
evitable knowledge of the value of his achievements, an 
ideal of his intrinsic power. 

It is bad enough when there is a gifted and powerful 
opposition to the teachings of the best minds in any 
period : but when the best minds themselves are on a 
false tack, who shall stem the tide ? 



^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



5ia SENTENCES AND NOTES 

As the waifs cast up by the sea change with the 
changing season, so the tides of the soul throw up their 
changing drift on the sand, but the sea beyond is one for 
ever. 

A woman may have some little mercy for the man she 
has ceased to love, but she has none for the memory of 
what he has been to her. 

Seek thine ideal anywhere except in thyself. Once 
fix it there, and the ways of thy real self will matter 
nothing to lliee, whose eyes can rest on the ideal already 
perfected. 

No skunk can get rid of his own name by giving it to 
another. 

In receiving an unjust insult, remember that you can 
afford to despise it; while he who has been guilty of it 
can only despise himself for his act Thus the advantage 
is yours. 

He belonged to that extraordinary class of persons 
whom no amount of intellect can prevent from being 
fools. 

Could I have seen the thing I am to-day ! 

The same (how strange), the same as I was then I 

Yet the time may come when to my soul it may be 

difficult, in such old things, to tell which came first of all 

the days which now seem so wide apart 

^ I was one of those whose little is their own* 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY WILLIAM M. ROSSETTI. 



33 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY WILLIAM M. ROSSETTI. 



Pag^ 35. 
The Bride's Prelude.— A good deal of this uncompleted 
poem was written at a very early date, say 1847-9. This 
portion may have extended up to about p. 52, "Not the 
guilt only made the shame,"* etc. ; and the poem was then 
named Bride-chamber Talk, The date of the remainder is 
less definite to me; perhaps towards 1859-60 for the most 
part ; and in the earlier portion considerable changes in 
diction, etc. were introduced about the same time. My 
brother had practically laid the poem aside for many years 
before his death, and would probably never have completed 
it, even in a longer term of life. I find a memorandum in 
his handwriting of the contemplated conclusion of the poem : 
written perhaps towards 1878. " Urscelyn has become cele- 
brated as a soldier of fortune, selling his sword to the highest 
bidder, and in this character reports reach Aloyse and her 
family respecting him. Aloyse now becomes enamoured of ^ 
a young knight who loves her deeply ; this leads, after fears * 
and hesitations, to her confessing to him the stain on her life ; 
he still remains devoted to her. Ursceljm now reappears; 
his influence as a soldier renders a lasting bond with him 
desirable to the brothers of Aloyse, much as they hate him ; 
and he, on his side, is bent on assuming an important position 
in the family to which he as yet only half belongs. He there- 
fore offers marriage to Aloyse, supported by the will of her 
brothers, who moreover are well aware of the blot they have 
to efiace, which would thus disappear. At a tournament 
Ursceljm succeeds in treacherously slaying the knight to 
whom Aloyse has betrothed herself; and this death is followed 
in due course by the bridal to which the poem relates. It 
winds up with the description of the last preparations pre- 
ceding the bridal procession. Amelotte would draw atten- 
tion to the passing of the time. Aloyse then says : ' There 
is much now that you remember ; how we heard that Urscelyn 



Digitized 



by Google 



5i6 NOTES BY fV. Af. ROSSETTI. 

had become a soldier of fortune, and how he returned here, 
etc. You must also remember well the death of that young 
knight at the tourney/ Amelotte should then describe the 
event, and say how well she remembers Urscelyn's bitter 
grief at the mischance. Aloyse would then tell her how she 
herself was betrothed secretly to the young knight, and how 
Urscelyn slew him intentionally. As the bridal procession 
appears, perhaps it might become apparent that the brothers 
mean to kill Ursceljm when he has married her." 

Page 66. 

Sister Helen. — ^This poem was first published about 1853 
in the DUsseldorf Annual^ at the invitation of the editress, 
Mrs. Howitt. It had been written a couple of years or so 
before. It reappeared with some improvements in the volume 
Poems of 1870 ; and again in the partly modified re-issue of 
that volume in 1881. The stanzas regarding the bride of 
Keith of Ewem are additions proper to this ultimate form of 
the poem. 

Page 75. 

The Staff and Scrip. — My brother found the stoiy of 
this poem in the Gesta Romanorum^ and schemed out the 
poem in September 1849. Its actual composition seems to 
me to have been somewhat later, perhaps towards 1853. 

Page 103. 

• Rose Mary. — This poem was written in the early autumn 
of 1 87 1. The BeryUsongs are a later addition, say 1879. 
The very general opinion has been that they were better 
away, and I cannot but agree with it. I have heard my 
brother say that he wrote them to show that he was not 
incapable of the daring rhyming and rhythmical exploits of 
some other poets. As to this point readers must judge. It 
is at any rate true that in making the word " Beiyl " the pivot 
of his experiment, a word to which there are the fewest 
possible rhymes, my brother weighted himself heavily. 

Page 176. 

The House of Life : Prefatory Note, — ^This note appeared 
in the volume Ballads and Sonnets^ 1881. The point which 
it emphasizes is that a series entitled The House of Life had 
been published in the volume Poems of 1870, consisting at 
that time partly of sonnets and partly of other compositions ; 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY tV. M ROSSETTL 517 

whereas in the volume Ballads and Sonnets the series thus 
entitled consisted solely of sonnets, and was in other respects 
not a little different. 

Page 176. 
The House of Life.— The dates of the various sonnets 
which make up this series are extremely various. The 
earliest of them may date in 1848, or even a year or so pre- 
ceding. The latest come close before, or even in, 1881, in 
the autumn of which year the series was published in the 
same form which it now bears. One positive line of demarca- 
tion between the various sonnets separates those which 
appeared in the volume Poems^ published in the Spring of 
1870, from any others. I am far from having a clear idea or 
definite information as to the true dates of the sonnets. But 
I think the reader is entitled to some sort of guidance re- 
garding them, forming as they do so extremely important a 
constituent in my brother's poetical and intellectual record ; 
and therefore, keeping in view the line of demarcation above 
referred to, I append here a rough suggestion of what may 
have been their sequence in point of date. All the items 
which are here entered "Between 1848 and 1869" appeared 
in the Poems of 1870, except the second and third sonnets 
(Numbers 75 and 76) of Old and New Art, 
Between 1848 and 1869. 

SONlfKTS SONKETS 

MUMBXRXD IfUMBERSD 

90. Retro me, Sathaniu 84. Farewell to the Gleiu 
71 to 73. The Choice. 95. The Vase of Life. 

74 to 76. Old and New Art. 6. The Kiss. 

69. Auttunn Idleness. 7* Supreme Surrender. 

47. Broken Music. 9. Passion and Worship. 
65. Known in vain. 79. The Monochord. 

15. The Birth-bond. 98. He and I. 

67. The Landmark. 99, xoo. Newborn Death. 

63. Inclusiveness. xox. The One Hope. 

77. Soul's Beauty. 2. Bridal Birth. 

78. Body's Beau^. 3. Love's Testament. 

70. The Hill Summit, 4« Lovesight. 

85. Vain Virtues. 10, The Portrait. 

86. I-oat Days. xi. The Love-letter. 

87. Death's Songsters. x6. ADavofLove. 

91. Lost on Both Sides. ax. Love-Sweetness. 
93. The Sun's Shame — z. 93. Love's Baubles. 
97. A Superscription. 95. Winded Hours. 

48. Death-in-Love. 38. The Morrow's Message. 

36. Life-in-Love. 39. Sleepless Dreams. 

37. The Love-Moon. 45. Secret Parting. 
49 to w. Willow-wood. 46. Parted Love. 
55. Stillborn Love. 83. Hoarded Joy. 



li: 



A Dark Day. 83. Barren Spring* 



Digitized 



by Google 



Si8 NOTES BYW.M. ROSSETTl. 




Bttwetn 187 


and 1881. 


SOUHBTB 


S0HNKT8 


MUMBERXD 


MUMBXRKD 


^ 


The Moonatar. 


43- 


Love and Hope. 
Qoud and Wmd. 


30. 


Last Fire. 


44* 


3'* 


Her Gifts. 


53* 


Without Her. 


33- 


Equal Troth. 


54* 


Love's Fatality. 


33- 


Venus Victrix. 


80, 


From Dawn to Noon. 


34* 


The Dark Glass. 


96. 


Life the Beloved. 


35' 


The Lamp's Shrine. 
Gracious Moonlight. 
Love Enthroned. 


40* 


Severed Selves. 


I. 


& 


Through Death to Lore. 


5. 


Heart's Hope. 


66. 


The Heart of the Night. 
Memorial Threshol<fi. 


8. 


Love's Lovers. 


81. 


13. 


The Lovers' Walk. 


88. 


Hero's Lamp. 


13' 


Youth's Antiphony. 


89. 


The Trees of the Garden. 


X4* 


Youth's Spring-tribute, 
Beauty's Pageant. 


93> 


The Sun's Shame— «. 


I7. 


61. 


The Song Throe. 
The SouTs Sphere. 
Ardour and ilemory. 


18. 


Genius in Beauty. 


6a. 


19. 


Silent Noon. 


U-. 


aa. 


Heart's Haven. 


068. True Woman. 


•6. 


Mid-Rapture. 


69. 


Love's Last Gift. 


a?. 


Heart's Compass. 


70. 


Introductory Sonnet. 


28. 


Soul-light. 


34> 


Pride of Youth. 


43. 


Hope overtaken. 


94- 


Michelangelo's Kiss. 



Tfu Recollections of Dante Gabriel RossetU^ the work of the 
friend of his closing days, Mr. Hall Caine, shows that the 
author regarded Still-bom Love, Known in Vain, Lost Days, 
and The One Hope (Nos. 55, 65, 86, and loi), as about the 
best of the series. 

Pages 215, 216. 

Soul's Beauty and Body's Beauty.— These two sonnets 
were written respectively for Rossetti's pictures entitled 
Sibylla Palmifera and lAUth. They might therefore, if he 
had not himself embodied them in The House of Life, have 
appeared appropriately in the section of the present book 
named Sonnets and Verses for Rossettfs own Works of Art 

Page 237. 

At THE SuN-RiSE IN 1 848.— My brother never published 
this sonnet. It is not of his best ; yet, as it openly proclaims 
that he shared the aspirations and exultations of the great 
year of European revolution, I have thought the personal in- 
terest attaching to the sonnet to be such as to entitle it to 
something better than final oblivion. 

Page 237. 

Autumn Song.— This lyric was set to music by Mr. Dann- 
reuther during my brother's lifetime, and was published in 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY W. M. ROSSETTL 519 

that fonn — ^though not othefwiee. I have therefore felt no 
hesitation in including it among his collected works. As to 
the next following lyric, The Lady's Lament, which had 
hitherto been wholly unpublished, I did hesitate; but I 
finally admitted it, as being a somewhat marked performance 
of its class. The class is the same as with me Autumn 
Song; each being the utterance of a dreamy or indeed 
morbid mood of desolation to which the youth of our modem 
generations is prone. 

The Portrait. — In printed notices of my brother's poems 
I have often seen the supposition advanced that this poem 
was written after the death of his wife, in relation to some 
portrait he had painted of her during her lifetime. The 
supposition is very natural — yet not correct. The poem 
was in fact an extremely early one, and purely imaginary, — 
perhaps, in the first draft of it, as early as 1847 ; it was after- 
wards considerably revised. 

Page 252. 

On Refusal of Aid between Nations.— This sonnet 
was written in 1S49, or perhaps 1848. It refers to the apathy 
with which other countries witnessed the national struggles 
of Italy and Hungary against Austria. 

Page 255. 

A Trip to Paris and Belgium. — In the autumn of 1849 
my brother undertook this trip along with Mr. Holman Hunt. 
He wrote the verses mostly while actually travelling by rail, 
etc., and sent them in his letters to me. Under the above 
heading I have pieced together such portions of his verse- 
missives as appear to me worthy of preservation in the present 
form. Much the same observation applies to the two ensuing 
sonnets. The Staircase of Notre Dame, Paris, and On 
Leaving Bruges; and to the lyric. Near Brussels, a 
Halfway Pause. The sonnet, Plau de la BastilU, Paris, 
belongs to the same series ; it is the only one of the set ^ich 
my brother published in one of his volumes {Ballads and 
Sonnets), 'th.e lyric Antwerp and Bruges is an altered 
version (as 1 find it in his own MS.) of The Carillon^ which 
was printed in The Germ, 



Digitized 



by Google 



520 NOTES BYW.M. ROSSETTI. 

Page 265. 

Vox EccLESLE Vox Christi.— This sonnet, hitherto un- 
published, was written in 1849. My brother wrote it to serve 
as a pendent to a sonnet of my own composition which was 
published in The Genn^ 1850, under the vague title The Evil 
under the Sun (" How long, O Lord," etc.). That title was 
vamped up to appease the publisher's nervousness; the 
sonnet bemg in fact written by me as a sorrowful com- 
memoration of the collapse — ^Ihe temporary collapse, as we 
now know it to have been^-of various revolutionary move- 
ments in Europe, especially that of Hungary. My own title 
for the sonnet was On the General Oppression of the Better 
by the Worse Cause^ October 1849. The sonnet has of late 
years been more than once republished under a more general- 
ized title, Democracy Downtrodden, I mention these facts, 
not to thrust my own performance into notice, but to bring 
out the more clearly the precise point of view which marks 
my brother's sonnet. 

Page 272. 

The Church-porch.— This sonnet was published by my 
brother in the volume Ballads and Sonnets. It was written 
as one of a brace of sonnets. He never published the second ; 
but this is to be found in an article, Dante Gabriel RossetH, 
by Mr. Gosse, printed in The Century Magazine in 1882. I 
am rather reluctant to miss out that second sonnet ; but, as 
my brother saw fit to leave it unused when he gave publicity 
to the first, I have decided to conform. 

Page 272. 

The Mirror. — ^Written in 1850. My brother never pub- 
lished this snatch of verse, but he had a certain liking for it, 
and I think it should now find a niche among his works. 

Page 273. 

A Young Fir-Wood. — A MS. of these verses is marked 
by my brother, " Between Ightham and Sevenoaks, Novem- 
ber 1850." 

Page 273. 

During Music— Written in 185 1. Hitherto unpublished. 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY W. M. ROSSETTL 521 

Page 280. 

Welungton's Funeral. — In one of my brother's jotting- 
books I find the following entry: ''When printing in 1870, I 
omitted the piece on Wellington's Funeral as referring to so 
recent a date ; but year by year such themes become more 
dateless, and rank only with immortal things." 

Page 285. 

On the Site of a Mulberry Tree, etc. — My brother 
had this sonnet printed long ago, but never published it ex- 
cept in the Academy for 15 February 1871. In the last line 
he substituted (in MS.) the word "Starveling's" for "tailor's"; 
and I remember he once told me that his real reason for not 
publishing the sonnet in either of his volumes was to avoid 
hurting the feelings of some sensitive member or members 
of the tailoring craft who might dislike the line in its original 
wording. This point is referred to in a letter addressed by 
my brother to Mr. Hall Caine, and published in that gentle- 
man's Recollections of Dante Gabriel RossetH, 

Page 285. 

On certain Elizabethan Revivals. — ^This sonnet had 
hitherto appeared only in Mr. Caine's volume above-men- 
tioned. My brother had offered it for the collection, Sonnets 
of Three tenturies, compiled by Mr. Caine ; but it dropped 
out of that book, as being little in harmony with the other 
contributions therein by Rossetti. The sonnet was written 
many years prior to the date of either of Mr. Caine's 
volumes. 

Page 286. 

Engush May. — ^This sonnet had not hitherto been pub- 
lished. I regard it as addressed to Miss Siddal, whom my 
brother married in i860. Its date may probably have been 
1854. 

Page 303. 

Dawn on the Night Journey. — ^Also hitherto unpublished. 

Page 340. 

To Phiup Bourke Marston. — ^This sonnet was printed 
in Mr. William Sharp's book, Danle Gabriel Rossetti, a 
Record and a Study, In line 4 he gives the word " sight." 



Digitized 



by Google 



Stt KOTES BY W. M. ROSSETTL 

In the MS. in my own possession I find '*li£^'' instead; 
but I incline to think that Mr. Sharp's version is correct 

Pc^e 341. 
Raleigh's Cell in the Tower. — ^This sonnet was pub- 
lished in Mr. Caine*s Sonnets of Three Centuries, 

Poge 343. 

For an Annunciation, Early Gerhan. — ^This is an early 
sonnet, hitherto unpublished — perhaps the earliest of all the 
Sonnets on Pictures, 

Page 348. 

For a Virgin and Child, by Hans Memmelinck ; and A 
Marriage of St. Catherine, by the Same. — ^These sonnets 
were published in The Germ; I have thought it, on the whole, 
better to admit them here. A few verbal alterations are 
made on MS. authority. 

P<^e 353. 

Mary*s Girlhood. — ^The picture to which these sonnets 
relate was the first oil-painting, 1848-49, completed by my 
brother. The concluding lines of sonnet i, " She woke in 
her white bed," etc, have a more direct connection, however, 
with his second picture, The Annunciation (or Ecu Ancilla 
Domini\ now in the National Galleiy. Sonnet 2 was in- 
scribed by my brother on the frame of his first picture. He 
never published it otherwise; but it has been given in Mr. 
Sharp's book, Dante Gabtiel RossetU^ etc. 

Page 3S7. 
Michael Scott's Wooing. — My brother made two or three 
drawings of this subject of invention, diverse in composition. 
He contemplated carrying out the subject in a large picture, 
which was never executed ; I am not certain whether a water- 
colour of it was produced or not. He took some pains over 
the wording of the illustrative verse, but never published it 
I think it deserves a place here, if merely as appertaining to 
one of his own desig^. See also the prose narrative under 
the same title, p. 439. 

Page 362. 
Mnemosyne. — ^This couplet was inscribed upon the frame 
of the picture entitled Mnemosyne^ or the Lamp of Memory, 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY W. M. ROSSETTT. 523 

GlovENxft E SiGNORiA.— This so-called TtaUan SireeUsong 
H certainly my brother's own composition — the Italian as well 
as the English version. I have seen his MS. of it, replete 
with alterations. In all the instances in which he wrote a 
composition in the two languages, the Italian was, I think, the 
first, and the English the second. 

Page 370. 

Proserpina. — ^This sonnet, and the following one. La 
Bella ManOj might have been included in the section Sonnets 
and Verses for Rossettfs own Works of Art. The fact of 
their being written in Italian as well as English has guided 
me, however, to a different arrangement. 

Page 372. 

Robe d'or, etc. — ^This French couplet with its English 
equivalent — and also the preceding Italian triplet with the like 
— ^may, I think, have been written to serve as motto for some 
picture ; I could not say which. 

Page 374. 
Barcarola. — ^The two little songs thus entitled had not 
hitherto been published ; nor yet the Bambino Fasciato nor 

La RlCORDANZA. 

Page 376. 

THOMiE Fides. — It is only on looking through my brother's 
MSS. that I have become aware of his having ventured thus 
into the realm of Latin verse. I find the little composition 
written out more than once, and with alterations of diction 
which convince me that it must be his own composition. It 
was intended to appear in a " XytxcsX tragedy," The Doom of 
the Sirens, of which he wrote out the scheme. See p. 431. 

Page 177' 
Versicles and Fragments. — I have taken these from 
among various jottings in my brother's notebooks. The first 
item, named The Orchard-Pit, is all that I can find written of 
a poem which was long and seriously projected: the argument 
of the poem appears printed now among the Prose works. 
Of the other items I need perhaps say nothing, unless it be 



Digitized 



by Google 



524 NOTES BY W.M. ROSSETTL 

this — that, slight as they are, they appear to me woitl^ 
of preservation on one ground or another. I do not think 
that any of the Versicles and Fragments belong to my brother's 
earlier period. 

Page 383. 

Hand and Soul. — This story — ^which, brief though it is, 
may rank as the most considerable prose-writing by Rossetti 
apart from what appears in The Marly Italian Poets — was 
written in December 1849, almost entirely in one ni^ht, 
or rather earliest morning (see Mr. Caine's Recollections 
of Dante Gabriel RossetH^ p. 134). It is purely a work of 
imagination; there never was a Chiaro dell' Erma, nor a Dr. 
Aemmster, nor the rest of them. The story was published in 
The Germ; and I have heard of more than one admirer of it 
who made enquiry in Florence or Dresden after the pictures 
of Chiaro — of course with no result save disappointment. The 
statement on page 395, "In the spring of 1847 ^ was at 
Florence," is sdso fictitious, though it has sometimes been 
cited as showing (contrary to the general and correct state- 
ment) that Rossetti had once at least been in Italy. 

Pagei^. 

St. Agnes of Intercession. — ^This fragmentary tale forms, 
I think, no unworthy pendent to Hand and SouL It does 
not seem to be intended to bear an equal weight of moral or 
spiritual significance ; but is not less imaginative, and its 
style of writing, if simpler and less resolutely sustained, 
seems to me fuUy as noticeable and individual. I incline to 
think that it was begun before Hand and Soul— in 1849, or 
even 1848 ; and was continued from time to time, probably 
into the spring of 1850. My brother intended to publish it in 
The Germ; and would doubtless have done so, had that 
magazine been less short-lived. He began an etching to 
illustrate it ; but threw this aside in disgust at his failure in 
technique. Sir John Millais then undertook to execute the 
etching. His production was included in the great Millais 
Exhibition at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1886, and manifestly 
represents the hero of the story painting the portrait of his 
affianced bride during her mortal illness. This, therefore, is 
clearly shown to be the intended y^»a^ of the tale ; as indeed 
one might readily divine from that portion of it which was 
written. At a later date Rossetti himself painted the like 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY fV. M. ROSSETTI. 525 

incident, in its mediaeval phase, under the title of Bonifazio^s 
Mistress, The written portion may be surmised to constitute 
less than half of the projected whole : my brother, according 
to Mr. Caine, indicated, in talking to that gentleman, that it 
would only be about a third. At some much later date, per- 
haps towards 1870, my brother turned his thoughts again to 
this tale, and transcribed the earlier pages of it ; and he again 
paid some attention to it in the last two or three months of 
his life, but without writing anything additional, or even re- 
vising the extant portion. The reader may observe that the 
name in the title, 6"/. Agnes of Intercession^ does not re-appear 
in the course of the story, where the picture itself comes to 
be spoken of: it was only adopted towards the time when the 
beginning of the tale was transcribed. My brother also 
intended to substitute the name ^'Davanzati" for ''Angio- 
lieri " \ but (in order to avoid tampering with an untranscribed 
passage printed at the close of our p. 408) I have found it 
requisite to retain "Angiolieri." Something in the nature 
of actual reminiscence may be traced in the opening details ; 
as that of our father singing old revolutionary and other 
songs, and of the author leaving school early to study the 
painter's art. The motto from Tristram Shandy would not, 
I believe, be discoverable upon the most diligent turning-over 
of the pages of that now too seldom read classic, which fasci- 
nated my brother greatly at a date not much earlier than the 
commencement of this tale : I regard it as his own. 

The first draft of St. Agnes of Intercession begins with the 
following paragraph — discarded when my brother made his 
transcript towards 1870. I preserve it here, as being, in its 
dim way, a true sketch of our father. Where I write " Italy,** 
my brofiier wrote " Poland," or afterwards " France.** " My 
father had settled in England only a few years before I was 
bom to him. He was one of that vast multitude of exiles 
who, almost from lustrum to lustrum for a season of nearly a 
century, have been scattered from Italy over all Europe — over 
the world indeed. Few among these can have less of riches 
than he had, wherein to seek happiness ; but I believe that 
there are still fewer who could be so happy as he was, with- 
out riches, in exile and labour.** 

It may have been rather later than the St, A^nes of Inter* 
cession — say 185 1, and again towards 1855, to judge by the 
character of the handwriting— that Rossetti began another 
story of the fantastic or supernatural, entitled Deuced Odd, or 



Digitized 



by Google 



Si6 NOTES BY W. M. ROSSETTI. 

The DeviFs in it I have forgotten, or perhaps never knew, 
what the narrative was to be : it relates to an actor in the 
walk of legitimate drama. The fragment which remains of 
this story, and I think no more was ever written, is so scanty, 
and exhibits so little of the main purport, that I leave it un- 
printed. Perhaps the idea may have been somewhat, yet 
only remotely, like that of a tale published in Hood's 
Magaxtne^ in which the devil appears on the boards, acting 
his own part in Der FreischUtz or some such stage-piece ; I 
can well remember that both my brother and I, reading that 
tale towards 1845, thought it extremely clever and effective. 
The author remains to me unknown. 

Page ^rj. 

The Orchard Pit. — ^This is the prose narrative written 
with a view to the composition of a poem : see p. 377. It 
dates towards 1871 

Page^zi. 

The Doom of the Sirens. — My brother, I am sure, 
schemed out this "l3nriad tragedy" with a feeling that it 
might really be made to constitute the words {libretto) of a 
musical opera. He regarded the project indeed with some 
eagerness at one time : he had not, I fancy, any clearly de- 
fined idea as to a musician to co-operate with him, but thought 
vaguely of our friend Dr. Franz Hueffer. The date of tiie 
composition may be nearly the same as that of The Orchard 
Pit, but rather later. 

Pag^ 439- 
Michael Scott's Wooing.— See the note (p. 522) to 
the verses bearing the same title. The present project of a 
poem, or perhaps rather of a prose-stoiy, is entirely different 
in its incidents from any of the designs which he made of 
Michael Scotfs Wooing — so far at least as my knowledge 
of them extends. From the character of the handwriting. I 
judge this skeleton-narrative to be two or three years later 
than The Orchard Pit, etc. 

Page 443- 
WiLUAM Blake. — These observations are taken from the 
Life of Blake by Alexander Gilchrist, edition of 1880: the 
large majority of them appeared also in the original edition. 



Digitized 



by Google 



NOTES BY W. M. ROSSETTI. 527 

1863. I need only say here that my brother knew, and had 
a very sincere regard for, Mr. Gilchrist, who died in 1861, as 
he was nearing the close of his excellent and now widely 
appreciated labours on the Life, Rossetti supplied him with 
some important materials, but not with any contributory 
writing of his own. After Gilchrist's death, his widow also 
worked to veiy good purpose upon the task; but she 
thought it desirable to avail herself of my brother's assist- 
ance in certain defined portions of the subject, especially the 
arranging and editing of the poems. I here give the remarks 
of my brother upon the poems ; preceded by his " supple- 
mentary chapter " to the Z^, and followed by his comments 
upon the Designs to the Book of Job, and upon certain points 
connected vwth the designs to tiie Jerusalem, Part of this 
last section (Jerusalem) belongs only to the edition of 1880. 
In the " supplementary chapter" a few of the opening phrases 
must, I consider, be Mr. Gilchrist's own : I have not been at 
the pains of detaching them. Nothing else of any substantial 
bulk or importance was written by my brother for Gilchrist's 
book. The present owner of the copyright handsomely 
made me free to reproduce my brother's contribution in the 
present form. 

Page 478. 

Ebenezer Jones. — From Notes and Queries, 5 February 
1870. This was an answer to a question asked by Mr. Gled- 
stanesrWaugh. 

Page 480. 

The Stealthy School of Criticism. — This article, a 
reply to The Fleshly School of Poetry, was published in the 
Athenceum for 16 December 1871. The Fleshly School of 
Poetry was (as observed in my Preface) an article in the 
Contemporary Review written by Mr. Robert Buchanan, and 
published under the pseudonym " Thomas Maitland." Subse- 
quently to the printing of my brother's rejoinder, the Contem^ 
porary article was enlarged by its author, and re-issued in 
pamphlet-form. Mr. Buchanan has since publicly admitted 
that it was totally unjust to Rossetti : whether it was or was 
not (even apart from its pseudonjrmity) a profligate act of 
literary spite under the disguise of moral purism is a ques- 
tion whicn I leave to the judgment of others. Having been 
revoked, be the act condoned— so far at least as I am con- 



Digitized 



by Google 



\ 



528 NOTES BY W.M. ROSSETTI. 

cerned. My brother refers prominently to a sonnet in The 
House of Life named Nuptial Sleep: this point also is 
touched upon in my Preface. Later on in tiie article he 
adverts to sonnets 29, 30, 31, 39, 40, 41, and 43. In the 
present arrangement of The House of Life^ these are sonnets 
63, Inclusvveness^ 65, Known in Vain, 67, The Landmark, 
85, Vain Virtues, 8^ Lost Days, 87, Death's Songsters, and 
91, Lost on Both Sides. 

Page 489. 

Hake's Madeline, and other Poems. — This critique 
comes from the Academy of i February 1871. The ensu- 
ing critique, of the same author's Parables and Tales^ is 
from the Fortnightly Review, April 1873. 

Page 510. 

Sentences and Notes. — Picked out passim from my 
brother's note-books. The only date which I have given, 
1866, may be about the earliest date of any of these jottings. 
They go on till towards the close of his life. 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



Digitized 



by Google 



