

THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 
OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS 



JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS, 

AUTHOR OF ' ANIMI FIGURA," " MANY MOODS," ETC. 



LONDON: 

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, & CO., i, PATERNOSTER SQUARE. 
1884. 



College 
Library 



V/7 



VAGO CUIDAM 
VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUM 

CUJUS PARS MAGNA VENETIIS SCRIPTA. 
VAGANS POETA 

D.D. 
VENETIIS MDCCCLXXXIV. 



> 1116384 






PREFACE. 

"Y "HE title of this volume sufficiently ex- 
plains its scope and purpose. It is the 
little book of a wanderer; and it is dedicated 
to a wanderer Vago Cuidam, a phrase bor- 
rowed from one of Petrarctt 's familiar letters. 
Since all men on this earth are wanderers, 
this dedication may be taken as addressed to 
himself by any one who finds an echo of his 
thought or feeling in my verse. 

The second section demands some words 
of comment. I wrote it to supplement and 
to explain what is defective and unintelligible 
in a collection of sonnets called ANIMI FIGURA, 



PREFACE. 

published by me in 1882. "Stella Marts" 
forms in fact the transition from "Intellectual 
Isolation'" to "Self-Condemnation" in that 
book. 

The portrait of a beauty-loving and im- 
pulsive but at the same time self-tormenting 
and conscientious mind, which I attempted to 
display in ANIMI FIGURA, was incomplete and 
inexplicable without the episode of passionate 
experience set forth in " Stella Man's." 

These explanations had to be made upon 
the appearance of "Stella Marts'' in VAGA- 
BUNDULI LIBELLUS ] for I wish it to be under- 
stood that the sonnets which compose that 
section were intended for the fictitious char- 
acter of ANIMI FIGURA. Few things are more 
difficult than to express imagined emotions in 
a lyrical form ; and in so far as any success 
may be attained in this attempt, the poet 
exposes himself to the danger of misconstrue- 



PREFACE. 

tion. It is taken for granted that he is 
describing his own experience, although, as 
in the present case, he may have sought to 
adumbrate the form which feelings common 
to all men assume in some specific and 
perhaps abnormal personality constructed by 
his fancy. 

To tell a story in a series of sonnets, is no 
easy task, because the effort to do so puts a 
severe strain upon the law whereby the sonnet 
lives. That form of verse is not designed 
for continuous narration, but for the crys- 
tallization of thought around isolated points 
of emotion, passion, meditation, or remem- 
brance. I have therefore omitted from 
11 Stella Maris" such connecting links as 
ought assuredly to have been supplied if this 
love-episode had been presented in prose or 
idyll, or in any of the numerous types of nar- 
rative verse. What remains will be enough, 



PREFACE. 

I trust, to explain how the fictitious character 
I endeavoured to portray in ANIMI FIGURA, 
yields to a passion which overmasters the 
man at first, how his acquired habits of self- 
analysis necessitate doubt and conflict at the 
very moment of fruition, and how he be- 
comes aware of a discord not only between 
his own tone of feeling and that of the 
woman who attracted him, but also between 
the emotion she inspired and his inalienable 
ideal of love. In a moment of disillusion- 
ment he roughly rejects what he had 
ardently desired, because he finds himself 
upon the verge of disloyalty to his superior 
nature. That his conscience should be 
vehemently stirred in this unsatisfactory 
climax of an adventure on which he had 
staked much, is consistent with the tenor 
of his temperament. The sense of failure is 
intensified by the memory of previous moods 



PREFACE. 

(set forth in ANIMI FIGURA, pp. 15 31) 
which had been inspired by somewhat 
arrogant self-confidence. 

It only remains for me to add that while 
a few of the sonnets in VAGABUNDULI 
LIBELLUS have already appeared in print 
(and for permission to republish them my 
thanks are due to Messrs. Smith and Elder), 
by far the larger part are now published 
for the first time. 



DAVOS PLATZ, March 1884. 



CONTENTS. 

PACK 

THE SEA CALLS 3 

STELLA MARIS n 

AMONG THE MOUNTAINS : 

Winter Nights in the High Alps . . . . . 81 

For a Picture -85 

The Average Man 86 

Adolescenti . . . . . . . ' . -87 

A Problem of the Night .88 

Three Sisters 89 

In Black and White Winter Etchings . . . .90 
The Coming of Spring . . . . . . .96 

The Soul and the Eagle 97 

On the Cowberry Alp 98 

In the Fir Wood 99 

Resignation 100 

THE ENVOY TO A BOOK . . ..'.'... . 105 



xiv CONTENTS. 

HACK 

ART AND POETRY : 

The Sonnet 113 

Music Past and Present 116 

Music . .117 

The Poets of Our Age 118 

A Portrait 1 19 

Angelo Ribello . 120 

Three Successive Portraits of the Same Face . . . 121 
To a Sicilian of To-day . . . . . . .122 

The Birth of Jacopo Robusti . . .123 

JUVENILIA : 

From Friend to Friend . 127 

Dead Love . . . ... . . 128 

At Waking ....... . 129 

The Passing of the Cloud . . ... 130 

Mi Raccomando a te . . . . . . -131 

Fiat Lux 132 

The Magic Isle . . 133 

Love's Idolatry . . . . . . . . 135 

Renunciation . . . . . . . . .136 

The Fall of a Soul 138 

O si, O si ! 139 

In Memoriam 140 

A Sister of the Poor 141 

To the Unseen Beauty 142 



CONTENTS. xv 

PAGE 

The Plovers ...... . 143 

A Boy's Voice Broken ... . . . 144 

A Coat of Arms 145 

Morgenlied 146 

An Autumn Day 147 

On the Hill-side . 148 

To Chrysanthemums ....... 149 

Rosa 150 

' Je suis Trop Jeune" 151 

HERE AND THERE :-- 

La Retraite I$5 

The Strolling Musician 156 

The Jews' Cemetery . .... . . .157 

Before the Dawn 159 

A Crucifix in the Etsch Thai 161 

Monte Generoso . . . . . . .162 

ON CLASSICAL THEMES : 

To the Loved One of the Poet . . . . . .167 

To the Beloved 168 

A Serenata ...... . 172 

The Garland- Bearer .... . . 173 

TRANSLATIONS 

On Disordered Will 177 

Nothing Overmuch . . . .. .178 



xvi CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Willing and Doing . . ..... . . 179 

The Leafless Wood 180 

To Sleep ... . . . . . .181 

To Sleep ......... 182 

Lux Umbra Dei 183 

The Philosophic Flight 184 

ON THEMES OF MEDITATION : 

Autumn Years ........ 187 

Wo die Gotter nicht sind, walten Gespenster . . .188 

Pessimism 189 

The Last Doubt 190 

The Last Despair 191 

The Voice of Rebellion 192 

In Memoriam 19.3 

In Memoriam . . 194 

The Grave of Omar Khayyam 195 

" The World's a Stage ". 196 

" All Life is but a Wandering to Find Home " . . . 198 

Priez Dieu pour lui ! ' . . 199 

A Dream of Burial in Mid Ocean ..... 200 

Burial in Athens 201 

To Night 202 

NOTES .......'.... 203 



c/\ 



THE SEA CALLS. 



THE SEA CALLS, 
i. 

JDROAD shadowy mountains and the boundless plain 
And silver streak of ocean part us, friend, 
Since that last night in Venice and the end 
Of our souls' conflict in a throb of pain. 

The stillness of these hills, these woods, again 
Folds me disquieted ; while you ascend 
Heights hitherto unsought, which lightnings renu, 
Where strife and tumult and ambition reign. 

Come back, come back ! The smooth sea calleth you. 
The waves that break on Lido cry to me. 
England and Alps divide us ; but the blue 

Breadth of those slumberous waters, calm yet free, 
The azure of those deep wild eyes we knew, 
Will bring both home to Venice, to the sea. 



VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



ii. 



1\WAY, away ! The ruffling breezes call ; 

The slack waves rippling at the smooth flat keel ; 

The swanlike swerving of the queenly steel ; 

The sails that flap against their masts and fall ; 
The dip of oars in time, the musical 

Cry of the statue-poised lithe gondolier ; 

The scent of seaweeds from the sea-girt mere ; 

The surge that frets on Malamocco's wall ; 
The solitary gun San Giorgio peals ; 

The murmurous pigeons, pensioners of St. Marl; ; 

The deep tongues of the slender campaniles; 
The song that fitful floats across the dark ; 

All sounds, all sights, all scents born of the sea, 

Venezia, call and call me back to thee ! 



THE SEA CALLS. 



III. 

JL O-NIGHT with noise of multitudinous rills, 

Snow-swollen in full midsummer by the breeze 

That blows from Italy, our silent hills 

Plain to the stars ; dry granite-grappling trees, 

From whose hard boughs the unwilling gum distils, 
Yield, as in grief, Arabian fragrances, 
Waving their plumes, which the wild south wind 

fills 
With moaning music, plangent litanies. 

I through this clamour of hoarse streams, this wail 

Of woods despoiled that weep beneath the storm, 
Too soft, too sweet for our stern upland vale, 

Hear only one deep message borne to me, 

From dark lagoon, from glimmering isle, from 

warm 
Venetian midnight hear the calling sea. 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



IV. 

LIGHTNING; and o'er those hills the rattling shock 

Of Alpine thunder, short, a dropping fire ; 

Unformidable here, but on yon spire, 

Where snow lies ridged, splintering the solid rock. 
Slow heat ; the stout hinds swink in sweating smock ; 

The milking maidens pant by ben and byre ; 

No sooner cut than carried, high and higher 

The scented hay is stored by swathe and shock. 
Such is our summer. Village greybeards swear 

They nor their fathers felt so sultry air. 

But I sit mute : how metal-molten glows 
Thy burnished sea ; one flame ; flamboyant dyes 

Of sulphur deepening into gold and rose ! 

How o'er thy bell-towers boom those thunderous 
skies ! 



THE SEA CALLS. 



v. 

J. HOU art not clamorous. Nay, thy silvery tongue 
And rhetoric that holds me night and noon 
Attentive to one tender monotone, 
Are clear as fairy chimes by lilies rung. 

They speak of twilight and grave ditties sung 

By seamen brown beneath a low broad moon, 
And breezes with the sea-scent in them blown 
At sundown, when the few faint stars are hung 

Dim overhead in fields of hyacinth blue; 

When, lifted between sea and sky, those isles 
North-gazing change from rose and blossoming rue 

To privet paleness ; and dark harbour piles 

Bar the wide fire-irradiate west ; wherethrough 
Declining day, like a dead hero, smiles. 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



VI. 



H 



.OURS, weeks, and days bring round the golden 

moon ; 

While I still wait : I 'mid these solemn firs, 
Late-flowering meadows and grey mountain spurs, 
Watch summer fade and russet hues imbrune 

The stern sad hills. All while thy smooth lagoon 
Invites me ; like a murmured spell recurs, 
When south winds breathe and the cloud-landscape 

stirs, 
One sombre sweet Venetian slumberous tune. 

Arise : ere autumn's penury be spent ; 

Ere winter in a snow-shroud wrap the year ; 
Ere the last oleanders droop and die ; 

Take we the rugged ways that southward lie ; 

Seek by the sea those wide eyes sapphire-clear, 
Those softened stars, that larger firmament. 



STELLA MAR IS. 



STELLA MARIS. 
i. 

1 MUSED on these last miseries of mankind : 

On souls that, fainting, feed a nameless thirst ; 

On hearts that long, with self-loathed longing 
cursed ; 

On loves that know themselves shameful and blind 
Fierce cruel loves that crucify the mind ; 

Dry hearts that throb and throb, yet cannot burst ; 

Souls that will hope, when hope is proved the worst 

Of torments : and I cried, Dwells there behind 
This world of phantoms which allure and fade 

This bubble-world, wherein 't is hell to feel, 

Since action bred by feeling breaks the seal 
Which seemed to clasp truth in the dreams we made 

Dwells there, unseized, unseen, what, once dis- 
played, 

Would prove our Maya-world of wishes real ? 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



ii. 



1V1 Y spirit adream in Venice by the sea, 

Roofed with that crystal dome of luminous sky, 
Where the towered islands of enchantment lie, 
Dallied with dark seductive reverie ; 

For soothing my life's smart with sympathy, 
In self-contented calm, with curious eye, 
Into despair's abyss I dared to pry, 
Nor feared that Maya might descend on me. 

Then o'er a level space of storm-swept sand, 

Unsought, unsummoned, crept the stealthy shade, 
And beckoned me with thin compulsive hand, 

And showed me Thee ! And, lo, thou wast arrayed 
In flame by my soul's conflagration fanned ! 
The charm was woven, and my will obeyed. 



STELLA MARIS. 13 



in. 

V ENICE, thou Siren of sea-cities, wrought 
By mirage, built on water, stair o'er stair, 
Of sunbeams and cloud-shadows, phantom-fair, 
With naught of earth to mar thy sea-born thought !' 

Thou floating film upon the wonder-fraught 

Ocean of dreams ! Thou hast no dream so rare 
As are thy sons and daughters, they who wear 
Foam-flakes of charm fr6m thine enchantment 
caught ! 

O dark brown eyes ! O tangles of dark hair ! 

O heaven-blue eyes, blonde tresses where the 

breeze 
Plays over sun-burned cheeks in sea-blown air ! 

Firm limbs of moulded bronze ! frank debonair 

Smiles of deep-bosomed women ! Loves that seize- 
Man's soul, and waft her on storm-melodies ! 



i 4 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



IV. 

JT^ AIR is the sea ; and fair the sea-borne billow, 

Blue from the depth and curled with crested 

argent : 

Fair is the sea ; and fair the smooth sea-margent, 
The brown dunes waved with tamarisk and willow : 

Fair is the sea ; and fair the seaman's daughter, 

Fairer than all fair things in earth and ocean : 
Fair is the sea; and fair the wayward motion, 
The wavering glint of light on dancing water : 

Fair is the sea ; and fair the heavens above it, 

And fair at ebb the grass-green wildernesses : 
Fair is the sea ; and fair the stars that love it, 

Rising from waves new-washed with orient tresses : 
Fair is the sea ; of all fair sea-things fairest, 
Stella, thou sea-born star art best and rarest ! 



STELLA MARIS. 15 



W HEN thou wert born, star of the salt sea-spray, 
Deep slumber brooded on the swarth lagoon ; 
The western heavens were silvered with a moon 
Sinking beneath those Alpine ramparts grey : 

'Twas the first morning of the month of May ; 

Long whispering wavelets lapped the Lido dune ; 
Shy breezes with a soft low under-tune 
Plained to the orient skies of dawn's delay. 

Then rose the star, Diana, and the foam, 

Touched by her saffron tresses, throbbed with 

morn ; 

Night fled, light sped through all the ethereal 
dome ; 

Earth thrilled and felt the advent of her god ; 

But when his feet the blue sea-pavement trod, 
In that first marriage moment thou wert born. 



16 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



V^xHILD of the sea and sun-god, thou foam-born, 

White as the foam, and as the dawn-star golden, 
Healthful as scent of May-bloom unbeholden 
In the dewed day-spring of the amorous morn ! 

Thou from that birth-hour blossoming still hast worn 
The aureole of thy mystic morning splendour, 
Glamour of sea-waves petulant and tender, 
Perfume of air from pure sea-spaces borne. 

Thou too along the sandy sea-marge roaming 

In childhood's happier days hast caught'the motion 
Of billows rippling from the far free ocean ; 

Hast heard and learned the music of the water, 

When through the veiled night or violet gloaming 
The great sea spake from silence to his daughter. 



S'lELLA MARIS. \1 



VII. 

SAW thee first, and knew not I should love thee, 

Pacing the meadows where narcissus flowers 
Star the green grass, and clustering stars above thee 

Hung the white blossoms of acacia bowers. 
Those rathe acacia branches wove a slender 

Lattice of light and trembling leaves to shield thee; 
Soft was the shade, and soft the shadowy splendour 

Of sunbeams shed through flowers that half con- 
cealed thee. 
Lap-full of stars, white buds and golden, fragrant 

With perfume of the spring in all their bloom, 
Singing a morning song to match the vagrant 

Larks high in air above that leafy gloom, 
Star of my soul, thou stood'st, and far before thee 
Slept the blue sea, heaven's broad blue caverns o'er thee. 



i8 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



/~\S o'er a landscape when the winds are free 

Cloud-shadows sail, and 'neath the changeful skies 
All changes ; for one scene is paradise, 
Another steeped in brooding mystery : 

So seems thy spirit when I gaze on thee; 

For now thy smile is heaven, and now there rise 
Visions of passionate hope that vex thine eyes, 
And now thy mood is mere tranquillity. 

Nor dare I dream, howe'er I muse upon 

The life beneath those radiant limbs of thine, 
That thou thyself art ; like the form divine 

That stirred to greet that sculptor's orison, 

Thou needest love to wake thee; would 'twere 

mine 
To be for thee thy soul's Pygmalion ! 



STELLA MARIS. 19 



IX. 

J. HESE salt sea-lakes, these smooth moon-silvered 

rrteres, 

Have moods of petulant mischief, perilous wrath ; 
When to the skies the churned foam scuds in froth ; 
When black as hate around chafed harbour piers 
Suck snake-like eddies ; when the weltering broth, 

Thick with brewed charms, 'neath close entangled 

spears 

Of fiends in conflict scattering threats and fears, 
Pants in short gasps ; when damned Ashtaroth 
Drives Venus from her sphere ; and on the bar 
Of Lido all night long the ruinous boom 
Of breakers in rebellion, joust and jar, 
Drowning the rain-drenched heavens with spouted 

spoom, 

Threatens another deluge. Thus, my star, 
Hast thou thy moods of tempest and of doom ! 



20 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



x. 

JL FEAR thee when those fervent heavens of light 
Aslumber in thine eyes of amethyst 
Leap into sudden balefires ; or some mist, 
Blown like Scirocco in the sun's despite 

Across the firmament of life's delight, 

O'erspreads thy brow with cloud-films that resist 
Love's proffered prayers and God-sent eucharist, 
Drawing from unknown depths their power to 
blight. 

I know not what of ominous from hell 

Weighs on my heart's joy when I see thee thus, 
Like to lost souls that suffer and rebel ! 

Some doom, thy doom or mine, pursuing thee, 
Rending our lives asunder, threatens us. 
Natheless I find nor will nor force to flee ! 



STELLA MARIS. 21 



XI. 

1 MAY not flee, for I am wholly thine, 

Already thine, and dare not dream of loss ! 
Swift-winged chance, the mystic albatross, 
With plumes too mighty and with charms divine, 

Hath borne me here a suppliant to thy shrine 

In love's enchanted isle, and now doth cross 
On pinions which the waves with foam emboss 
Those dim irremeable wastes of brine. 

I must abide ; for chance hath flung me here : 

Yea, though the summer hours so swiftly flown 
Count but few weeks, they yet were all love's own: 

Love reckons not by time ; his dateless sphere 

Circles in rest for ever round God's throne 
Eternity 's irrevoluble year. 



22 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XII. 

.Til USHED is the music ; all those crowds are gone. 
Flown are the passing strangers, whose dark eyes 
Were bent my soul of souls to scrutinise, 
Darting their wistful flame from foreheads wan. 

Moonlight with lamplight blending slants upon 

The tower that rears yon angel to the skies, 
Where the grey miracle of Venice lies 
Bare to the stars 'neath heaven's pavilion. 

I only wake. I at this hour, when morn 

Whitens the first faint pallor of the north, 
Walk amid ghosts, and restless wander forth, 

Pacing the sombre verge of waves forlorn. 

These wait for day, disquieted. I wait, 

And want thee, and repine, and weep my fate. 



STELLA MARIS. 



LxESTLESS I wander through these windy ways 
And water-paths, where Auster swells the tide 
Surging from Adria's sand-banks o'er the wide 
Salt lakes low-lying and Venetian maze 

Of marble basements. Like a ghost at gaze 

Hurrying I thread the labyrinth hungry-eyed, 
Seeking the one to whom my heart's voice cried 
Through dim-remembered antenatal days. 

Week-long 1 watch and wander ; find not thee : 

Nay, though one spoken word might bring thee 

near, 
My lips are mute. Surely 'twas shown to me, 

How without speech, some while, like morning clear, 
Thy swift bright eyes unsummoned o'er the sea, 
Should dawn, and mine make answer : I am here. 



24 VAGABUNDULI LIB ELL US. 



XIV. 



IGHT, saith the proverb in thy speech, my star ! 

Night is the mother of thoughts infinite. 

Now lovers lone, drowned in the deep midnight, 

Their treasury doors of countless thoughts unbar. 
Yea, those who love, twined from the loved one, are 

Vexed with a thousand shades of vain delight ; 

A thousand wakeful dreams with winnowing flight 

Wave from their restless pillow sleep afar. 
O star, my star ! many as stars above thee, 
Numberless are the thoughts wherewith I love thee ! 

From eve to dawn, waking, I toss and languish : 
For thee, for thee, I find no snatch of slumber : 

The very moonbeams on my bed in anguish 
Wail and lament so that I find no slumber ! 



STELLA MARIS. 25 



xv. 

1 HOU wilt not always have thy seventeen years : 
Thou wilt not always have those hues so fair : 
Thou wilt not always have that golden hair : 
Thou wilt not always have a man to love thee ! 
Time splits the marble walls with strength of years : 
Time makes a lover's heart revive from pain : 
Time cleaves the mountain-flank with constant 

strain : 
With time I'll force thy heart of stone, and love 

thee ! 

heart of stone, and soul of cruelty ! 

How many sighs hast thou drawn forth from me ! 
My heart burns upward like a firebrand when 

1 hear the folk around me speak of thee : 

My heart burns up and flames within me then, 
Hearing thy name upon the lips of men ! 



26 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XVI. 

J_-/IDST thou but know, star of my soul's unrest, 
What pains I suffered for thy sake, my own, 
When thou wert warmly housed, and I alone, 
I, wretched I, the cold, hard pavement pressed ! 

The rain was like rose-water to my breast ; 

The lightnings signs of love in mercy shown ; 
The storm a shower of sweets around me thrown ; 
While I beneath thy window found no rest ! 

While I beneath thy window made my bed, 

Thou wert asleep, and with the spirit's eyes 
I saw thee slumbering in the gates of dreams, 

And seemed to see beneath the calm moonbeams 
Thy pure white bosom all uncovered, 
Thou loveliest angel flown from paradise ! 



STELLA MARIS. 27 



XVII. 

JTOETS and lovers, when the world was young, 
Saw from still waves, from solitary flowers, 
And far blue mountain-tops in tranquil hours, 
Fair human forms emergent. Daphne clung 

Close to the whispering laurel ; Naiads flung 

White arms from troubled fountains ; rainbow 

showers 

Drew Iris down the clouds ; and windy bowers 
With midnight cries of Faun and Satyr rung. 

These dreams are flown : we have outworn romance 
And mythic fable. Yet thy wonderland, 
Thy Venice, from her blossom-like expanse 

Of sea and sky commingling sends forth Thee, 

To greet the soul that seeks her, and to stand 
Fit incarnation of her deity. 



28 VAGABUXDULI LIBELLUS. 



XVIII. 



YEA, 



'twas for Thee we waited. Thou didst lean 
Forth from inanimate loveliness, a soul 
Completing and interpreting the whole 
Of that which Venice and her people mean. 

For me no longer like a painted scene 
Or undecipherable antique scroll, 
Rise palace-fronts around and waters roll, 
Idle imagination's void demesne. 

Spirit in thee meets spirit. That last bliss 

We long for, when we gaze with ardent eyes, 
Striving the world's delight to humanise ; 

Hands that will clasp our hands, lips that might kiss, 
A heart that with our heart can sympathise ; 
I find in thee : but, ah, need more than this ! 



STELLA MARIS. 29 



XIX. 



HEART, that it were possible to stay 
On that first ledge of feeling, when the eyes, 
Inebriate with milk of paradise, 
Swim in the splendour of love's orient day ; 
Nor seek from beauty more than right to pay 
The adoration of the soul, and rise 
Strengthened by worship to eternalize, 
Through art, her message ere she meet decay \ 
Man is too covetous : the poet's dream, 

The painter's vision, voice of seraphim 
Rising like altar-flame into the sky 
Of music, these, though fair, content not him ; 

For he must drink of passion's fiery stream, 
Nor knows if Love will find him ere he die. 



30 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



J. HO U art so frank, so musical ; thy smile 
And speech responsive to the negligent 
Lilt of thy limbs ; thy laughter rippling sent 
Like waves in summer round a windless isle ; 

That I dare half believe no purposed wile, 

Dark scheme or greed for gain or discontent, 
Lurk in thy breast, but fair thoughts innocent, 
Unbargained love and friendship void of guile. 

Dare I believe this ? Dare I dream that thou, 
The dawn-star of this Maya-city spread 
A foam-film on the waters, 'neath that brow 

Alive with latent lightnings, and the head 

Medusa-like where smouldering passions glow, 
Hidest no mystery, no deep shame, no dread ? 



STELLA MARIS. 31 



XXI. 

VV HAT force compels my soul in Thee to find 
The out-flood of her pent-up harmonies ? 
Why wakest thou the notes she pined to seize, 
Locked in the lonely caverns of her mind ? 

What is there in thee that thou canst unbind 
The sealed fount of sacred memories, 
Stirring dim musical remembrances 
Of life in God ere earth's life made me blind ? 

Is it the rhythm of thy strength at rest, 

Or rhythm of thy limbs so lightly swung, 
Or of the heart atremble in thy breast, 

Or of swift words that dance upon thy tongue ? 

Nay, these were well : yet 't was upon thine eyes 
Gazing, my soul remembered Paradise. 



32 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXII. 



VJTVE me thyself! It were as well to cry : 

Give me the splendour of this night of June! 
Give me yon star upon the swart lagoon 
Trembling in unapproached serenity ! 

Our gondola that four swift oarsmen ply, 

Shoots from the darkening Lido's sandy dune, 
Splits with her steel the mirrors of the moon, 
Shivers the star-beams that before us fly. 

Give me thyself! This prayer is even a knell, 
Warning me back to mine own impotence. 
Self gives not self; and souls sequestered dwell 

In the dark fortalice of thought and sense, 

Where, though life's prisoners call from cell to cell, 
Each pines alone and may not issue thence. 



STELLA MARIS. 33 



XXIII. 

J_ WERE prudence, therefore, to delude desire 
With possible fruition ; from afar 
To watch smooth waters silvered by the star, 
And the moon's mirrored loveliness admire. 

'Twere prudence, ere flame fell, to crush that pyre 
The thought of thee built in my soul, and bar 
Her door against thy battail carrying war 
Into the conquered town with sword and fire. 

For yon stars errant of the homeless sky 

None wail but children, yet unlearned to know 
The laws that circumscribe humanity : 

But to man's burning heart what power shall show 
This common prudence ? Human 't is to cry 
For stars that like our soul's star throb and glow. 



34 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXIV. 

/\RT thou love- worthy ? Shall a wretch set free 
By those thy succourable fervid eyes, 
Which with his long life-torment sympathise, 
Crying : We comprehend thy pain and thee ! 

Shall such a wretch weigh if thou worthy be, 

Nor welcome love, though even in reckless wise 
Love wing his wavering way through stormy skies, 
Shrouded in doubt and instability ? 

Not I ! No more I seek than what thou bringest ; 
And all thou askest, thou shalt have from me. 
Give me thyself! Nay, if to gold thou clingest, 

Gold in abundance I will shower on thee ! 

Thine eyes my hope are. It were heaven to gain 
Communion with thee, even in the clasp of pain ! 



STELLA MARIS. 35 



XXV. 



OPARE me not ihou I I would not have thee hide 
The furnace of that fierce imperious gaze, 
Nor pray thee for love's sake to veil the rays 
Streaming from thy white soul, thou deified 

Dream of lust intellectual, carnal pride ! 

What though I swoon on the world's stony ways 
Desiring thee, though 'wildered in thy maze 
Of loveliness I roam unsatisfied : 

Though thou shouldst be for me incarnate hell, 
Damnation palpable, a living flame, 
Grave of mine honour, murderer of my name ; 

Nay, though thy love be thirst insatiable, 

Want unassuaged and passion without aim ; 
Thine am I, thine, thou irresistible ! 



36 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXVI. 



VV AS it for naught then that my feet were set 
Upon that upward and disconsolate way, 
Which scales through darkness and the heart's 

dismay 
From earth to heaven's star-cinctured parapet, 

Where stationed on cold thrones the wise forget 
Joy and the passionate gust of winds at play 
Fluttering youth's roses in the disarray 
Of petulant will untaught, untutored yet ; 

If now, even now, when manhood's soberer blood 

Through steadier veins should drive a tardier flood, 
Now when life's race toward noon is well-nigh run, 

Keen gust of joy fraught with a fiery zest 

On vexed anticipation's torturing quest 

Hounds my tired soul lashed with love's malison ? 



STELLA MAR1S. 37 



XXVII. 

.LVEBUKE me not ! I have nor wish nor skill 
To alter one hair's breadth in all this house 
Of Love, rising with domes so luminous 
And air-built galleries on life's topmost hill ! 

Only I know that fate, chance, years that kill, 

Change that transmutes, have aimed their darts 

at us ; 

Envying each lovely shrine and amorous 
Reared on earth's soil by man's too passionate will. 

Dread thou the moment when these glittering towers, 
These adamantine walls and gates of gems, 
Shall fade like forms of sun-forsaken cloud ; 

When dulled by imperceptible chill hours, 
The golden spires of our Jerusalems 
Shall melt to mist and vanish in night's shroud ! 



38 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXVIII. 

J. DREAMED we were together on blue waves 
Sailing at eventide an unknown deep, 
Where charmed islands bathed in summer sleep, 
Breathed shrill sea-music from their agate caves : 

Love, the immortal youth of sixteen years, 

With wings upon his shoulders and a star 
Trembling above those eyes that pierce so far 
Beyond the future of man's hopes and fears, 

Steered us with singing : but I might not heed ; 

For with a dread my gaze was fixed on high, 
Where burned the broad red sail against the sky, 

And on the sail the semblance of a steed, 

White as sea-foam and winged, which snorting 

bore 
A dead man o'er blue waves for evermore. 



STELLA MARIS. 39 



XXIX. 



JVlYSTERIOUS Night! Spread wide thy silvery 
plume ! 

Soft as swan's down, brood o'er the sapphirine 

Breadth of still shadowy waters dark as wine ; 

Smooth out the liquid heavens that stars illume ! 
Come with fresh airs breathing the faint perfume 

Of deep- walled gardens, groves of whispering pine; 

Scatter cool dews, waft pure sea-scent of brine ; 

In sweet repose man's pain, man's love resume ! 
Deep-bosomed Night ! Not here where down the marge 

Marble with palaces those lamps of earth 

Tremble on trembling blackness; nay, far hence, 
There on the lake where space is lone and large, 

And man's life lost in broad indifference, 

Lift thou the soul to spheres that gave her birth ! 



40 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXX. 

1 MPASSIONED Night ! Queen of our heart's unrest ! 
The slow dark waters journeying toward the sea 
Plash with a soft low moaning melody 
Like the half-heard sad music of man's breast. 

O conscious Night ! What murmurings unexpressed 
Throb through the pulse of thy tranquillity ! 
We are alone with love and death and thee, 
Silent, forlorn, disconsolate, oppressed. 

The dusky waves stream on ; the ruffling barque 

With sails outspread that scarcely feel the breeze, 
Glides on her passage through the glimmering 
dark : 

These yearn for sleep in calm unfathomed seas ; 

She longs for anchorage ; while heaven's huge arc 
Swarms with tired travelling stars that find no 
ease. 



STELLA MARIS. 41 



XXXI. 

1 HROUGHOUT the close inextricable coil 

Of man's life-tissues appetite, thought, will, 
Sense, conscience, instinct, choice of good or ill 
There floats a fine elixir, subtlest oil, 

Liquidest ether : substance is but foil 

To this pure quintessence of powers that fill 

The horn of life's abundance, and distil 

Spirit through nerves that vibrate, thews that toil. 

This, only this, forms man's last uttermost force ; 
And this finds no assuagement for the thirst 
Enormous laid on being, till the whole 

Inextricable coil, the sum of soul, 

In every filament be satiate first ; 

Then self drains joy at life's transcendent source. 



42 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXXII. 



H 



. OW shall the soul on that last ledge of being, 
That thin fine tongue, keen quivering promontory 
Thrust into utmost seas of gloom or glory 
Beyond the extremest verge of mortal seeing 

How sever true from false before her fleeing, 
Summon and satisfy those feudatory 
Powers which reiterate their wrangling story, 
How drink at length the bliss of their agreeing ? 

Fate weaves our arras-web : some selves are woven 
For clear melodious issues, calm solutions, 
Real or ideal, twin sides of joy's gold medal ; 

Others, too crossly spun, too deeply cloven, 

In conflict clasp unharmonized illusions, 
Grope with dumb hands on keys, numbed feet on 
pedal. 



STELLA MARIS. 43 



1 S love that last supremest consummation, 

That final concord where all powers agree, 
Commingling thought with sense, setting self free, 
Soothing the tyrant will with joy's oblation ? 

No need to pause for doubt or consultation ; 

Those wrangling partners in man's empery, 
Brief parley made, proclaim their jubilee : 
Love, only love fulfils life's aspiration ! 

True : but how rare, how mystical a jewel 

Must that love be which mid the vexed confusion 
Of sense, will, reason, shields the soul from peril ! 

How sinister, how ruinously cruel, 

The fate of him who blinded by illusion 
O'erlooks one flaw in love's enchanted beryl ! 



44 VAGABUNDUL1 LIBELLUS. 



xxxiv. 

i~lOW often have I now outwatched the night 
Alone in this grey chamber toward the sea 
Turning its deep-arcaded balcony ! 
Round yonder sharp acanthus-leaves the light 

Comes stealing, red at first, then golden bright ; 

Till when the day-god in his strength and glee 
Springs from the orient flood victoriously, 
Each cusp is tipped and tongued with quivering 
white. 

The islands that were blots of purple bloom, 

Now tremble in soft liquid luminous haze, 
Uplifted from the sea-floor to the skies ; 

And dim discerned erewhile through roseate gloom, 
A score of sails now stud the waterways, 
Ruffling like swans afloat from paradise. 



STELLA MARIS. 45 



XXXV. 

AT came at length, our meeting. Her white dress, 
Those summer robes she then so lightly wore, 
Were changed for winter's livery, and the shore 
Of Lido where she stood, now 'neath the stress 

Of rude Borrin with wavelets numberless 

Moaned to grey lands and cloud-capped mountains 

hoar. 
Her cheeks were bronzed with sunshine ; yet she 

bore 
Light in her eyes from heaven's deep wilderness, 

Blue lustre linking her to skies and seas, 

Clear elemental splendour. Grave and few, 
Meant for bystanders, were our words ; but these 

Bound soul with soul ; from brow to forehead flew 

Prayer and compliance. Were those effluences, 
So strongly felt, felt only by us two ? 



46 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XXXVI. 

J. HE heavens are one dusk sapphire ; one dark gem 
The sea-floor spread beneath that windless blue : 
The moon ascendant like a live coal through 
Infinite depths of ocean, steals on them. 

From burning rose to gold, from gold to true 
Silver she soars with lifted diadem, 
Scaling the skies, and with her lustrous hern 
Sweeping the lesser lamps of night from view. 

All the pure ardent stars that were so white, 

Sink into space ; she brooks no rival near : 

The seas her mirror, and the heavens her sphere. 

Only she dares not quench that breathing light 

Which in this dark room shines and outshines her, 
Stella, sole empress o'er the queen of night. 



STELLA MARIS. 47 



xxxvn. 

C 

OILVERY mosquito-curtains draped the bed : 

A lamp stood on the table ; but its light 
Startled no whit the drowsy wings of night, 
Nor had the mystery of darkness fled. 

She slumbered not : flawless from foot to head ; 
Fair ivory body clothed in fairest white ; 
No bar between her beauty and my sight : 
Silence and storm-throes on our souls were shed. 

Storm in the flakes of refluent hair that fret 

Those brows imperious ; in the smouldering fire 
Of clear blue eyes love's tear-dews never wet ; 

Scorn frozen on firm lips, and petulant ire 

Ready to leap from that marmoreal breast. 
How awful was this motionless unrest ! 



48 VAGABUNDULI LI BELL US. 



XXXVIII. 

ixND then she rose ; and rising, then she knelt ; 

And then she paced the floor with passionate 

tread ; 

And then she sank with that imperial head 
Bowed on bare knees : her broad arms made a 
belt 

To clasp them ; dark rebellious hair was shed 

In tempest o'er fixed ardent eyes which dwelt, 
Searching my heart's heart; yea, my manhood felt 
From that tense huddled form intensest-dreed. 

Nerves quaked ; veins curdled ; thin compulsive flame 
Thrilled through her crouching flesh to my couched 

soul 
Expectant ; lingering minutes winged with blame 

Swept over us with voiceless thunder-roll, 

While the vast silence of the midnight stole, 
Merging our sin, a shuddering sea of shame ! 



STELLA MARIS, 49 



XXXIX. 

OHE was a woman ; therefore was she one, 

Worshipping whom a man of woman born 
Shrinks like a guilty thing surprised by morn 
From thoughts of self and sin's dominion. 

I clasped her in my arms ; yet might not shun 
The awful oath of that allegiance sworn 
To Beauty, when the soul was less forlorn 
Circling with gods round heaven's unfaltering sun. 

I drank her lips ; as thirsty flowers drink rain, 
Kisses 1 drank sweeter than honey-dews ; 
Yet though their arrowy perfume smote my brain, 

Love lurked not there, whose breath lifts earth to heaven ; 
Love, for whose sake man's frailties are forgiven, 
Love cried : Less than Love's best thou shalt 
refuse 1 



50 VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



XL. 

OIDE unto side, we watched the ascendant day : 

But naught of faith, nothing of hope we spake : 
Breezes of morning thrilled the salt sea-lake ; 
While my will wavered yet twixt yea and nay. 

Suddenly, passion's red flower faded away ; 
Maya some little time forebore to shake 
Her painted lure, while the dull frozen ache 
Of disappointment turned my life's light grey. 

Scorn spake, self-scorn aping satiety : 

" There neither is, nor can there ever be, 

Twixt that white body and thy weak heart's desire, 

Communion ! Touch, taste, handle ! fierce self-blame 
Shall feed on thee, fervid with venomed fire. 
For gold she sells herself. Thine is the shame ! " 



STELLA MARIS. 51 



XLI. 

" Q 

OHAME and Desire, twin brethren, are the brood 
Of thoughts diseased, which sound thoughts over- 
reach ; 

Self-gendering and self-slaughtering, each by each 
Slain and impregnated ; incestuous blood, 

Seed fratricidal. These find sweetest food 

In brains of fools, whose blood stale customs bleach; 
Who drug remorse with paradox, and preach 
Confusion, prating of vice gilt with good. 

Look on the girl there, thou thrice-cozened fool 

Fooled by desire, by shame, by thought's disease ! 
Let her greed send thy paltering soul to school ! 

Thought, shame, desire, she hath not. Sense and will 
On what she grasps, without misgiving seize. 
Herself she yields, throat, passion, purse to fill." 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS, 



XLII. 



w, 



INGED arrows from the armoury of scorn 

Flew home, and stung my spirit; my heart, un- 

quelled, 

With indignation those fierce gibes repelled ; 
And like the nightingale against a thorn 

Leaning her wounded breast from eve till morn, 
Made music out of misery, which held 
The ear of grief attentive, and refelled 
Despair with arguments from anguish torn. 

" Taunt me no taunts ! Have I not felt and seen 
That beauty like to this which I let shine 
Undimmed in lily-white marmoreal sheen, 

Nor dared to mar with lustre less divine, 

Must, shall be proved love-worthy, even though we, 
Seeker and sought, souls most unworthy be ? " 



STELLA MAKIS. 53 



XLIII. 

/xH might it be that thou, who like the Dawn, 
Or Nereid rising from thine own blue sea, 
In supple strength and fearless nudity, 
With calm wide eyes of azure unwithdrawn, 

Bared thy white limbs, and let thy beauty dawn 

In moonbeams whiter than the moon for me ; 
Thou wild as Adria's waves that cradled thee, 
Swift as a sleuth-hound, slender as a fawn ; 

Ah might it be that thou, even thou, couldst give 

What the soul yearns for; not this passionate 

feast 
Which makes the satiate man go forth a beast ! 

I crave no life-gift ; let the guerdon be 

Than thought more frail, than time more fugitive, 
So but we blend one moment, thou with me ! 



54 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



X-LIV. 

.L/REAMER ! I cast beyond the moon, and crave 
Impossibility. These longings are 
Mere madness, like to theirs who clasp a star, 
Or pluck the North-lights on their plumes to wave. 

Desire so sublimate digs her own grave : 

Substance for shadow bartering, peace for war, 
We seek we know not what ; yet, seeking, mar 
Such goods as God to lowlier lovers gave. 

Delight still flies before us : still we groan 

Mid dreams emergent from our own heart's gloom ; 
Which, bright as dawn by traitorous fancy shown, 

Turn, when we wake and face our hopeless doom, 

To fiends of midnight vengeance, and the tomb 
Gapes to engulf us wrecked and overthrown. 



STELLA MAR1S. 55 



XLV. 

J_ AKE it, oh take it, take thy gold ! The shame 
Shall rest with me, the bitter barren bliss 
Of dreaming on a joy so brief as this. 
Thou hast no suffering, and, I think, no blame. 

Abide for me the everlasting flame, 

The worm that dies not, and the snakes that hiss 
Round souls that seek impossibilities, 
Lost in their lake of longing without aim. 

Is g there no spell then to assuage this smart? 

None ; for we truly know not what we crave. 
Knowing, we might appease the clamorous heart 

But lust contents it not ; and storms that rave 

O'er the soul's seas, are stilled by no fine art. 
Ah God, will peace be found even in the grave ? 



56 VAGABUNDULI LIB ELL US. 



XLVI. 



X RATE not of peace ! Peace hides in prison cells 
And beds of sickness. Tis not peace I want, 
But life in floods, fretful, extravagant, 
Boiling perennial from the world's hot wells : 

Such life as in thy nerve, thy sinew, dwells, 

Child of the waves and sun-god, arrogant 
With blood and brine, like sea-winds petulant, 
Rude as sea-billows when the tempest swells. 

Thou then hast sold thyself? And I have bought 
Bought what ? The intolerable sense of sin. 
This anguish is too sharp. Souls cannot win 

Life from the bargain base their greeds have wrought. 
Flesh fattens flesh ; but flesh-fed souls go thin. 
That golden glorious body gave me naught. 



STELLA MARIS. 57 



XLVII. 

OHE then is flown, flown with her smile supreme 
Of hard imperial scorn defying pain, 
And never, never will come back again : 
Those oars that sweep her from me, lash the 
stream 

Of tides in-flowing gilt with morning's gleam : 

Night and the stars have flown ; day now doth reign 

In garish glory over earth and main : 

Stella hath fled, and fled with her my dream. 

O dream that followest on the paths of night ! 
O joy that wast too frail to bear the light ! 
O heart that in thy depth didst doubt of love ! 

That love, so late attained, pursued so long, 

Why couldst thou not have plucked the fruit 

thereof? 
O rebel will, 'tis thou hast wrought me wrong ! 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



XLVIII. 

JL DO remember while I muse upon 

The peevish impotence of my mistrust, 
Puling at love because forsooth love must 
Build divers shrines for man's devotion ; 
I do remember how I strove with one, 

The rapier of whose keener thought was thrust 
Down to the soul's core, severing love from lust 
With touch more fine and firmer vision. 
This truth he spake, " Toward undiscovered things 
Thou shalt not soar on those dark dragon wings 

Fledged by gaunt appetite from glut of pain ! 
The soul's adventure frank and free as air 
Whereof thou pratest, oh, my friend, beware, 
'Tis but a blind love-blasting hurricane ! " 



STELLA MARIS. 59 



XLIX. 

J. S there no way by tyrannous strength of will 

To shape life's course across the trackless deep, 
Choosing our own star from the stars that sweep 
Heaven's concave ? Or must man one fate fulfil 

By patient tendance on the pole-star still, 

The sole star all must serve who fain would keep 
Safe steerage through the waves that round them 

leap, 
The storms that scatter and the rocks that kill ? 

I have not lived my own philosophy ! 

How could I live it ? for the joy I sought 
Was intermixed with so much subtlest ill, 

That when I grasped that cup, the good in me 

Stood forth in scorn, and I, in trammels caught 
Of my own strength, was forced the wine to spill. 



60 VAGABUNDULI LI BELL US. 



1VJ USING on Venice and the thought of thee, 

Thou resolute angel, sleep o'erspread my brain ; 
Brief solace blossomed from the root of pain, 
For in my dream thou wert at one with me : 

No longer restless like that clear blue sea, 

No longer lost in schemes of sordid gain, 

No longer unattainable by strain 

Of futile arms and false love's mockery ; 

But tranquil, with thy large eyes fixed on mine ; 

Love's dove-wings moving on thy soul's abyss ; 
Thy lips half-opened, and thy breast divine 

Scarce heaving with an unacknowledged bliss ; 
And all the golden glory that is thine, 
Communicated in a long close kiss. 



STELLA MARIS. 61 



LI. 

V_JREY chamber; thou the shrine where love's star 

shone, 
She from whose brow dawned heaven's day, though 

the doom 

Of life enveloped that clear light with gloom, 
Tempering rays too keen to gaze upon ! 
Grey chamber, eastward turning ; shadows wan 
Begin to fade, while from her orient room 
Riseth the morn unheeded, to illume 
Venice with gold and barred vermilion ! 
Grey chamber, thou dost greet the expected dawn, 

Which with slow shuddering steps leads forth the 

day : 

Hast thou forgotten the Star, whose beams with- 
drawn 
Left thee, despite of earth's light, cold alway? 

Thou hast forgotten : but my lost heart in pawn 
Hungers for her, and loathes thee, chamber grey ! 



62 VAGABUNDULI LIB ELL US. 



LII. 

_L HEY write me, Stella, write me thou art mad ! 

Strange truth to say, this comforts me somewhat. 
Knowing thee severed from life's common lot, 
I bow to Him who made thee, yea am glad. 

In lieu of that fierce calenture I had 

Transmitted from thine eyes, my heart so hot 

Is cooled with tenderness ; I fear thee not, 

Nor loathe, nor long. Nay, though my soul is sad, 

Sad for thee, my soul's sister, loveliest one 

That e'er these shameful sorrowing eyes shall 

shun, 
Yet art thou sacred now, assoiled of sin : 

And I can shed kind tears, nor curse our fate ; 
I understand thee now, and weeping win 
Solace : we both have fallen, but God is great. 



STELLA MARIS. 63 



LIII. 

1 DARE believe, now that I know the blight 

Which preys on thy life's bloom Thou, far but 

dear, 

Far from these arms for ever, ever near 
To the dark spirit which felt thy spirit's light 

I dare believe two souls in thee unite, 

Two angels who divide the luminous sphere 

Of thy terrestrial loveliness, and steer 

Crosswise thy worldly course with warring might. 

The one descended from those heavens where dwelt 
My soul with thine in antenatal rest, 
Leans from thine eyes, and whispers : We have 
felt! 

The other risen from hell, more fierce, more strong, 
To wreak on suffering lives his suffered wrong, 
Drives me, lured, loathing, from his home, thy 
breast ! 



64 VAGABUNDUL1 LIBELLUS. 



LIV. 



S. 



SPIRIT of light and darkness ! I no less 

Twy-natured, but of more terraqueous mould, 
In whom conflicting powers proportion hold 
With poise exact, before thy proud excess 

Of beauty perfect and pure lawlessness 

Quail self-confounded ; neither nobly bold 
To dare for thee damnation, nor so cold 
As to endure unscathed thy fiery stress. 

Both of thine angels wound me ; and so tame 

Is this mixed essence of my earthlier mind, 
That seeking joy of sense, I light on shame ; 

Flying from shame, desire's loathed dungeon find ; 
Attack, retreat ; clasp and unclasp ; and win 
Neither the wage of virtue nor of sin. 



Sl^ELLA MARIS. 65 



LV. 



w, 



HAT wrong, what wrong, what keen incurable 

wrong 
Have I then wrought thy spirit, that thou shouldst 

flee 

Into the void uncomforted of me ? 
Hath scorn, self-scorn, wielding pride's fiery 

thong, 

Wounding thy womanhood, with scorpion-strong 
Poison of fretful rage envenoming thee, 
Driven my soul's bliss forth across the sea 
Vexed with fierce storm where fiends in conflict 

throng? 
Madness dwells near to love ! Ah, well away, 

My love was madness ! Thy love too, my dear, 
Bred madness ! And so vilely tuned this fear 
Feeding on our twinned lives, that not one ray 

Smote through the darkness of that ominous day 
When the last first sole hour for hope was here I 

5 



66 VA CAB UND ULI LI BELL US. 



LVI. 

Y_/H pity, pity, pity for the doom 

Which broods o'er souls thus disinherited, 

Shorn thus of dear delights, the daily bread 

Of natural comrades travelling through life's gloom! 

We finelier spun, from fate's indifferent loom 

Flung forth for diverse issues, we must tread 
Dim paths environed with lonely dread, 
Tracts which no stars of mutual love illume. 

We clasped but in convulsion : clasping thus, 

The best thy wild free passionate nature, wrought 
Of sea- waves and of sunbeams, could make mine, 

Met in my dolorous heart mere depth of thought 

And lair of dark rebellion. Thou didst shine : 
I spurned thee : then black night swept over us. 



STELLA MARIS. 67 



LVII. 



V_xOULD I but reach that dark sequestered land, 

Where she now dwells ringed round with mystery ; 

Hear her cry : Friend, I look for help to thee ! 

Could she but read my thoughts and understand 
What those long midnight hours for her have planned ! 

Sit by my side, and speak the truth to me ; 

Bless me with trust, sister to brother be ; 

Temper with love the flame her beauty fanned I 
Nay, but I crave o'ermuch. Mine was the crime ; 

Mine be the retribution. What I sought, 

She gave ; and did but claim the wage of guilt. 
How should she plunge down through this tortuous 
thought, 

Up through these spirals of repentance climb, 

Or save me from the cell my self had built? 



68 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



LVII1. 

/\H, could I think that Christ for thee and me 
Yearneth, to bring back both into His fold, 
Arraying this weak flesh with wings of gold, 
Preparing us a place where angels be ! 

Yearns He for our lost lives, as I for thee 

Yearn in this solitude, whence I behold 

The wondrous heavens and world in cloud-wreaths 

rolled, 
But seek in vain thy spirit's self to see ? 

Seraph of light and darkness, spurn the gloom ! 
Shine forth in thy best beauty like the sun ! 
Burn till thy keener loveliness illume 

The carnal mesh around that radiance spun ! 

Or must I still strive on for thee with doom, 
And weep as Christ weeps o'er a soul unwon ? 



STELLA MARTS. 69 



LIX. 

J. HE good thou cravest might have once been thine, 
Hadst thou not made thy will the instrument 
Of forceful folly, on vain rapture bent. 
Thou from the boughs didst rend that fruit malign, 

Which, slowly ripening 'neath the touch divine 

Of hours and days and seasons, should have leant 

At last to bless thee with the full content 

Of lives conjoined in friendship's holiest shrine. 

Now with intemperate fingers having torn, 

Thou findest beauty but a poisonous lure 
Unto thy soul's destruction, joy a thorn, 

Love's orient wings smirched with the mire impure 
Of frustrate lust, friendship no sooner born 
Than lettered with disease what skill can cure ? 



70 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



LX. 

1V1 ETHOUGHT in sleep, nay not in sleep, far more 
In clear-eyed visions of the wakeful night, 
Stella came aureoled with silvery light, 
Standing at my bedside as heretofore 

She stood, a breathing statue, marble-white, 

With calm beseeching eyes, hands that implore, 
And on her lips, from that celestial shore 
Where our souls met, a message winged with 
might. 

Ah, strange ! Yet wherefore strange ? For friend knows 

friend 

Only through spirit-thrills that touch the mind 
To act of divination : thus we lend 

Each to the other potencies which bind 

Twinned selves in quintessence, thoughts that 

portend 
Those last best aptitudes the senses blind. 



STELLA MARIS. 71 



LXI. 

_L OISED in mid air and gloom, on sails outspread, 

Chimaera trembles. Whether our flight is flown ; 
Whether outsoaring this Cimmerian zone, 
Where fear dwells and the soul with doubt is fed, 

Deathward the wings that bore us shall be sped ; 

I know not. Reason upon my spirit's throne 
Now waits, illumined by the rays that shone 
Still from thine eyes and archangelic head. 

This interstellar darkness, shed between 

Clairvoyance and illusion, doubt-beset, 
Sharpens the soul's sight. I have clearly seen, 

Here on heaven's boundary line, hell's parapet, 

That Thou within thine inmost heart's serene 
Love-worthy art, and Love shall fold thee yet. 



7* VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



LXII. 



JTl USH, I have fallen ; my feet are on firm ground ; 
Chimaera like the thunderstorm withdraws ; 
And I am left to sober natural laws, 
A calm grey sky, a landscape cloud-embrowned. 

How looks the plain, the footing I have found ? 

Stern, but not desolate ; and through the flaws 
Of tempest shines one star, whose lustre draws 
My tortured soul into her peace profound. 

Praise, praise to God ! Surely 'twas God who willed 

This whirlwind where my life was well-nigh lost. 
I feel Him ; with heaven's hope my heart is filled. 

Where God is, I am, and Thou art. The cost 

Shall not be counted, when at length in Him 
Both blend, as blend we must, spirit and limb. 



STELLA MARIS. 73 



* 
LXIII. 

VV HO reads may wonder that so crude a fact 

Mere love 'twixt man and maid, lawless, unwed 
Should by sheer force of scrupulous thought be led 
To such fine issues. Twas a trivial act. 

From the bare natural feast of sense and tact 

Springs healthy flesh new-born, exhilarated : 
Why should the heart then starve ? Why prowl, 

unfed, 
Lion-like, through waste wild, cave, cataract ? 

Verily, there's the problem. Yet should he 

Have found, or dreamed to find in her the goal, 
Whither he voyaged with a hungering soul ; 

But finding it, have found therewith that she 

Loved not as he loved think you then his whole 
Life-wisdom saved him from blank misery ? 



74 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



LXIV. 

nn 



JL HIS man, whose impotence shows manifest 
In the cold light of life's philosophy, 
From love sought some clear joy, fairer, more free, 
More exquisite, than earthly love possessed. 

Tired of seclusion, stirred by vague unrest, 
His spirit's sails in rash precipitancy 
Took flight across the wide and treacherous sea 
Of Beauty, winged for a false adventurous quest. 

Beauty seduced him. There are souls who pay 
Such vows to Aphrodite that she seems 
Consolidate with Goodness pure as day, 

And Truth transcending Fancy's loftiest dreams : 
Who saith that Loveliness can be mere clay, 
Against their heart's best hope, their faith blas- 
phemes. 



STELLA MARIS. 75 



LXV. 



A, 



.RE these then lost in everlasting night ? 
Is there no substance in that ancient lore 
Which taught the expectant spirit how to soar 
Heavenward on plumes uplift by Beauty's might ? 

To form the rays of that celestial light 

Which from the throne of thrones for evermore 
Streams on the hosts of angels that adore, 
Goodness and Truth with Loveliness unite. 

Earth sunders what the eternal will made one : 

Truth veils the splendour that would sear our eyes : 
Goodness conceals her charms in coarse homespun : 

Beauty puts on that sensual disguise, 

Which when men fain Would clasp her, bids him 

shun 
Gross Circe-spells that blind and brutalize. 



76 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



LXVI. 



are the sisters soldered by a bond 
Which even on earth is holy. Therefore we 
Who follow love with vain temerity, 
Deeming that wanton lord some vagabond, 

Who with light heart will laughingly abscond, 

Leaving his debts unpaid, careless and free, 
Find to our cost that by some stern decree 
Duty still rules us with inflexible wand. 

Loveliness stirs the soul's most sacred thirst 

For unattainable good transcending sense ; 
And loyalty, which slumbered when the first 

Whirlwind of passion blurred truth's excellence, 

Resumes her sway o'er tempers gently nursed. 
From love true men still crave life-permanence. 



STELLA MARIS. 77 



LXVII. 

)EAUTIFUL wert thou ! What was then thy gift 
Of irresponsible beauty on our earth ? 
I found in thee no toy for trivial mirth ; 
Nor bred beneath thy radiance plumes to lift 

The adventurous soul above this mundane drift 
Of cares diurnal. When I test the worth 
Of that thy flawless diamond, from the birth 
Of passion to its death, I still must sift 

Love's problem thus : Love, be it high or low, 
Is no light-winged slight indifferent thing, 
But a close bond wedding two selves in one ; 

However disparate those selves may grow 

Toward diverse issues. Beauty thus doth bring 
Man back through love to law no life may shun. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 81 



WINTER NIGHTS IN THE HIGH ALPS, 
i. 

1 \| OTES of a mute, not melancholy world, 

A world of snows and darkness and moon-sheen, 
Of still crystalline air and stars serene,. 
And stationary pines in slumber furled : 

Notes of the sober night, when drift is whirled 
By tireless winds over the solemn scene, 
When the lake-pavement groans, and mists between 
The shadowy mountain tops are coldly curled : 

Notes of a meditative man who walks 

Those white fields and that ice-floor all alone, 
Yet draws warm life from winter's frozen wells : 

Notes of a soul that most divinely talks 

Unto herself in silence, and hath known 

The God that in the mystic moon-world dwells. 



82 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



II. 

JL SEND them to you, friends, whose feet are far, 
Moving upon a loved and populous land 
In sweet society and mutual band 
Of fellowship, star linked to breathing star ! 

Fain would I sometimes be where pictures are, 
And music, and the clasp of hand to hand ; 
Where men I love with loveliest women stand, 
And theatres their wonder-world unbar ; 

Where London's eddying ocean on its surge 

Tosses the thunder of souls armed for strife, 
And streets, aflame all night, with forceful urge 

Of multitudes in conflict quicken life ; 

Where chaff from wheat of hearts keen passions 

purge, 
And each tense hour with throes of fate is rife. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 83 



III. 

VV ITH you I may not dwell. Yet man is great ; 
And the mind triumphs over place and time : 
I therefore, doomed to weave my lonely rhyme, 
Here 'mid these pines, these moon-scenes desolate, 

Have found therein a joy that mocks at fate ; 

And stationed on a specular mount sublime, 
Have scanned yon fields low-lying, whence I climb 
To commune with the stars inviolate. 

The sempiternal stars, the flawless snows, 

The crystal gems fashioned by art of frost, 

The thin pure wind that whence it listeth blows, 

The solitude whereon the soul is tossed 

In contemplation of the world's huge woes ; 
These things suffice. Life's labour is not lost. 



84 VAGABUNDULl LIBELLUS. 



IV. 

JT* RIENDS have I found here too : this peasant folk, 
Comradely, frank, athletic ; men who draw 
Their lineage from a race that never saw 
Fear on the field, but with firm sinewy stroke 

Those knightly ranks, Burgundian, Austrian, broke, 
And bade the Italian tyrant far withdraw ; 
These vales, these hills have known no lord but law 
Since Freedom for this people first awoke. 

Their joys austere, their frugal style be mine ; 

Low houses builded of the rude rough stone, 
Raftered and panelled with smooth native pine ; 

Here let me rest heart-whole, nor rest alone ; 

High thoughts be my companions ; words divine 
Of poets; these are still the spirit's own. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 85 



FOR A PICTURE. 

DREAM of deep green England came to me, 
Musing 'mid snows here by the slumberous 

stove : 

Warm summer evening faded o'er a grove 
Massed into leafy darkness, tree by tree, 

From saffron sky down to short turf, where he 

Who filled the foreground, like a beardless god, 
In coarse brown working clothes divinely trod, 
Shouldering his joiner's tools, stately and free. 

Like a young god he moved. And each strong limb, 
Unconscious of its strength, played tranquilly. 
The day's work dealt, this hour for love and home, 

This cool dark dewy hour, his own, had come, 

This hour for greetings at the gate, when she 
Who trembled 'neath his clasp, should cling to him. 



86 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE AVERAGE MAN. 

V V HO is my chosen hero ? I have none. 

This young man is enough for me : brave, chaste, 
Faithful to duty, by no vice debased, 
Lord of himself, yet serving every one ; 

Fair, with frank eyes, and jocund as the sun; 

Smiling from full glad lips ; so amply graced 
With natural persuasion, pure from waist 
To feet and shoulder, that no man doth shun, 

Nor woman neither, his compulsive charm. 

These great good gifts he ne'er hath used for harm. 
From his stout limbs, true heart, strong-fibred 
brain, 

Sweetness flows into life, like sweet fresh air 

From mountains blown over a bed of pain. 

I seek naught human loftier, naught more rare. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 87 



ADOLESCENTI. 

JL OO blessed thou, couldst thou self-conscious be 
Of thine own blessedness ! couldst thou but live 
Contented with those gifts the minutes give ; 
Thy bare existence being felicity ! 

No burden of the world's pain weighs on thee : 

Thou ne'er hast felt fate's worst imperative : 
Those weariest words Forget, Forgo, Forgive, 
Are found not yet in thy philosophy. 

Thrice blessed thou ! Though one had eminent wealth, 
Fame, knowledge, wisdom, mastery of his art ; 
Yet were he naught matched with thine ignorance, 

Thy poverty, thine insignificance ! 

To thee, being young, God giveth the better part ; 
Unworn, unvexed, unwearied, thou hast health ! 



88 VAGABUNDULI LI BELL US. 



A PROBLEM OF THE NIGHT. 

_T ULL well we know that each star is a sun, 
Circled with congregated worlds that move 
In rhythmic choirs around one heart of love 
Vibrating flames which through their orbits run. 

Faith too hath held that of these worlds each one 
Pulses with life and life-pangs like our own ; 
For some are fledglings, some to full age grown, 
Some over-worn, their labours told and done. 

These thoughts perplex me not. Far more I muse, 

On winter nights, when the wide heavens lie bare, 
Why is it that one region shines so fair 

With fabled constellations, fiery spears, 

Orbs within orbs, which cross and interfuse, 
While yon black gulf yawns well-nigh void of 
spheres ? 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 89 



THREE SISTERS. 
Reason, Will, the Heart. 

IVE me the dagger ! Let me deal death's blow ! ' 
Cried Reason in her scorn, when craven Will, 
Quailing before some apprehended ill, 
Had let my guilty Heart unmurciered go. 

Phantom-like o'er smooth wreaths of winter snow, 
Where passion slept her last sleep in the chill 
Of frozen hope, these twain swept up the hill, 
And found their sister sunk in tearless woe. 

My Heart, when she beheld them, rose and knelt : 

" Spare me not, dreadful sisters ! Slay, but hear ! 
For your sakes I would suffer worse than death. 

Yet, when you've slain me, say : Through her we felt." 
Then, when those unrelenting ones were near, 
She kissed their hands and yielded up her breath. 



90 VAGABUNDUL1 LIBELLVS. 



IN BLACK AND WHITE WINTER ETCHINGS. 
I. 

The Chorister. 

ONOW on the high-pitched minster roof and spire : 
Snow on the boughs of leafless linden trees : 
Snow on the silent streets and squares that freeze 
Under night's wing down-drooping nigh and nigher. 

Inside the church, within the shadowy choir, 

Dim burn the lamps like lights on vaporous seas ; 
Drowsed are the voices of droned litanies ; 
Blurred as in dreams the face of priest and friar. 

Cold hath numbed sense to slumber here ! But hark, 
One swift soprano, soaring like a lark, 
Startles the stillness ; throbs that soul of fire, 

Beats around arch and aisle, floods echoing dark 
With exquisite aspiration ; higher, higher, 
Yearns in sharp anguish of untold desire ! 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 91 



II. 
The Zither-Player. 

L HREE stealthy winter months of frost and storm 
Have piled this mountain-pass from peak to peak 
With trackless avalanche and snow-wreaths bleak, 
Obliterating road-marks, blurring form. 

One thing alone upon the waste is warm : 

One low-roofed house, where struggling men may 

seek 
Shelter, when whirled tornadoes round them 

shriek, 
And the snow-fiends of wild December swarm. 

In the pine-panelled room, beside the stove, 

A crone sleeps crouching o'er her spinning-wheel, 
An old man groans upon the bed above ; 

The while a youth, whose eyes through twilight rove 
In search of something which the sad hours steal, 
Draws from thrilled zither-strings the dirge of love. 



92 VAGABUNDULI LJBELLUS. 



III. 

At Midnight. 

Jr ROM dreams I wake; dreams of warm summer 

night ; 

Deep night on stately cities ; luminous seas, 
Ruffled in rosy sunset with a breeze, 
Breathing from unnamed mountains far from sight. 

From dreams I wake ; dream-lands where hope is bright, 
And love the nursling of light melodies, 
And joy a winged thing too swift to seize, 
And mere existence an unmixed delight. 

Then from my bed I rise : the frozen vale 

Whitens before the window 'neath a cloud, 
Snowing incessantly; winter death-pale 

Heaps drift on drift, wraps shroud o'er sheeted shroud, 
Round the gaunt forest-slopes that guard this gaol ; 
Where hopes decay, where dreams are disallowed. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 93 



IV. 
The Jodeller, 

.L<OW spreads the chamber-roof of red larch wood : 
The deep wide walls with Cembra-plank and pine 
Are timbered : ponderous volumes, line o'er line, 
Rise from the floor in voiceless multitude. 

One lamp dilutes the darkness. Here I brood 

Mid clouds of blue tobacco-smoke that twine 
Round the square stove of dull green serpentine, 
Where Perseus towers, drenched in the Gorgon's 
blood. 

Here through the slow still winter nights I muse, 

Or write, or read, or dream of days long dead : 
The soft smooth drifts all sounds outside confuse : 

Only at one fixed hour a young man goes 

With shrill blithe jodel homeward o'er the snows : 
My heart leaps up ; my soul is warmed and fed. 



94 VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



V. 
A Waking Dream. 

W ALKING, I met upon this winter road, 

In light malign, obscurity of stars, 

My very self: his brows were seamed with scars, 

His shoulders bent beneath sin's heavy load. 
A lolling imp that weary pack bestrode, 

Who glared and grinned behind close visor-bars ; 

He in his crooked hand held splintered spars, 

Waifs of wrecked hope, and plied them like a goad. 
Tottering, blood-stained, over the slippery snow, 

That double of my self in anguish crept, 

Crawling I know not to what dreadful goal : 
While the shrill puck-eared fiend kept gibbering low, 

" Mine was the care to rouse you when you slept ! 

Dark loom the ways before us, slothful soul ! " 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 95 



VI. 
The Todten-Volk. 

J. HEY trod the snow, that frore battalion ; 

Yet not one foot-track on the snow was seen : 
Cowled and in antique habit, 'neath the sheen 
Of moon and stars, the dead folk journeyed on. 

The shuddering seer that vision might not shun : 

At the smooth brink of the storm-swept ravine, 
Stationed with scarce firm standing-ground 

between 
The dead folk and his death, he marked each one. 

They came ; the dead moved onward without sign ; 
No light was in their eye-balls; each dry face 
Turned from his face that scanned ; only the last 

Gazed on him with strange sweetness in sad eyne : 
That was his own true love : alive she passed, 
To join next day death's frozen populace. 



96 VA GA B UND ULI LI BELL US. 



THE COMING OF SPRING. 

VV E wake one morning, and the frozen hush 
That broods on field and forest winter-long, 
Is broken by a brief and tremulous song 
Poured from yon snow-girt pine-wood. 'Tis a 
thrush ! 

Again, yet once again, those joy-notes gush 

O'er the white wilderness ; whereby a throng 
Of summer hopes are loosened, and the strong 
Night melts in earliest Spring's auroral blush. 

Soon streams will glide and murmur; here and there 
Soft downy fledglings on the dry grey sod 
Peep into light, dove-plumed anemones ; 

And meadow-grass grow green, and everywhere 
The sward be starred with scented crocuses, 
And in mild air earth feel her present god. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 97 



THE SOUL AND THE EAGLE. 

F Azrael, the Angel of the Lord, 

Should float into thy chamber and should say, 
" I am sent to cleave asunder spirit and clay ! " 
Waving therewith death's keen two-handed sword ; 

How wouldst thou take that sentence ? Pain abhorred, 
Loathly desire, chill day succeeding day, 
Cast from thee; wouldst thou soar, winging thy way 
To nothing or new lives in darkness stored ? 

To me there came a hunter yester-morn 

Bearing an eagle he had caged, to sell : 

I bought the bird, bade him fly forth ; forlorn 

With dull captivity, some moments' spell 

He shivered, then spread wings, and upward borne 
On blasts of exultation spurned our dell. 



98 VAGABUNDULI LIB ELL US. 



ON THE COWBERRY ALP. 

J. HAD a dream, daughter, a dream last night : 
Ah me, that fancy thus should fool a man ! 
Do you remember where our spaniel ran 
Yesterday through those larches summery-bright 

With gentians and the tremulous delight 

Of hurrying streamlets ? We were cold and wan ; 
We saw the fair flowers, but we gazed upon 
This wondrous world through shades of self-born 
night. 

Sleep brought me flattering visions ; for I paced 

Those self-same lawns, that bubbling water-brim, 
Like new-made Adam ; and you walked as one 

Awaked to life amid heaven's seraphim. 

Will it be so when death comes ? Pale, defaced, 
Shall souls bloom forth and greet the eternal sun ? 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 99 



IN THE FIR WOOD. 

VJTREY pines, companions of my solitude, 

Which with the change of seasons cannot change, 
Contracted to life's narrowing winter-range, 
Cloistered within the aisles of this sad wood ! 

Teach me your wisdom, patriarchs ! Ye have stood 

Patient three hundred years, nor thought it strange, 
Yourselves unstirred, to watch in farm and grange 
Man's transitory race ten times renewed. 

Ye murmur not : what though spring's wizard hands 
Waft you no love-gifts ; though nor orient sun 
Nor sunset have ye gazed on ; though the breeze 

Thrills you with flattering music from far lands 

You scarce dare dream of; though rills past you 

run, 
Babbling way-farers, bound for venturous seas. 



VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



RESIGNATION. 



N 



EVER, oh never more shall I behold 
A sunrise on the glacier : stars of morn 
Paling in primrose round the crystal horn ; 
Soft curves of crimson mellowing into gold 

O'er sapphire chasm, and silvery snow-field cold ; 

Fire that o'er-floods the horizon ; beacons borne 
From wind-worn peak to storm-swept peak forlorn ; 
Clear hallelujahs through heaven's arches rolled. 

Never, oh never more these feet shall feel 
The firm elastic tissue of upland turf, 
Or the crisp edge of the high rocks ; or cling 

Where the embattled cliffs beneath them reel 

Through cloud-wreaths eddying like the Atlantic 

sur 
Far, far above the wheeling eagle's wing. 



AMONG THE MOUNTAINS. 



II. 

JL HEN welcome, resignation ! O ye powers, 

That mould our mortal fate, patience I crave ! 
Let not this flesh become life's sentient grave 
Through self-abandonment and loveless hours ! 

What is it that we men call rightly ours ? 

Joy, and high pulse of health ? Strong arms that 

wave 

Adventurous ensigns ? Hearts inured to brave 
Death on the perilous world's giddy watch-towers ? 

Not these ; but souls that seek not to rebel ; 
Renunciation hand in hand with hope ; 
Faith that can cheer e'en exile's lonely glen ; 

Love that on little things is wont to dwell ; 

Thoughts unsubdued, fronting heaven's awful cope 
And the unfathomable minds of men. 



THE ENVOY TO A BOOK. 



THE ENVOY TO A BOOK. 



JP AREWELL, my comrade through those checkered 

years ; 

Ten years of storm and sunshine shared with thee ! 
Each of thy written words remains to be 
Landmark of doubts outlived, abandoned fears. 

I chose thee, as men choose the friend who cheers 

Long months of outland wanderings. Thou for me 
Hast been calm strength, fruitful society, 
Comfort amid well-springs of wasteful tears. 

It was no vulgar impulse, thirst for fame, 

Ambition, greed of gold, quest after truth, 
That prompted me to this my arduous aim ; 

But keen self-communing in the close of youth, 

Thirst of the soul, choked with sloth's weeds 

within, 

From work new calm, new wealth, new faith 
to win. 



106 VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



II. 

VV ORKING, I won them. Yea, with gradual strain, 
Sore struggling, as on Resurrection morn 
Cortona's painter showed the souls reborn, 
Clad with undying flesh from clay again ; 

So did my skeleton of self, through paiu 

And travail, from that grave of deadening scorn, 
In doubt and fear, o'erburdened, overworn, 
Emerge and her own robe of life regain. 

No page of thine but tells of double toil : 

Toil of the mind to reach one purposed end, 
And snatch from towers of truth one precious spoil 

Toil of the heart her self-forged bonds to rend, 

Her fiends of sloth, dread, shame, despair, to foil : 
Toil of the man fate, passion, will to bend. 



THE ENVOY TO A BOOK. 107 



III. 

VyN each smooth page of thine what light is shed, 
By one discerned alone ! Light from red hours 
Of wrestling with immitigable powers 
In terror, when the wings of hope were fled ! 

Light from the vigil hours by that sick bed, 

When breath grew faint, till o'er the city towers 
Dawn shot with flame the flying spring-tide 

showers, 
And day went forth, and showed a father dead ! 

Light from those grey despondent autumn days 

Of sickness, when I cried, ' O Lord, how long ? ' 
Fretted in vain ; so tired 1 might not raise 

Limbs from the curtained couch, whence mirth and song 
Were banned, where pain kept watch, and in the 

maze 
Of weakness whelmed the soul so swift and strong ! 



io8 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



IV. 



L 



have we lived together, and have seen 
Things strange and unaccustomed. No arm-chair 
Hugging a table built with books 'neath fair 
Shelves, the calm scholar's undisturbed demesne ; 

No library where science reigns, a queen, 

O'er students mustering in the lifeless air 
Of manuscripts by myriads ; no such lair 
Brought thee to birth ! But 'neath the heavens 
serene ; 

Where Zinal's mighty glaciers toss their crests 

Ridged into frozen billows ; where the pines 
Enfold Argentiere 'neath yon cleft ravine 

Snowward ascending ; where bland summer shines 
On shores and towers Italian ; thou hast been 
Cradled and rocked to life on Nature's breasts. 



THE ENVOY TO A BOOK. 109 



V. 

VV ELTERING Biscayan waves, Sicilian sea 
Where Galatea sports in April noons, 
Flamingo-haunted lakes and low lagoons 
By desert Carthage, bare Epipolae, 

Deep alder-shaded streams in Chamonix, 

Perugia white with frost 'neath wintry moons, 
Siena's roseate walls, transparent Junes 
And autumn calms, in Venice, nurtured thee. 

And thou the long long months of cold hast known, 

Here 'mid these mountains ; months by comrade- 
ship 
Of thee made swift and sweet ; hast taken tone 

Sterner and firmer from the fellowship 

Of pines and stainless skies and stars that sail 
In silence o'er the still snow-sheeted vale. 



VAGABUNDULI LI SELL US. 



VI. 



R 



AREWELL ! The men who greet thee, greet a 

book, 

For better or for worse. These volumes they 
Welcome ; or wearily pursue their way, 
Casting upon thy leaves a casual look. 

Who knows what pangs begot thee, what throes shook 
Thy cradle ? This new history, they say, 
Claims some attention from us for a day : 
No Nile of learning this, a garrulous brook. 

Nay, let men talk. There is an irony 

I' the fate that waits for books. Thy face, O friend, 
Hath for my soul a story, which 't were vain 

To ask the unkindly world to comprehend. 

Nay, have we not our secret ? I would fain 
Veil from the sight of men thy mystery. 



ART AND POETRY. 



THE SONNET. 
I. 

J. HE Sonnet is a fruit which long hath slept 

And ripened on life's sun-warmed orchard-wall ; 

A gem which, hardening in the mystical 

Mine of man's heart, to quenchless flame hath 

leapt ; 
A medal of pure gold art's nympholept 

Stamps with love's lips and brows imperial ; 

A branch from memory's briar, whereon the fall 

Of thought-eternalising tears hath wept : 
A star that shoots athwart star-steadfast heaven ; 

A fluttering aigrette of tossed passion's brine; 

A leaf from youth's immortal missal torn ; 
A bark across dark seas of anguish driven ; 

A feather dropped from breast-wings aquiline; 

A silvery dream shunning red lips of morn. 



114 VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



II. 

HERE is no mood, no heart-throb fugitive, 
No spark from man's imperishable mind, 
No moment of man's will, that may not find 
Form in the Sonnet ; and thenceforward live 

A potent elf, by art's imperative 

Magic to crystal spheres of song confined ; 
As in the moonstone's orb pent spirits wind 
'Mid dungeon depths day-beams they take and give. 

Spare thou no pains ; carve thought's pure diamond 
With fourteen facets scattering fire and light : 
Uncut, what jewel burns but darkly bright ? 

And Prospero vainly waves his runic wand, 
If spurning art's inexorable law, 
In Ariel's prison-sphere he leave one flaw. 



ART AND POETRY. 115 



III. 

nn 



A HE Sonnet is a world, where feelings caught 
In webs of phantasy, combine and fuse 
Their kindred elements 'neath mystic dews 
Shed from the ether round man's dwelling 
wrought ; 

Distilling heart's content, star-fragrance fraught 
With influences from the breathing fires 
Of heaven in everlasting endless gyres 
Enfolding and encircling orbs of thought. 

Our Sonnet's world hath two fixed hemispheres : 

This, where the sun with fierce strength masculine 
Pours his keen rays and bids the noonday shine : 

That, where the moon and stars, concordant powers, 
Shed milder rays, and daylight disappears 
In low melodious music of still hours. 



n6 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



MUSIC PAST AND PRESENT. 



O, 



'H for those first song-poets ! They who sent 
Man's voice aloft on wings that sought the skies, 
Sustained and steadied for that great emprize 
By the majestic disemburdenment 

Of man's heart's message in a calm content 

Clear rhythmic utterance, full-formed melodies ! 
The jubilant soul, struggling with tears and sighs, 
Hung on those notes and shared that song's ascent. 

Our learned tone-poets in these latter times 

Scorn the pure vocal instrument of song. 
Man's voice with thrilled man's soul no longer 
chimes. 

And though brass tubes and trembling strings prolong 
Bacchantic rapture that to earth's height climbs, 
The voice that freed the spirit suffers wrong. 



ART AND POETRY. 117 



MUSIC. 
For a Picture. 

WHO art thou?" "Music." "Prithee tell me 

why 

Thy listening ear is bent to yonder shell ? " 
" Because the sounds of Nature sink and swell 
Within its spiry hollows, and I try 
To read aright that rhythmic harmony." 

" But in thy hand there hangs a written scroll ? " 
" What the world tells, the ever wakeful soul 
Reasoning records in symbolled charactry." 
" Thus the rude things of sense by thought refined 

Are made immortal ? " " Yea : 't is mine through 

art, 

Framing a message for the watchful mind 
More clear than words, to soothe or stir the heart." 

" But why these lutes and viols on the ground ? " 
"They reconstruct dumb thought to speaking 
sound." 



VAGABUNDULI LIRELLUS. 



THE POETS OF OUR AGE. 

THOUSAND voices, thrice ten thousand tones, 
Various as North and South, as Heaven and Hell, 
Compound one dim confused anarchic swell 
Of paeans, dirges, odes, love-lyrics, groans. 

Upon those ancient ermine-mantled thrones 

Where poets erewhile sat, cratnber pell-mell 
A rout of chattering monkeys taught to spell. 
Earth hears and shudders through her patient zones. 

Still, though mobs storm Parnassus, why should we 
Shrink from this advent of democracy? 
Soul, know thyself! Each woman, man, girl, boy, 

Of all those myriads who assail thine ears, 

Hath, as thou hast, some urgent grief or joy. 
Thee too, like them, the earth long-suffering hears. 



ART AND POETRY. 119 



A PORTRAIT. 

VV IDE lucid eyes in cavernous orbits set, 
Aflame like living opals or the sea, 
Vibrant with floods of electricity, 
The soul projected in each fiery jet : 

This thy fierce fascination haunts me yet ; 

And I have dreamed all Venice into thee, 
Her domes of pearl, her heaven's immensity, 
And superhuman saints of Tintoret. 

Hoarse-voiced art thou as Tritons of her brine ; 

Swift as man-snaring murderous ocean shark ; 
White as foam-wreaths blown over Lido's line ; 

Stealthy as bats that skim those waves at dark ; 

Storm-browed with curls of thunder ; leonine 
As the winged guardian war-beast of St. Mark. 



120 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



ANGELO RIBELLO. 

JXEBELLIOUS Angel ! Were it mine the skill 
Of those first Titans, Titian, Veronese, 
Or him the master mightier-winged than these, 
Thy Tintoret who reigns o'er Venice still ; 

I would compel thee, by art's crucible 

Severing the soul's ore from gross earthly lees, . 

To reassume amid heaven's hierarchies 

Thy station, purged, pure, and of perfect will. 

A warrior angel, thou with those shouldst stand 

Who guard our Lady round her throne of light ; 
And in thy puissant grasp a gleaming brand ; 

And all about thy shoulders armour bright ; 

But I would have thine eyes even as they are, 
Gazing from steel-clad brows, each orb a star. 



ART AND POETRY. 



THREE SUCCESSIVE PORTRAITS OF THE 
SAME FACE. 

(Boyhood, Youth, Maturity.} 

.L, INKED to the past by no plain piety, 
But straining personality from strife 
In dark shrill chasms of anguished inner life, 
The final soul emerges. You can see 

What full fair fruitage of humanity 

That face in boyhood promised. Next the flame 
Of desperate will devouring some deep shame 
Breaks from those young worn brows defiantly. 

Here a third self unfolds : the man, burned hard, 
Bathed in black Fafnir's gore, no longer clean, 
No longer dubious, springs erect between 

Gulfs that gape fore and aft ; life's ways are barred 
To left and right; while he, stern-eyed, serene, 
Faces all fate and stands full-armed on guard. 



t22 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 

TO A SICILIAN OF TO-DAY. 

VV ERE mine the hand, the archangelical brain, 

Of him who, when faith ruined and hope was 

barred, 

Set those marmoreal presences on guard 
In San Lorenzo, art should thus arraign 
The Genius of Rebellion and Disdain : 

Like thine his throat; like thine his forehead 

scarred 

With lightnings ; thin tense lips, and diamond- 
hard 

Flash of implacable eyes defying pain. 
Thou shouldst emerge in breathing bronze or stone 
Brutus, the patriot traitor, at whose shrine 
Kneel they whose threats shake tyrants on their 

throne ; 
Or, from thy fiery tomb by pride up-borne, 

Shouldst frown the soul's self of that Florentine 
Whose curled mouth held the Inferno in great 
scorn. 



ART AND POETRY. 123 



THE BIRTH OF JACOPO ROBUSTI. 



'M 



ID the seventh sphere, where Seraphs stand at 

gaze, 

Shrouded with fire unquenchable before 
The throne of thrones built on that sapphire floor 
With jacinth, topaz, emerald, chrysoprase, 

God bending earthward through the orb of rays 

Woven by multitudinous saints for ever more 
Prostrate in adoration, spake : " Of yore 
Yon sea-girt city sounded with my praise ; 

Now is the voice of those that sought me dead 

In Venice ; therefore, O thou youngest-eyed 

Of all heaven's angels, thou whose wings are yet 

Scarce fledged, obscure the lightnings 'of thy head 
In human flesh ; for seventy suns abide 
And bear me witness; be thou Tintoret ! " 



JUVENILIA. 



FROM FRIEND TO FRIEND. 

V_yH friend, I know not if such days and nights- 
Of fervent comradeship as we have spent, 
Or if twin minds with equal ardour bent 
To search the world's unspeakable delights, 

Or if long hours passed on Parnassian heights 
Together in rapt interminglement 
Of heart with heart on thought sublime intent, 
Or if the spark of heaven-born fire that lights 

Love in both breasts from boyhood, thus have wrought 
Our spirits to communion ; but I swear 
That neither chance nor change nor time nor aught 

That makes the future of our lives less fair, 

Shall sunder us who once have breathed this air 
Of soul-commingling friendship passion-fraught. 



128 VAGABUNDUL1 L1BELLUS. 



DEAD LOVE. 

Y_/ LOVE, dear Love, I sit and sing to thee ; 

And from sere reeds sought in the wintry brake, 
Hoarse reeds wherethrough the winds wail mournfully, 

And the waves wash, a funeral pipe I make : 
For thou art dead, dear Love, and never more 

Melodious movements of the breathing spring 
Shall thaw thy blood, or spread thy pinions frore, 

Or stir thy mute cold throat to carolling. 
These reeds shall bloom and rustle to the breath 

Of minstrel winds in April ; birds shall sweep, 
And summer flies shall quiver ; but thy death 

Is unrelenting as the marble sleep 
Which binds Endymion : his eternal swoon 
Breaks to no kisses of the passionate moon. 



fUVENlLlA. 129 



AT WAKING. 

\. HIS morning's light scarce sent a glimmering ray 

Through my blank window, when I woke to think; 
And then, as one who, hidden far away 

In some cathedral, hears the cadence sink 
Through alien aisles, and the great fugue again 

Breathe sure and solemn on a storm of sound ; 
So from my tangled dreams there grew a pain 

At first scarce felt, and round it vaguely wound 
The trouble of my slumber ; but when sleep 

Moved from my soul, as clouds from mountains 

move, 
The pain waxed stronger; till, with a sudden leap, 

Full-formed it burst upon me all thy love, 
Words, letters, looks, revenge, and cold disdain- 
A tumult of mixed passion smote my brain. 



130 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE PASSING OF THE CLOUD. 

/~\.S when the moon, some sultry summer night, 

Broods in the bosom of a labouring cloud, 
And scarcely shoots a swart uncertain light 

Through the dull volumes of her vapoury shroud ; 
But, on a sudden, breathing winds arise 

And part the veil, and she looks forth again 
To scan the silent earth with silver eyes, 

Disclosing tower and town and bosky plain ; 
So for three days my soul in darkness dwelt, 

Shadowed by unintelligible gloom, 
Till, stirred by secret impulses, she felt 

Her light revive and burst the dolorous tomb, 
And burning clear beheld that all is fair 
And good and perfect in the tranquil air. 



JUVENILIA. 131 



MI RACCOMANDO A TE. 

1J. ELP me ! My years flow on, slow sliding years 

That pass unruffled like a sleepy stream. 

Help me ! I know not whether I live or dream ; 

What is, I may not part from what appears. 
Help me ! I lie obscure in a low cave ; 

You stand above me, and you take the sun 

I see not, full upon your forehead : one 
Swift ray reflected from your eyes may pave 
A path for me to rise by : send down light ; 

Send ray on ray, and build the road divine ; 

Gaze still more strongly, till that splendour shine 
With fire able to pierce my spirit's night, 

And draw me sunward. So our lives shall be 

In endless day joined indissolubly. 



132 VAGABUNDUL1 LIBELLUS. 



FIAT LUX. 

JL-/ET there be Light ! What sound, as of the roar 
Of breakers surging from a bottomless sea, 
What brightness of a new sun suddenly 
Launched on the void to roll for evermore, 

Smote the still soul that desolate before 

Lay slumberous in her dungeon's misery, 
Distant from God and man and earth and thee ? 
O love, behold her spread strong wings and soar I 

She lives; she loves; her heavenward flight is free. 
It was thy voice, thy touch, that, quivering o'er 
The bonds that bound her, loosed them rapturously. 

She spurns her chains, and from the prison door 
Leaps forth, a new and lustrous thing, to be 
Buoyed on the beams that from thy radiance pour. 



JUVENILIA. 133 



THE MAGIC ISLE, 
i. 

J. HERE is an island hidden far away, 

Round which life's ocean streams and beats and 

raves ; 

But never can his most unquiet waves 
Break rudely there : so strong, so clear a lay 
Floats from the shore, of flutes and lutes, the sound 
Of maidens singing with shrill voice divine, 
Of youths whose hair drops down with odorous 

wine, 

Whose deep broad chests heave with a joy profound. 
Above them droops the vine, and flowers below 

Sphere the still air with fragrance ; the blue sea 
Panting beneath their music tremblingly 
Kisses the deep blue sky, wherein there glow 

Love's lights for ever. Tis a halcyon clime, 
Withdrawn from change and chance and envious 
time. 



J34 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



II. 

JL.OVE leads thee to this isle ! Oh, follow him ; 
Be his obedient vassal ! Day and night, 
Sunsetting and sunrising, the swift light 

Alternating with stars and moonbeams dim, 

For thee shall be one splendour; and for thee 
The ceaseless songs of seraphim shall rise 
Like altar-flames through incandescent skies, 

Praising the Lord their God continually. 

Oh, follow, follow ! Cease, fond wretch, to eat 
Thy heart sore laden with a sorry care ! 
Love breathes, and hovering through the fragrant 
air, ^ 

Their wings a thousand unseen Zephyrs beat, 

A 
Fanning thy bnw, cooling thy feverish head, 

Spreading for thee a smooth Elysian bed. 



JUVENILIA. 135 



LOVE'S IDOLATRY. 

JTJ. OW do thine eyes excuse idolatry, 

My saint, to whom at rise and set of sun 
Thus on my yearning spirit's bended knee 

With purest vows I pay mine orison ! 
Thine eyes the temples are of holiest love, 

Whereto my soul makes hourly pilgrimage, 
Suing for wings to lift her flight above 

This house of flesh that clips her like a cage. 
Thine eyes are fountains of perennial health, 

To which in sick and weary mood I fly; 
Thine eyes are priceless mines of heavenly wealth, 

Stored with high truths and sweet divinity. 
Then call me not idolater, but see 
How firm my faith who kneel and worship thee. 



136 VAGABUNDUH LIBELLUS. 



RENUNCIATION. 



AH, 



what a pain is here ! All through the night 

I yearned for power, and nursed rebellious scorn, 
Striving against high heaven in hot despite 

Of wavering nerves and will by passion torn. 
I dreamed ; and on the curtain of the gloom 

False memory drew an idyll of old hope, 
Singing a lullaby to mock my doom 

With love far off and joy beyond my scope. 
I woke ; the present seemed more sad than hell ; 

On daily tasks my sullen soul I cast ; 
But, as I worked, a deeper sorrow fell 

Like thunder on my spirit ; for she past 
Before the house with wondering wide blue eye 
That said, " I wait ! why will you not reply ? " 

f 



JUVENILIA. 137 



IL 

IV 1 Y heart was hot and answered : " What might be ! 

Love, peace, content, the plenitude of strength ; 
She offers it of all convention free : 

Wilt thou not take and eat and rest at length ? 
Her brows are framed of beauty, and her soul 

Sits throned within her eyelids orbed in light ; 
And from her parted lips harmonious roll 

Full floods of music, rivers of delight ! " 
Oh, heart, false heart ! why tear'st thou me again ? 

" To touch, to handle, stretching forth thy palm 
To sleep forgetful of sharp self-disdain ; 

It were so easy, and so sweet the calm ! " 
Calm as the salt dead lake ; easy as sin ; 
Sweet as love-apples hiding dust within. 



138 VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



THE FALL OF A SOUL. 

J. SAT unsphering Plato ere I slept : 

Then through my dream the choir of gods was 
borne, 

Swift as the wind and lustrous as the morn, 
Fronting the night of stars ; behind them swept 
Tempestuous darkness o'er a drear descent, 

Wherethrough I saw a crowd of charioteers 

Urging their giddy steeds with cries and cheers 
To join the choir that aye before them went : 
But one there was who fell, with broken car 

And horses swooning down the gulf of gloom ; 

Heavenward his eyes, though prescient of their 

doom, 
Reflected glory like a falling star ; 

While with wild hair blown back and listless hands 

Ruining he sank toward undiscovered lands. 



JUVENILIA. 139 



O SI, O SI! 

FOR that bath whose medicinal balm 

Made wrinkled age and life-long weariness 
Exchange their torturing thorn-crown for the palm 

Of golden youth that shadows but to bless ! 
O for that river whose oblivious stream 

Drowned thoughts of things ill done and pain and 

wrong, 
Blotting the past like a delusive dream 

From which we wake with prayer and morning 

song ! 
O for that horse whose steady pinions soar 

Upward from earth and sorrow and false joy 
Into the heavens that change not evermore, 

Where anguish cannot plague nor pleasure cloy ! 
Health is Medea's bath, thy sorest need ; 
Content is Lethe ; Faith, the winged steed ! 



140 VAGABUNDULr LIBELLUS. 



IN MEMORIAM. 

JL HREE comrade elms with leafy arms enlaced 

Guarded through sun and shade a hundred years 
Yon hill-set house majestical, that rears 
Its solitary bulk so proudly based. 

Alike they grew, with equal beauty graced 
Of boughs aerial ; three giant peers : 
Together shed their leaves like autumn's tears, 
And took the storms of winter close embraced. 

Now they are gone ; the twain were cut away ; 
The third, left sorrowful without a mate, 
Waved heavy branches to the breeze of May ; 

Till on the dawning of a tranquil day, 

Bending his comely head, subdued by fate, 
He bowed and fell, heart-broken, desolate. 



fUVENILIA. 



A SISTER OF THE POOR. 

J\.NEW you this lady ? She was one whom God 
Loved greatly ; yet the proud ones of the land 
Eyed her askance, what time rough paths she trod 
And wild waste places, with an angel's hand 

Soothing intolerable anguish. Men 

By maddening fever fretted, orphans thrown 
Like fruit untimely on the barren stone 
Of city streets, babes in the stifling den 

Of crime and famine to her bosom pressed 
These knew her. As a folded lily keeps 
Whiteness unstained on stony Alpine steeps, 

Even so this maiden in the festering nest 

Of sin and sickness blossomed. Now she sleeps 
Pure with the pure, and with the saints at rest. 



142 VAGABUNDUL1 L1BELLUS. 



TO THE UNSEEN BEAUTY. 

J_ WILL arise and come to Thee. The juice 
Of gravest herbs, poppy and pale henbane, 
Shall bead my forehead and confuse my brain 

With fierce intoxication, life's long truce. 

Too true there is no road from hence but Death ; 

And that perchance to Nothing : yet blank naught 
Were better than the anguish of such thought 

As we draw daily with our deepest breath. 

I know not what compels me ; but thy form 

Still beckons ; and I hear a voice that says : 

" Pass forth ; for ever flow the lengthening days ; 

For ever swells the elemental storm ; 

. And thou art nothing ; lay thee on the knees 
Of Doom, and take thine everlasting ease." 



JUVENILIA. 143 



THE PLOVERS. 

J ATE on the moors I heard the plovers cry. 

A waning moon was up, and sulky rack 
Swept in torn squadrons ominously black 
O'er the scant larches as the wind wailed by. 

There was no hope that night in earth or sky : 

The lute-chords of my life hung faint and slack, 
Vibrating keenly when athwart our track 
I rather felt than saw those mourners fly : 

For ever and for ever doomed to range 

The wilderness, the darkness and the storm, 
While other birds of air are nested warm 

In tufts of ivy or 'neath sheltering grange ; 

Since each, a man, beside the cross had stood 
And mocked Christ in His dying solitude. 



\ 

144 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



A BOY'S VOICE BROKEN. 

OUMMER hath come ! The world is ripe for song ! 

Pant forth thy passionate pain, thou nightingale ! 

Brown moonlight fills the broad ambrosial vale, 

Where deep-embowered I wait and listen long ! 
So cried the boy. When, hark, the hurrying throng 

Of thick notes preluding that final wail ! 

Thrilled by the sound divine, his lips grew pale ; 

Some god unknown within his heart was strong. 
Then silence fell. He, soaring on the wings 

Of song, poured his soul forth in rivalry : 

Till, at heaven's height, where the rapt spirit 

springs 
By one quick bound up to infinity, 

The boy's voice failed. Love's hour had come. 
The lute 

On which Love plays, must first be smitten mute. 



JUVENILIA. 145 



A COAT OF ARMS. 

J. HREE golden trefoils starred on an azure field : 

Bearing these blazoned arms, my fathers fought ; 

I in this age when heraldries are naught, 

Have found life's oriflamme limned in their shield. 
What though nor bickering brand nor lance I wield, 

Yet 'neath this ensign have I lived and thought ; 

Yea, whatsoe'er these hands and brain have 
wrought, 

With one same triple treble sign is sealed. 
Faith, Hope, and Love ; Religion, Conduct, Art ; 

Truth, Beauty, Good ; trifoliate trinities ; 

Trefoils triune, conjoining head, will, heart 
In threefold concord ; thrice-linked harmonies, 

Tripartite, trisubstantiate ; these three 

Made, make, shall make what lives and lasts in me. 



10 



146 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



MORGENLIED. 

/xT Miirren let the morning lead thee out 

To walk upon the cold and cloven hills ; 
To hear the congregated mountains shout 

Their paean of a thousand foaming rills. 
Raimented with intolerable light 

The snow-peaks stand above thee, row on row 
Arising, each a seraph in his might ; 

An organ each of varied stop doth blow. 
Heaven's azure dome trembles through all her spheres 

Feeling that music vibrate ; and the Sun 
Raises his tenor as he upward steers ; 

And all the glory-coated mists that run 
Beneath him in the valley, hear his voice, 
And cry unto the dewy fields : Rejoice ! 



JUVENILIA. 147 



AN AUTUMN DAY. 

SOUL is in the sunlight. Not one breath 
Troubles the stainless and translucent sky. 
Methinks the spirits of the mountains fly 
Heavenward like flames. Blue air encompasseth 

The congregated Alps that lift on high 

Their crowned brows, to hear what Summer saith. 
She, having whispered, will depart ; and death 
Comes in the clasp of Winter by-and-by. 

Hushed are the pines. There is no stir, no strife, 
No fretful wailing of frore winds that blow 
Earth's winding-sheet of cold uncoloured snow. 

This morn, upon the brink of dying, Life 

Draws a deep draught of peace, and rapture thrills 
Through all the pulses of the impassioned hills. 



148 VAGABUNDUL1 LIBELLUS. 



ON THE HILL-SIDE. 

J. HE winds behind me in the thicket sigh, 

The bees fly droning on laborious wing, 
Pink cloudlets scarcely float across the sky, 

September stillness broods o'er everything. 
Deep peace is in my soul : I seem to hear 

Catullus murmuring, " Let us live and love ; 
Suns rise and set and fill the rolling year 

Which bears us deathward, therefore let us love ; 
Pour forth the wine of kisses, let them flow, 

And let us drink our fill before we die." 
Hush ! in the thicket still the breezes blow ; 

Pink cloudlets sail across the azure sky; 
The bees warp lazily on laden wing ; 
Beaut} 7 and stillness brood o'er everything. 



JUVENILIA. 149 



TO CHRYSANTHEMUMS. 

comers ! Ye, when autumn's wealth is past ; 
When pale October strips the yellowing leaves ; 
When on our garden lawns and dripping eaves 
The rain- soaked foliage of the elm is cast ; 

When 'neath grey skies the wild Atlantic blast 

Searches the flower-bed for each bloom that cleaves 
To blackening tendrils ; when November weaves 
Fret-work of frost, and winter frowns at last ; 

Ye in the year's decay and death of hope 

Dawn with your hues auroral, hues of rose, 
Saffron and ivory, amber, amethyst ; 

More delicate, more dear, more true than those 

Gay blossoms which the July sunbeams kissed, 
Purer of scent than honeyed heliotrope. 



ISO VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



ROSA. 

W HAT flowers for thee, dearest ? What flowers for 
thee? 

Red roses for my rose, and azure eyes 
Of gentian steadfast as thy constancy? 

Pearl-cupped anemones, and silver sighs 
Of fragile lilies breathed by the faint wind ? 

All these are gone; swift summer spreads her 

wing, 
And bears them southward, leaving naught behind 

But sober crocuses, that meek the spring 
With lilac modesty how pale and prim 

By those gay flaunting chalices of gold, 
Which the voluptuous prime with fire did brim ! 

Yet, since Love deems no duteous service cold, 
These will I pluck, and bind them on thy brow, 
Saying, " Their hues are meek and chaste as thou." 



JUVENILIA. 151 



"JE SUIS TROP JEUNE." 

J /SAVE me awhile ; I am too young to love ; 

My maiden fancies are enough for me : 
Leave me awhile; too soon will passion move 

The silent springs of my virginity. 
You break my dream, wither my girlhood's flower, 

With vows and kisses and soft whispered sighs; 
And offer what ? The homage of an hour, 

The sad sweet service of adoring eyes. 
And then you fly. 'T is honour bids you go : 

You think it virtue to have left me maid ; 
You smile " Uncropped by me her rose shall blow, 

Her bridal kiss on worthier lips be laid." 
But give me, stranger, give me back, I pray, 
The heart's ease that was mine but yesterday ! 



HERE AND THERE. 



LA RETRAITE. 
Written on the last page of a gift- book. 

V_/LD books, old flowers, old feelings, foliage pressed 
By Time, who lays the stony weight of years 
Upon our palpitating hopes and fears, 
The scented herbage of our throbbing breast! 

These leaves I turn, on a vague scholar's quest, 

In search of some frail thought that disappears ; 
But meet, instead, the broad soul-haunted meres 
Of memory, and the friend's face I love best. 

Dearest, this book I gave you years ago : 

I find it now in Florence ; and I write, 

Here by your hearth, words you may never know. 

Live well ; live happy. Short is day, but bright. 
The Bersaglieri on the flags below 
Cry : Comes for us, for you, for all the night ! 



156 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE STROLLING MUSICIAN. 

J. EN francs and twice five cents were in my purse : 
I counted them while those brown wanderers plied 
Shrill cornet, wheezy file, cracked ophicleide, 
Making such music as provoked a curse. 

Still, as they blew, from bad to strident worse 
The strife of deepening dissonances cried ; 
Till, when the soul of pity sank and died, 
The hat went round ; and then, by fate perverse, 

The lad who bore it showed so fair a face 

So sweet a smile on pure pale lips by down 
Of earliest manhood fringed, so musical 

A laughter in dark dream-eyes with the brown 

Cluster of curls o'ershadowed that his grace 
Brought concord home : cents, francs, he took them 
all! 



HERE AND THERE. 157 



THE JEWS' CEMETERY. 

Lido of Venice. 

I. 

1\. TRACT of sand swept by the salt sea foam, 

Fringed with acacia flowers, and billowy-deep 
In meadow grasses, where tall poppies sleep, 
And bees athirst for wilding honey roam. 

How many a bleeding heart hath found its home 

Under these hillocks which the sea-mews sweep I 
Here knelt an outcast race to curse and weep, 
Age after age, 'neath heaven's unanswering dome I 

Sad is the place, and solemn. Grave by grave, 

Lost in the dunes, with rank weeds overgrown, 
Pines in abandonment ; as though unknown, 

Uncared for, lay the dead, whose records pave 
This path neglected ; each forgotten stone 
Wept by no mourner but the moaning wave. 



158 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



ii. 



w, 



HILE thus I mused, the genius of the spot 
Rose in my soul, rebuking me, and said : 
You wrong these patient and heroic dead, 
Whose trust, although He slew them, wavered not! 

You wrong the living ! Israel ne'er forgot 

His forefathers, lapped in earth's narrow bed. 
Each grave is known and named and numbered. 
You misconceive the tranquil tragic lot 

Of lives so fallen on sleep ! Secure of God, 

Merged in the deathless memory of their race, 
These wait And if your callous feet have trod 

Blank tombs that to the bare skies turn their face, 

From faith here prostrate learn to kiss the rod, 
From contrite hope here learn to sue for grace ! 



HERE AND THERE. 159 



BEFORE THE DAWN. 
Between, Bel Alp and Brleg. 

\ FULL moon sinking in the west ; a beam 
Of morn uprising from the orient skies : 
Dim meadow-ways beneath, where the dew lies 
And flowers of autumn crocus faintly gleam. 

Through the hushed pines, beside the hurrying stream, 
We downward fare, while bells of dawning rise 
From unseen hamlets, and before our eyes 
The solid world looms like a twilight dream. 

High up in Heaven above the unfading snow, 

Laved by strong ocean floods of confluent light, 
A sole star shines. Within that restless spark 

Ruby and sapphire mingle, shoot, and glow. 

Thus burns faith's Phosphor-orb, intensely bright, 
Betwixt heaven's day-spring and earth's dolorous 
dark. 



160 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



BEFORE THE DAWN. 
At Citta di Castello. 

1~\S one who stands before a picture set 

In ebon framework, so in dreams of night 

I gazed upon broad mountains, billowy bright 

With rays ineffable -a window let 

Into the wall of blackness ; and while yet 

My spirit pondered, on my dreaming sight 

This legend flashed in letters fiery white : 

THESE BE THE HILLS OF HEAVEN. FORGO. FORGET. 

Then came who called me, and I rose, and went 
Along the moonlit city walls, where roll 
The springs of Tiber ; and through copse and dell 

Fared in the light malign : but wonderment 

Of that strange dream possessed me, and my^soul 
Yearned for the Hills of Heaven like one-in hell. 



HERE AND THERE. 161 



A CRUCIFIX IN THE ETSCH THAL. 

JjLUE mists lie curled along the sullen stream : 

Clouds furl the pine-clad highlands whence we 

came : 

Stage after stage, interminably tame, 
Stretch the gaunt mountain-flanks without one 
gleam. 

All things are frozen in a dull dead dream : 
It is a twilight land without a name : 
Each half-awakened hamlet seems the same 
Home of grey want and misery supreme. 

Heart-breaking is the world-old human strife 

With niggard nature traced adown this vale 
In records fugitive as human life. 

Ah Christ ! The land is thine. Those tortured eyes, 
That thorn-crowned brow, those mute lips, thin 

and pale, 
Appeal from man's pain to the impiteous skies. 



162 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



MONTE GENEROSO. 

i. 

Morning Clouds. 

IVl ORN hath gone forth. The symphony sublime 
Of dawning closeth on that final blare 
Of the sun's trumpets blown in saffron air. 
Now to their thrones on the world's watch-towers 
climb 

The congregated clouds, that through the prime 
Dwelt like a ruffled lake, motionless there 
From Apennine to Alp, o'er cities fair 
Veiled as God's thoughts are veiled by brooding 
Time. 

They stir, they soar ; driven by no blast of wind, 

But self-impelled, like travelling bisons swayed 
By instinct of some slow compulsive mind, 

They sweep the plain's face, and the hills invade ; 

Then, coiled around this crag, heaven's radiance 

blind, 
And forge the noonday thunder's cannonade. 



HERE AND THERE, 163 



II. 

Early Summer. 

IVl EADOWS with asphodel and lily flowers 
O'er-silvered, as our English fields in May 
Are gilt with buttercups ; wind-ruffled hay 
Exhaling summery spice in noontide hours ; 

Bare crested crags, gaunt battlemented towers, 
Purple with silk-enwoven peony spray ; 
Each black-browed ledge, where late the snow- 
wreaths lay, 
Plumed with auriculas and dewed with showers ! 

June then is here ! The barren hill-sides glow 

With gentians, and waist-high the giant stands 

/ 
Girt with laburnum blossoms amber-pale; 

Where girls from chestnut-shadowed homesteads go 

With brown-cheeked lads, laughing and clasping 

hands, 

'Neath golden-green young beech-boughs in the 
vale. 



164 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



III. 

The Summit, at Evening. 

on the main Atlantic, onward driven 

By winds that mound the unfathomable deep 

Into ridged billows, a good ship will creep 

High to the crest and hang 'twixt sea and heaven ; 

So have we climbed this summit, whence 'tis given 
With unobstructed view at ease to sweep 
The illimitable champaign, towns that sleep 
In twilight, storm-swathed Alps by lightnings 
riven. 

The bells of evening rise from village towers 

Far, far below ; while evening silence steals 
Down from the crags and chasms of our hill, 

To lawns o'er-snowed with faint narcissus flowers 
Paling the sward 'neath pendulous abeles, 
Where spring, earth's pure Proserpina, breathes 
still. 



ON CLASSICAL THEMES. 



Lo, i 



TO THE LOVED ONE OF THE POET. 

(After Tlteognis.) 
have given thee plumes wherewith to skim 



The unfathomed deep, and lightly hover around 
Earth's huge circumference. Thou shalt be found 
At banquets on the breath of paean and hymn : 

To shrill-voiced pipes with lips of seraphim 

Lovely young men thy rapturous fame shall sound : 
Yea, when thou liest lapped in the noiseless 

ground, 
Thy name shall live, nor shall oblivion dim 

Thy dawn of splendour. For these lands, these isles, 
These multitudinous waves of refluent seas, 
Shall be thy pleasure-ground wherethrough to 
roam, 

Borne by no steeds, but wafted by the smiles 
Of Muses violet-crowned, whose melodies, 
While earth endures, shall make all earth thy 
home. 



168 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



TO THE BELOVED. 

(After Philostratus.) 

I. 

VV HENCE flew the Love that made my spirit his prey, 
But from those eyes of light where beauty dwells? 
Great captains hold high rock-built citadels ; 
Kings lean from towers, and subject lands survey; 

But Love is loftier-placed, more proud than they : 
For on thy brows he sits enthroned, and tells 
Eternal stories to heaven's sentinels, 
Charming the errant stars upon night's way. 

Love's castles are not fenced with stone or clay ; 

Thine eyelids are the rampart whence he flings 
The ammunition of his amorous play ; 

Swift are his sallies, for he rides on wings ; 

Free, for no cumbrous arms his flight delay, 
Fledged with fair thoughts and fond imaginings. 



ON CLASSICAL THEMES. 169 



II. 



B, 



IRDS of the air on tree-tops build their nest, 
And fishes in blue caverns of the deep 
Haunt where the sunless waters brood and sleep ; 
But in man's eyes the shapes of beauty rest, 

Nor move therefrom on any further quest : 

They in their living mansion dwell, and keep 
Perpetual station, though we smile or weep, 
Swaying the thoughts of man's love-laden breast. 

Thus in mine eyes I bear thee ; and what time 

They gaze upon the heavens in noonday sheen, 
Methinks the sun hath set, and thou sublime 

Walkest those paths eterne in light serene ; 

And when night comes, twin stars above me rise, 
Hcsper and thou, sole regents of the skies. 



i ?o VAGABUNDULI 



III. 

JjECAUSE I am a stranger, wilt thou swear 
I have no right to be beloved of thee ? 
Oh, be not guilty of this perjury ! 
Sin not against Love's laws that made thee fair t 

Are not the summer rains that blossoms bear, 

Strangers to earth, who takes them thirstingly ? 
The snow-born streams are strangers to the sea, 
And dawn a stranger to the dim night air. 

The swallow builds her nest 'neath yonder eaves ; 

Yet from what land she journeys, none can say : 
The nightingale who darkling thrills the leaves 

With heavens of song, is stranger to the May : 
The soul, a stranger, to the body cleaves : 
Take me, thy stranger, and Love's laws obey ! 



ON CLASSICAL THEMES. 171 



IV. 



OHUT not thy doors against Love's paraclete, 
Because I walk unsandalled and unshod : 
Naked is Love, and yet how great a god ! 
Poor are the meadow-flowers, and yet how sweet ! 

The Graces dancing round the ivory seat 
Of Paphian Aphrodite, never trod 
Those porphyry pavements, never touched the sod 
Of lawns in Ida, save with naked feet ! 

The stars are naked ; yet the Soul of Love 

Throbs in their radiant spheres, and far above 
The reach of wealth is their immortal youth ! 

Let rich men pay : I woo thee not with pelf : 
My gifts are music, adoration, truth, 
Strength, health, sweet hours, hope, manhood, love, 
myself ! 



172 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS, 



A SERENATA. 

\.J PEN the doors, those bolts of brass withdraw, 
Show the fair treasury of thy heart to me ! 
'Twere easier far to dive into the sea, 
And conquer pearls or corals from death's jaw ; 

To over-leap the everlasting law 

And pluck down stars from heaven's immensity ; 

To chain the winds atremble on the lea, 

Or snatch her whelps from wounded tigress' paw ; 

Than from thy marble mind, O pitiless thou, 

To draw by close persuasion, tears and sighs, 

By constant thoughts, by service, prayer and vow, 

The secret of those deep mysterious eyes ! 

O love, my life, I sit outside and pray thee : 
Open, show me thy heart ! Love shall repay 
thee! 



ON CLASSICAL THEMES. 173 



THE GARLAND-BEARER. 

(After Sappho.) 

DRING summer flowers, bring pansy, violet, 

Moss-rose and sweet-briar and pale columbine ; 
Bring loveliest leaves, rathe privet, eglantine, 
And myrtles with the dews of morning wet : 

Twine thou a wreath upon thy brows to set ; 

With thy soft hands the wayward tendrils twine ; 
Then lay them lightly on those curls of thine, 
Those curls too fair for gems or coronet. 

Sweet is the breath of blossoms, and the Graces, 

When suppliants through Love's temple wend 

their way, 
Look down with smiles from their celestial places 

On maidens wreathed with chaplets of the May ; 

But from the crownless choir they turn their faces, 
Nor heed them when they sing nor when they 
pray. 



TRANSLATIONS. 



ON DISORDERED WILL. 

(From Folgore da San Gemignano.) 

VV HAT time desire hath o'er the soul such sway 
That reason finds nor place nor puissance here, 
Men oft do laugh at what should claim a tear, 
And over grievous dole are seeming gay. 

He sure would travel far from sense astray 

Who should take frigid ice for fire ; and near 
Unto this plight are those who make glad cheer 
For what should 'rather cause their soul dismay. 

But more at heart might he feel heavy pain 

Who made his reason subject to mere will, 
And followed wandering impulse without rein ; 

Seeing no lordship is so rich as still 

One's upright self unswerving to sustain, 
To follow worth, to flee things vain and ill. 



12 



178 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



NOTHING OVERMUCH. 

(From L. B. Alberti.') 

J. IME was I watched a man all cased in mail 
Sit fury-fraught, yet tremble wan of hue ; 
And eyes I've often seen drop plenteous dew 
For the fierce heat that did the heart assail ; 
I've seen a lover who might neither wail 

Nor weep because of pangs that pierced him 

through ; 

And famished men I've seen who could not chew, 
So mighty were the throes that wrought them bale. 
Sails, too, I've seen aflight upon the deep, 

Which too much strength of wind submerged and 

rent; 
And hounds whose swiftness put the breeze to 

shame, 
Through too great speed defrauded of their game : 

Such force hath man from nature force which 

blent 
With too much will due balance cannot keep. 



TRANSLATIONS. 179 



WILLING AND DOING. 

(From Lionardo da Vinci.) 

JTl E who can do not what he wills, should try 
To will what he can do ; for since 'tis vain 
To will beyond power's compass, to abstain 
From idle will were best philosophy. 

Lo, all our happiness and grief imply 

Knowledge or not of will's ability : 

They therefore can, who will what ought to be, 

Nor wrest true reason from her seat awry. 

Nor what a man can, should he always will : 

Oft seemeth sweet what after is not so ; ~ 
And what I willed, when had, hath cost a tear. 

Then, reader of these lines, if thou wouldst still 
Be helpful to thyself, to others dear, 
Will to can alway what thou ought to do. 



l8o VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE LEAFLESS WOOD. 

(From Giovanni delta Casa.") 

O WEET woodland solitude, that art so dear 

To my dark soul lost in doubt's dreadful maze, 
Now that the North-wind, these short sullen days, 
Wraps earth and air in winter's mantle drear, 
And thy green ancient shadowy locks are sere, 
White as my own, above the frosty ways, 
Where summer flowers once basked beneath 

heaven's rays, 

But rigid ice now reigns and snows austere ; 
Pondering upon that brief and cloudy light 

That's left for me, I walk, and feel my mind 
And members, like thy branches, frozen too ; 
Yet me, within, without, worse frost doth bind, 

My winter brings a fiercer East-wind's blight, 
A longer darkness, days more cold, more few. 



TRANSLATIONS. 181 



TO SLEEP. 

(From Giovanni della Casa.') 

v_x SLEEP, O tranquil son of noiseless Night, 
Of humid, shadowy Night ; O dear repose 
For wearied men, forgetfulness of woes 
Grievous enough the bloom of life to blight ! 

Succour this heart that hath .outworn delight, 

And knows no rest ; these tired limbs compose ; 
Fly to me, Sleep ; thy dusky vans disclose 
Over my languid eyes, then cease thy flight. 

Where, where is Silence, that avoids the day ? 

Where the light dreams, that with a wavering 

tread 
And unsubstantial footing follow thee ? 

Alas ! in vain I call thee ; and these grey, 

These frigid shades flatter in vain. O bed, 
How rough with thorns ! O nights, how harsh to 
me ! 



182 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



TO SLEEP. 

(From Marini.~) 

V_/ THOU, the son of Silence and dim Night, 
Parent of forms, imaginary, fair ; 
Thou gentle Sleep, over whose paths of air 
Souls oft are led to Love's own heavens of light ! 

Now that all hearts but this, lulled by those slight, 

Those shadowy dreams, slumber ; at my last 

prayer; 

From Erebus dark as the soul's despair, 
From deep Cimmerian caverns, wing thy flight ! 

Come with thy calm gift of oblivion : 

Come with the face whereon I fain would gaze : 
Bring to my breast in dreams that only one : 

Or, if the form I seek, thou canst not raise, 

Yet through thy charm shall fancy feed upon 
Visions of death that waits to close my days. 



TRANSLATIONS. ' 183 



LUX UMBRA DEI. 

(From Marini.') 

DURIED within the deep shades tenebrous 
Of inaccessible lustre, blinding light, 
Mid clouds of silence dark and dense as night, 
The eternal Mind his secret hides from us. 

Striving to pierce those mists fuliginous 

Which wrap His judgments in thick veils from 

sight, 

Rash empty human wit He still doth blight 
With lightning, daunts with voices thunderous. 

O Sun invisible ! Thou that dost lurk 

Lost in that luminous abysm of gloom, 

With thine own rays veiled as with vaporous murk; 

Me dark and sightless thy swift rays illume ; 

Through my soul's night thine unseen splendours 

glow; 
The less of thee I grasp, the more I know. 



184 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE PHILOSOPHIC FLIGHT. 

(From Giordano Bruno.) 

1\1 OW that these wings to speed my wish ascend, 
The more I feel vast air beneath my feet, 
The more toward boundless air on pinions fleet, 
Spurning the earth, soaring to heaven, I tend : 

Nor makes them stoop their flight the direful end 
Of Daedal's son ; but upward still they beat. 
What life the while with this death could compete, 
If dead to earth at last I must descend ? 

My own heart's voice in the void air I hear . 

Where wilt thou bear me, O rash man ! Recall 
Thy daring will ! This boldness waits on fear ! 

Dread not, I answer, that tremendous fall : 

Strike through the clouds, and smile when death 

is near, 
If death so glorious be our doom at all ! 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 



AUTUMN YEARS. 

ESTILENCE-SMITTEN multitudes sere leaves 
Driven by the dull remorseless autumn breath 
Of storms that sweep summer to wintry death : 
Such are our days. The charnel odour cleaves 

To these decaying thoughts. Blind ruin weaves 
Their dance, that on the dark stream eddieth 
Of desolation : and the soul's voice saith ; 
Fly forth ! The swallows quit thy mouldering 
eaves ! 

Midway upon life's path what doom is this ; 

To fray the world's highways, searching for strength, 
Searching for peace, perplexed in body and mind ! 

And naught remains, save that the slackening wind, 
Tired of continual drift, should drop at length, 
And death conclude these peregrinities. 



188 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



WO DIE COTTER NIGHT SIND, WALTEN 
GESPENSTER. 



W, 



HERE gods are not, ghosts reign. When Phoebus 

fled 

Forth from his laurel-girt Parnassian shrine 
With hollow shriek, that shivering o'er the brine 
Thrilled through earth, air, the news that Pan was 
dead ; 

Dragons and demons reared their obscene head 
From fanes oracular, fierce serpentine 
Hissings, in lieu of Pythian runes divine, 
Poured on the night perplexity and dread. 

Thus, in the temple of man's mind, when faith, 

Hope, love, affection, gods of hearth and home, 
Have vanished; writhe dim sibilant desires, 

Phantasmal superstitions, lust the wraith 

And greed the vampire, sphinx-like fiends that 

roam 
Through ruined brain-cells, ringed with fretful fire. 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 189 



PESSIMISM. 

T- 
HERE is a doubt drearier than any deep 

Thought's plummet ever sounded, that our earth 
This earth where each man bears the load of birth, 
The load of death, uncertain whether sleep 

Shall round life with oblivion may be worth 
Less in the scale of being thart a heap 
Of mildewed ears* the farmer scorns to reap, 
Or garners in his barns with sorry mirth. 

Of every million lives, how many a score 

Are failures from the birth ! If this be true 
Of seeds, men, species, why not then of suns ? 

Our world perchance is worm-gnawn at the core ! 
Or in its daedal frame doth cancer brew 
Venomous juice that blent with life-blood runs? 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE LAST DOUBT. 

.L,OST in life's gloom, Maya descends on me : 

What are these limbs ? This hand, these words I 

write? 
What are my deeds, thoughts, instincts ? What 

is sight, 
Speech, hearing, action, self? Oh, misery ! 

Beyond man's power to feel, know, act, dream, be, 

There dwells a something, a dread infinite Might, 
Essential evanescence, endless night, 
Dumb ground of all things, sole reality. 

From this -this unapproachable, unknown, 
Intangible, unthinkable, this thing 
Deep as the world's base, this brute ocean-ring 

Girdling life's sentient sphere, bathing the zone 

Of being, from this force, this frozen sting, 
Reason torpedo-struck shrinks on her throne. 



ON THEMES OF .MEDITATION. 191 



THE LAST DESPAIR. 

J_>/ARK moments are there when the adventurous soul 
Quails 'neath her weight of immortality, 
Spurning the supreme will that makes man be 
Deathless. She writhing in fate's fierce control, 

Knows that unending years for her must roll 
Through dateless cycles of eternity ; 
And time be drowned in timeless agony ; 
And self endure, self's ever-burning stole. 

The curse of this existence, whence it came, 

We view not ; only this we view, that naught 
Shall free man from self's robe of sentient flame. 

There is no cunningest way to murder thought. 

Stab, poison, strangle ; yea, the flesh hath died ! 
What further skill yields souls their suicide? 



192 rAGABUNDULl LIBELLUS. 



THE VOICE OF REBELLION. 

IvEBELLION quickening with the flight of time 
Hath a terrific gamut ; for the sound 
Of unassuageable woe, hugging the ground, 
Swells deep at first ; then, as a midnight chime 

Starts on the bass, and upward swift doth climb 

Through tenor, alto, till the heaven's profound 
Thrills with the tense soprano ; so the hound 
Of vengeance, scenting unforgiveable crime, 

Leaps from long-suffering murmurs to a note 

Full-toned and resonant ; slow months slip by ; 
That voice is now a fierce and querulous cry ; 

Soon, when weeks count for months, and days for weeks, 
That cry, no longer human, splits the throat 
Of Maenad multitudes with shrill sharp shrieks. 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 193 



IN MEMORIAM. 



Lo, 



how this man, while life was left to him, 
Wrought through those seventeen years of deepen- 
ing pain, 

Through strife, renunciation, and the strain 
Of slow disease feeding on lung and limb ; 
How though his breath grew scant and eyesight dim, 
- While wayward sleep forgot to haunt his brain, 
Thwarted, downcast, again and yet again, 
He raised his clear and incorruptible hymn 
In praise of beauty ; how, through journeyings oft, 
On wild waste seas, 'mid Alpine frosts austere, 
Bookless, companionless, from life withdrawn, 
With heart untamed he hailed the eternal dawn ; 

How, undisturbed, singing beheld death near; 
Then, still with quenchless song, winged his soul's 
flight aloft ! 



134 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



IN MEMORIAM. 

Q 

OALT of the earth he was; if ever man, 

Girt round with love, ringed with faith's aureole, 
Treading our globe corrupt from pole to pole, 
Himself God-stayed and steadfast in hope's van, 

With heart sin-proof, with wise brain firm to scan 

False dread, frail dreams that flatter and cajole, 
Kept man's mind sweet and from misdoing whole, 
By brine of reason and the will that can. 

Fresh air he was ; wholesome, nerve-nourishing, light, 
Liberal, elastic ; yielding sound men health, 
And sick men ease : truth, starred above our sighj, 

Loomed on his thought ; close 'neath his grasp lay 

wealth 
Souls faint for : then death came, took -him by 

stealth : 

But death, God's thrall, steals not that spirit's 
might. 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 195 



THE GRAVE OF OMAR KHAYYAM. 

OMAR KHAYYAM, in life's calm eventide, 
Walking his garden on a night of June 
With one whose youth shone like the rising moon, 
Murmured these words: "When earth on either 
side 

Shall clasp this breathing clay, the potter's pride ; 

When all these songs are silenced, soon, too soon ; 
Then shall red rose-leaves, morning, night, and 

noon, 
Blown by North-winds, the dust of Omar hide." 

Listened the youth, and wondered : yet, being sure 

No wise man's words like snow-flakes melt in vain, 
After long years, with eld's slow steps, again 

Turning toward Omar's home in Naishapur, 

He sought that tomb, but found, by wild winds 

blown, 
Drift of red rose-leaves, deep on a hidden stone. 



196 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



THE WORLD'S A STAGE. 



one who takes his station at some show ; 

No matter what, Circus or Music-hall, 

Opera, Penny-gaff, in pit or stall ; 

And while the trumpets for the fourth act blow 

The fourth, which is the best, as all men know 
Must leave his place of entertainment, fall, 
At some uncertain, sudden, tiresome call, 
Into the outer dark and face the snow ; 

Thus is it with this life of ours : we die 

Ere half the plot be fashioned : where we go, 
No man hath known ; none helps ; some say 
goodbye. 

'Twere wisdom therefore with dispassionate eye 
To view the stage, enjoy the mop and mow, 
Then quit the unfinished play, contented so. 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 197 



II. 

1V1 EN who at theatres throng pit and stall, 

Choose their own place ; come, go, as suits them 

still : 

While we into this world, or will or nill, 
Come as fate rules our coming; bide the call 

That brings us here, and then defrauds of all 

We fain would gaze on. Is there any ill 

Worse than life's scene surveyed without our will, 

Cut short by death's untimely curtain fall ? 

Nay, be not thus rebellious ! It is much 

To taste the joys of thinking, feeling, touch, 
Sight, hearing, for these few years. Men, be sure, 

Howe'er their miseries or their sins endure, 

Owe nothing to that cold mysterious clutch 
Which moulds and mars life. Fate must find the 
cure. 



198 VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



"ALL LIFE IS BUT A WANDERING TO FIND 

HOME." 


(After Menander.) 

V V HOM the gods love, die young ; that man is blest 
Who having viewed at ease this solemn show 
Of sun, stars, ocean, fire, doth quickly go 
Back to his home with calm uninjured breast. 

Be life or short or long, 'tis manifest 

Thou ne'er wilt see things goodlier, Parmeno, 
Than these ; then take thy sojourn here as though 
Thou wert some play-goer or wedding guest. 

The sooner sped, the safelier to thy rest, 

Well-furnished, foe to none, with strength at need, 
Shalt thou return ; while he who tarries late. 

Faints on the road, out-worn, with age oppressed, 

Harassed by foes whom life's dull tumults breed ; 
Thus ill dies he for whom death long doth wait. 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 199 



PRIEZ DIEU POUR LUI ! 

Jr RAY we to God our Father for this friend ! 
Our friend is gone back to his Father's feet, 
Charged with long life's transgression ; sure 'tis 

meet 
That we transgressors that high will should bend ! 

Think not to bend it, brethren ! Yet ye lend 

The tribute of true tears, affections sweet, 
Humble submission at heaven's judgment seat ; 
And God man's purblind prayers will comprehend. 

The Name of God is Justice ; but that Name 
Is also Love. Alas, how hard it is 
For mortal man, perplexed with pity and shame, 

Justice and Love in one leal act to kiss ! 

Pray we to, God in faith ; from Justice crave 
Forgiveness ; call on Love man's soul to save ! 



200 VAGABUNDULI L1BELLUS. 



A DREAM OF BURIAL IN MID OCEAN. 

J_yOWN through the deep deep grey -green seas, in 

sleep, 

Plunged my drowsed soul ; and ever on and on, 
Hurrying at first, then where the faint light shone 
Through fathoms twelve, with slackening fall did 
creep : 

Nor touched the bottom of that bottomless steep, 
But with a slow sustained suspension, 
Buoyed 'mid the watery wildernesses wan, 
Like a thin cloud in air, voyaged the deep. 

Then all those dreadful faces of the sea, 

Horned things abhorred and shapes intolerable, 
Fixing glazed lidless eyes, swam up to me, 

And pushed me with their snouts, and coiled and fell 
In spiral volumes writhing horribly 
Jagged fins grotesque, fanged ghastly jaws of hell. 



ON THEMES OF MEDITATION. 201 



BURIAL IN ATHENS. 

_L HEY had this custom in the violet-crowned 
City of Queen Athena, that when one 
Drooped ere his race on earth was well begun, 
In spring time sinking down to the sunless ground ; 

They bore that clay-cold loveliness with sound 

Of flutes and choirs, and ere the jocund sun 
Flashed from the white front of the Parthenon, 
Lighted the death-pyre on a meadowy mound. 

Those leaping flames with flames of flooding morn 

Commingling, blent earthly and heavenly fires ; 
Forth flew the soul, winged with the breath of 
choirs ; 

The flesh, resolved into elastic air, 

With elemental freedom played re-born ; 

And life through man's migration shone more fair. 



VAGABUNDULI LIBELLUS. 



TO NIGHT, 
The Mother of Sleep and Death. 

V_yH Mother, holiest Mother, Mother Night! 
Thou on thy marble throne of ebon hue 
Hast still the everlasting stars in view, 
The slumbering earth and dusk heavens infinite ! 

Turn thou those veiled eyes where never light 
Shone rudely yet, but dim purpureal blue 
Broods in the dawn of moonbeams, on these two 
Dread angels folded on thy bosom white : 

Sleep and his twin-born Death, entwined, embraced ; 

Mingling soft breath, deep dreams, dark poppied 

hair ; 
Lips pressed to lips, and hands in hands enlaced ; 

Thy children and our comforters, the pair 

From whom poor men, by earth enslaved, debased, 
Find freedom and surmount their life's despair ! 



NOTES. 



NOTES. 



STELLA MARIS. 

Nos. I., II., XX., XL., pages n, 12, 30, 50. The word "Maya" 
in these sonnets may need explanation. It is used to signify 
the Spirit of Illusion. Further light upon the sense in which 
I have employed it is thrown by the sonnet on TJie Furies, 
page 37 of m y ANIMI FIGURA. It occurs again in The Last 
Doubt, page 190 of this volume. 

No. IV., page 14, The rhythm is suggested by that of a Venetian 
vilota, " Belo xe il mar e bela la marina." 

Nos. XIV., XV., XVI., pages 24, 25, 26. Written on the themes 
of popular Venetian songs. 

No. XXXV., page 45. Borrin is the Venetian N.E. wind. 

No. XXXVI., page 46. Suggested by a lyric in Venetian dialect. 

No. XLVIII., page 58. See the sonnets Debate on Self, Nos. III. 
and IV., and Pro and Con, No. I., in my ANIMI FIGURA, pages 
20, 21, 29. 

No. LXL. page 71. For this use of the phrase Chimarra, see the 
sonnets The Furies and The Tyranny of Chinitcra, in my 
ANIMI FIGURA, pages 37 and 41. 



206 VAGABUNDULI LIB ELL US. 



A PROBLEM OF THE NIGHT. 

Page 88. Those who in winter have watched the luminous star- 
sown spaces of the heavens around Orion, and have observed 
the vacancy in the south-western skies, may have felt the 
force of this problem. It is very noticeable in a narrow 
mountain valley. 



THE JODELLER. 

Pag^ 93- Cembra is a sort of mountain cedar, which grows only 
on the bleaker eminences of the Alps, and yields a remarkably 
fine wood for panelling. 

THE TODTEN-VOLK. 

Page 95. There are certain men in valleys of the High Alps who 
claim the gift of seeing the dead people of their village walk at 
night ; and when some living person is about to die, he or she 
follows the procession, clearly recognized by the seer ; whereas 
the dead avert their faces and pass unidentified before him. 

IN THE FIR WOOD. 

Page 99. The pines of the High Alps have a slow growth and a 
long life ; and in the valley of which I write it is impossible 
ever to see the actual sunrise or sunset by reason of impending 
mountain ranges to east and west. 

THE ENVOY TO A BOOK. 

No. II.. page 106. The third line refers to Luca Signorelli's fresco 
of the Resurrection at Orvieto. 



MI RACCOMANDO A TE. 

Page 131. Dante rose from sphere to sphere of Paradise by ga/.ing 
on the light transmitted from Beatrice's eyes. 



NOTES. 07 

THE PLOVERS. 

Page 143. It is a popular belief that these birds are the souls of 
Jews who mocked Christ on Calvary. 

TO THE BELOVED. 

Pages 1 68 171. Suggested by passages in the eVtaroXal e 
of Philostratus. 



THE GRAVE OF OMAR KHAYYAM. 

Page 195. For this story see the Introduction to Whinfield's edition 
of Omar (Triibner, 1883), page xiv. 



Printed by Hazel), Watson, and Viney, Limited, London and Ayle*bury. 



.yO 
/ 




University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



Book SIij>-25 



UCLA-College Library 

PR 5522 V17 



L 005 761 470 3 



College 
Library 

PR 

#22 

V17 



A 001 168602 9 



