The Project Gutenberg EBook of Enoch Arden, &c., by Alfred Tennyson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Enoch Arden, &c.

Author: Alfred Tennyson

Posting Date: January 27, 2010 [EBook #1358]
Release Date: June, 1998

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENOCH ARDEN, &C. ***




Produced by Stewart A. Levin








  ENOCH ARDEN, &c.

  by ALFRED TENNYSON.




  CONTENTS




  Enoch Arden
  Aylmer's Field
  Sea Dreams
  The Grandmother
  Northern Farmer
  Miscellaneous.
      Tithonus
      The Voyage
      In the Valley of Cauteretz
      The Flower
      Requiescat
      The Sailor-Boy
      The Islet
      The Ringlet
      A Welcome to Alexandra
      Ode sung at the Opening of the
         International Exhibition
      A Dedication
  Experiments.
      Boadicea
      In Quantity
      Specimen of a Translation of
         the Iliad in Blank Verse




  ENOCH ARDEN.




  Long lines of cliff breaking have left a chasm;
  And in the chasm are foam and yellow sands;
  Beyond, red roofs about a narrow wharf
  In cluster; then a moulder'd church; and higher
  A long street climbs to one tall-tower'd mill;
  And high in heaven behind it a gray down
  With Danish barrows; and a hazelwood,
  By autumn nutters haunted, flourishes
  Green in a cuplike hollow of the down.

    Here on this beach a hundred years ago,
  Three children of three houses, Annie Lee,
  The prettiest little damsel in the port,
  And Philip Ray the miller's only son,
  And Enoch Arden, a rough sailor's lad
  Made orphan by a winter shipwreck, play'd
  Among the waste and lumber of the shore,
  Hard coils of cordage, swarthy fishing-nets,
  Anchors of rusty fluke, and boats updrawn,
  And built their castles of dissolving sand
  To watch them overflow'd, or following up
  And flying the white breaker, daily left
  The little footprint daily wash'd away.

    A narrow cave ran in beneath the cliff:
  In this the children play'd at keeping house.
  Enoch was host one day, Philip the next,
  While Annie still was mistress; but at times
  Enoch would hold possession for a week:
  'This is my house and this my little wife.'
  'Mine too' said Philip 'turn and turn about:'
  When, if they quarrell'd, Enoch stronger-made
  Was master: then would Philip, his blue eyes
  All flooded with the helpless wrath of tears,
  Shriek out 'I hate you, Enoch,' and at this
  The little wife would weep for company,
  And pray them not to quarrel for her sake,
  And say she would be little wife to both.

    But when the dawn of rosy childhood past,
  And the new warmth of life's ascending sun
  Was felt by either, either fixt his heart
  On that one girl; and Enoch spoke his love,
  But Philip loved in silence; and the girl
  Seem'd kinder unto Philip than to him;
  But she loved Enoch; tho' she knew it not,
  And would if ask'd deny it.  Enoch set
  A purpose evermore before his eyes,
  To hoard all savings to the uttermost,
  To purchase his own boat, and make a home
  For Annie: and so prosper'd that at last
  A luckier or a bolder fisherman,
  A carefuller in peril, did not breathe
  For leagues along that breaker-beaten coast
  Than Enoch.  Likewise had he served a year
  On board a merchantman, and made himself
  Full sailor; and he thrice had pluck'd a life
  From the dread sweep of the down-streaming seas:
  And all me look'd upon him favorably:
  And ere he touch'd his one-and-twentieth May
  He purchased his own boat, and made a home
  For Annie, neat and nestlike, halfway up
  The narrow street that clamber'd toward the mill.

    Then, on a golden autumn eventide,
  The younger people making holiday,
  With bag and sack and basket, great and small,
  Went nutting to the hazels.  Philip stay'd
  (His father lying sick and needing him)
  An hour behind; but as he climb'd the hill,
  Just where the prone edge of the wood began
  To feather toward the hollow, saw the pair,
  Enoch and Annie, sitting hand-in-hand,
  His large gray eyes and weather-beaten face
  All-kindled by a still and sacred fire,
  That burn'd as on an altar.  Philip look'd,
  And in their eyes and faces read his doom;
  Then, as their faces drew together, groan'd,
  And slipt aside, and like a wounded life
  Crept down into the hollows of the wood;
  There, while the rest were loud in merrymaking,
  Had his dark hour unseen, and rose and past
  Bearing a lifelong hunger in his heart.

    So these were wed, and merrily rang the bells,
  And merrily ran the years, seven happy years,
  Seven happy years of health and competence,
  And mutual love and honorable toil;
  With children; first a daughter.  In him woke,
  With his first babe's first cry, the noble wish
  To save all earnings to the uttermost,
  And give his child a better bringing-up
  Than his had been, or hers; a wish renew'd,
  When two years after came a boy to be
  The rosy idol of her solitudes,
  While Enoch was abroad on wrathful seas,
  Or often journeying landward; for in truth
  Enoch's white horse, and Enoch's ocean-spoil
  In ocean-smelling osier, and his face,
  Rough-redden'd with a thousand winter gales,
  Not only to the market-cross were known,
  But in the leafy lanes behind the down,
  Far as the portal-warding lion-whelp,
  And peacock-yewtree of the lonely Hall,
  Whose Friday fare was Enoch's ministering.

    Then came a change, as all things human change.
  Ten miles to northward of the narrow port
  Open'd a larger haven: thither used
  Enoch at times to go by land or sea;
  And once when there, and clambering on a mast
  In harbor, by mischance he slipt and fell:
  A limb was broken when they lifted him;
  And while he lay recovering there, his wife
  Bore him another son, a sickly one:
  Another hand crept too across his trade
  Taking her bread and theirs: and on him fell,
  Altho' a grave and staid God-fearing man,
  Yet lying thus inactive, doubt and gloom.
  He seem'd, as in a nightmare of the night,
  To see his children leading evermore
  Low miserable lives of hand-to-mouth,
  And her, he loved, a beggar: then he pray'd
  'Save them from this, whatever comes to me.'
  And while he pray'd, the master of that ship
  Enoch had served in, hearing his mischance,
  Came, for he knew the man and valued him,
  Reporting of his vessel China-bound,
  And wanting yet a boatswain.  Would he go?
  There yet were many weeks before she sail'd,
  Sail'd from this port.  Would Enoch have the place?
  And Enoch all at once assented to it,
  Rejoicing at that answer to his prayer.

    So now that the shadow of mischance appear'd
  No graver than as when some little cloud
  Cuts off the fiery highway of the sun,
  And isles a light in the offing: yet the wife--
  When he was gone--the children--what to do?
  Then Enoch lay long-pondering on his plans;
  To sell the boat--and yet he loved her well--
  How many a rough sea had he weather'd in her!
  He knew her, as a horseman knows his horse--
  And yet to sell her--then with what she brought
  Buy goods and stores--set Annie forth in trade
  With all that seamen needed or their wives--
  So might she keep the house while he was gone.
  Should he not trade himself out yonder? go
  This voyage more than once? yea twice or thrice--
  As oft as needed--last, returning rich,
  Become the master of a larger craft,
  With fuller profits lead an easier life,
  Have all his pretty young ones educated,
  And pass his days in peace among his own.

    Thus Enoch in his heart determined all:
  Then moving homeward came on Annie pale,
  Nursing the sickly babe, her latest-born.
  Forward she started with a happy cry,
  And laid the feeble infant in his arms;
  Whom Enoch took, and handled all his limbs,
  Appraised his weight and fondled fatherlike,
  But had no heart to break his purposes
  To Annie, till the morrow, when he spoke.

    Then first since Enoch's golden ring had girt
  Her finger, Annie fought against his will:
  Yet not with brawling opposition she,
  But manifold entreaties, many a tear,
  Many a sad kiss by day and night renew'd
  (Sure that all evil would come out of it)
  Besought him, supplicating, if he cared
  For here or his dear children, not to go.
  He not for his own self caring but her,
  Her and her children, let her plead in vain;
  So grieving held his will, and bore it thro'.

    For Enoch parted with his old sea-friend,
  Bought Annie goods and stores, and set his hand
  To fit their little streetward sitting-room
  With shelf and corner for the goods and stores.
  So all day long till Enoch's last at home,
  Shaking their pretty cabin, hammer and axe,
  Auger and saw, while Annie seem'd to hear
  Her own death-scaffold raising, shrill'd and rang,
  Till this was ended, and his careful hand,--
  The space was narrow,--having order'd all
  Almost as neat and close as Nature packs
  Her blossom or her seedling, paused; and he,
  Who needs would work for Annie to the last,
  Ascending tired, heavily slept till morn.

    And Enoch faced this morning of farewell
  Brightly and boldly.  All his Annie's fears,
  Save, as his Annie's, were a laughter to him.
  Yet Enoch as a brave God-fearing man
  Bow'd himself down, and in that mystery
  Where God-in-man is one with man-in-God,
  Pray'd for a blessing on his wife and babes
  Whatever came to him: and then he said
  'Annie, this voyage by the grace of God
  Will bring fair weather yet to all of us.
  Keep a clean hearth and a clear fire for me,
  For I'll be back, my girl, before you know it.'
  Then lightly rocking baby's cradle 'and he,
  This pretty, puny, weakly little one,--
  Nay--for I love him all the better for it--
  God bless him, he shall sit upon my knees
  And I will tell him tales of foreign parts,
  And make him merry, when I come home again.
  Come Annie, come, cheer up before I go.'

    Him running on thus hopefully she heard,
  And almost hoped herself; but when he turn'd
  The current of his talk to graver things
  In sailor fashion roughly sermonizing
  On providence and trust in Heaven, she heard,
  Heard and not heard him; as the village girl,
  Who sets her pitcher underneath the spring,
  Musing on him that used to fill it for her,
  Hears and not hears, and lets it overflow.

    At length she spoke 'O Enoch, you are wise;
  And yet for all your wisdom well know I
  That I shall look upon your face no more.'

    'Well then,' said Enoch, 'I shall look on yours.
  Annie, the ship I sail in passes here
  (He named the day) get you a seaman's glass,
  Spy out my face, and laugh at all your fears.'

    But when the last of those last moments came,
  'Annie my girl, cheer up, be comforted,
  Look to the babes, and till I come again,
  Keep everything shipshape, for I must go.
  And fear no more for me; or if you fear
  Cast all your cares on God; that anchor holds.
  Is He not yonder in those uttermost
  Parts of the morning? if I flee to these
  Can I go from Him? and the sea is His,
  The sea is His: He made it.'

                                Enoch rose,
  Cast his strong arms about his drooping wife,
  And kiss'd his wonder-stricken little ones;
  But for the third, sickly one, who slept
  After a night of feverous wakefulness,
  When Annie would have raised him Enoch said
  'Wake him not; let him sleep; how should this child
  Remember this?' and kiss'ed him in his cot.
  But Annie from her baby's forehead clipt
  A tiny curl, and gave it: this he kept
  Thro' all his future; but now hastily caught
  His bundle, waved his hand, and went his way.

    She when the day, that Enoch mention'd, came,
  Borrow'd a glass, but all in vain: perhaps
  She could not fix the glass to suit her eye;
  Perhaps her eye was dim, hand tremulous;
  She saw him not: and while he stood on deck
  Waving, the moment and the vessel past.

    Ev'n to the last dip of the vanishing sail
  She watch'd it, and departed weeping for him;
  Then, tho' she mourn'd his absence as his grave,
  Set her sad will no less to chime with his,
  But throve not in her trade, not being bred
  To barter, nor compensating the want
  By shrewdness, neither capable of lies,
  Nor asking overmuch and taking less,
  And still foreboding 'what would Enoch say?'
  For more than once, in days of difficulty
  And pressure, had she sold her wares for less
  Than what she gave in buying what she sold:
  She fail'd and sadden'd knowing it; and thus,
  Expectant of that news that never came,
  Gain'd for here own a scanty sustenance,
  And lived a life of silent melancholy.

    Now the third child was sickly-born and grew
  Yet sicklier, tho' the mother cared for it
  With all a mother's care: nevertheless,
  Whether her business often call'd her from it,
  Or thro' the want of what it needed most,
  Or means to pay the voice who best could tell
  What most it needed--howsoe'er it was,
  After a lingering,--ere she was aware,--
  Like the caged bird escaping suddenly,
  The little innocent soul flitted away.

    In that same week when Annie buried it,
  Philip's true heart, which hunger'd for her peace
  (Since Enoch left he had not look'd upon her),
  Smote him, as having kept aloof so long.
  'Surely' said Philip 'I may see her now,
  May be some little comfort;' therefore went,
  Past thro' the solitary room in front,
  Paused for a moment at an inner door,
  Then struck it thrice, and, no one opening,
  Enter'd; but Annie, seated with her grief,
  Fresh from the burial of her little one,
  Cared not to look on any human face,
  But turn'd her own toward the wall and wept.
  Then Philip standing up said falteringly
  'Annie, I came to ask a favor of you.'

    He spoke; the passion in her moan'd reply
  'Favor from one so sad and so forlorn
  As I am!' half abash'd him; yet unask'd,
  His bashfulness and tenderness at war,
  He set himself beside her, saying to her:

    'I came to speak to you of what he wish'd,
  Enoch, your husband: I have ever said
  You chose the best among us--a strong man:
  For where he fixt his heart he set his hand
  To do the thing he will'd, and bore it thro'.
  And wherefore did he go this weary way,
  And leave you lonely? not to see the world--
  For pleasure?--nay, but for the wherewithal
  To give his babes a better bringing-up
  Than his had been, or yours: that was his wish.
  And if he come again, vext will he be
  To find the precious morning hours were lost.
  And it would vex him even in his grave,
  If he could know his babes were running wild
  Like colts about the waste.  So Annie, now--
  Have we not known each other all our lives?
  I do beseech you by the love you bear
  Him and his children not to say me nay--
  For, if you will, when Enoch comes again
  Why then he shall repay me--if you will,
  Annie--for I am rich and well-to-do.
  Now let me put the boy and girl to school:
  This is the favor that I came to ask.'

    Then Annie with her brows against the wall
  Answer'd 'I cannot look you in the face;
  I seem so foolish and so broken down.
  When you came in my sorrow broke me down;
  And now I think your kindness breaks me down;
  But Enoch lives; that is borne in on me:
  He will repay you: money can be repaid;
  Not kindness such as yours.'

                               And Philip ask'd
  'Then you will let me, Annie?'

                                There she turn'd,
  She rose, and fixt her swimming eyes upon him,
  And dwelt a moment on his kindly face,
  Then calling down a blessing on his head
  Caught at his hand and wrung it passionately,
  And past into the little garth beyond.
  So lifted up in spirit he moved away.

    Then Philip put the boy and girl to school,
  And bought them needful books, and everyway,
  Like one who does his duty by his own,
  Made himself theirs; and tho' for Annie's sake,
  Fearing the lazy gossip of the port,
  He oft denied his heart his dearest wish,
  And seldom crost her threshold, yet he sent
  Gifts by the children, garden-herbs and fruit,
  The late and early roses from his wall,
  Or conies from the down, and now and then,
  With some pretext of fineness in the meal
  To save the offence of charitable, flour
  From his tall mill that whistled on the waste.

    But Philip did not fathom Annie's mind:
  Scarce could the woman when he came upon her,
  Out of full heart and boundless gratitude
  Light on a broken word to thank him with.
  But Philip was her children's all-in-all;
  From distant corners of the street they ran
  To greet his hearty welcome heartily;
  Lords of his house and of his mill were they;
  Worried his passive ear with petty wrongs
  Or pleasures, hung upon him, play'd with him
  And call'd him Father Philip.  Philip gain'd
  As Enoch lost; for Enoch seem'd to them
  Uncertain as a vision or a dream,
  Faint as a figure seen in early dawn
  Down at the far end of an avenue,
  Going we know not where: and so ten years,
  Since Enoch left his hearth and native land,
  Fled forward, and no news of Enoch came.

    It chanced one evening Annie's children long'd
  To go with others, nutting to the wood,
  And Annie would go with them; then they begg'd
  For Father Philip (as they call'd him) too:
  Him, like the working bee in blossom-dust,
  Blanch'd with his mill, they found; and saying to him
  'Come with us Father Philip' he denied;
  But when the children pluck'd at him to go,
  He laugh'd, and yielding readily to their wish,
  For was not Annie with them? and they went.

    But after scaling half the weary down,
  Just where the prone edge of the wood began
  To feather toward the hollow, all her force
  Fail'd her; and sighing 'let me rest' she said.
  So Philip rested with her well-content;
  While all the younger ones with jubilant cries
  Broke from their elders, and tumultuously
  Down thro' the whitening hazels made a plunge
  To the bottom, and dispersed, and beat or broke
  The lithe reluctant boughs to tear away
  Their tawny clusters, crying to each other
  And calling, here and there, about the wood.

    But Philip sitting at her side forgot
  Her presence, and remember'd one dark hour
  Here in this wood, when like a wounded life
  He crept into the shadow: at last he said
  Lifting his honest forehead 'Listen, Annie,
  How merry they are down yonder in the wood.'
  'Tired, Annie?' for she did not speak a word.
  'Tired?' but her face had fall'n upon her hands;
  At which, as with a kind anger in him,
  'The ship was lost' he said 'the ship was lost!
  No more of that! why should you kill yourself
  And make them orphans quite?'  And Annie said
  'I thought not of it: but--I known not why--
  Their voices make me feel so solitary.'

    Then Philip coming somewhat closer spoke.
  'Annie, there is a thing upon my mind,
  And it has been upon my mind so long,
  That tho' I know not when it first came there,
  I know that it will out at last.  O Annie,
  It is beyond all hope, against all chance,
  That he who left you ten long years ago
  Should still be living; well then--let me speak:
  I grieve to see you poor and wanting help:
  I cannot help you as I wish to do
  Unless--they say that women are so quick--
  Perhaps you know what I would have you know--
  I wish you for my wife.  I fain would prove
  A father to your children: I do think
  They love me as a father: I am sure
  That I love them as if they were mine own;
  And I believe, if you were fast my wife,
  That after all these sad uncertain years,
  We might be still as happy as God grants
  To any of His creatures.  Think upon it:
  For I am well-to-do--no kin, no care,
  No burthen, save my care for you and yours:
  And we have known each other all our lives,
  And I have loved you longer than you know.'

    Then answer'd Annie; tenderly she spoke:
  'You have been as God's good angel in our house.
  God bless you for it, God reward you for it,
  Philip, with something happier than myself.
  Can one live twice? can you be ever loved
  As Enoch was? what is it that you ask?'
  'I am content' he answer'd 'to be loved
  A little after Enoch.'  'O' she cried
  Scared as it were 'dear Philip, wait a while:
  If Enoch comes--but Enoch will not come--
  Yet wait a year, a year is not so long:
  Surely I shall be wiser in a year:
  O wait a little!'  Philip sadly said
  'Annie, as I have waited all my life
  I well may wait a little.'  'Nay' she cried
  'I am bound: you have my promise--in a year:
  Will you not bide your year as I bide mine?'
  And Philip answer'd 'I will bide my year.'

    Here both were mute, till Philip glancing up
  Beheld the dead flame of the fallen day
  Pass from the Danish barrow overhead;
  Then fearing night and chill for Annie rose,
  And sent his voice beneath him thro' the wood.
  Up came the children laden with their spoil;
  Then all descended to the port, and there
  At Annie's door he paused and gave his hand,
  Saying gently 'Annie, when I spoke to you,
  That was your hour of weakness.  I was wrong.
  I am always bound to you, but you are free.'
  Then Annie weeping answer'd 'I am bound.'

    She spoke; and in one moment as it were,
  While yet she went about her household ways,
  Ev'n as she dwelt upon his latest words,
  That he had loved her longer than she knew,
  That autumn into autumn flash'd again,
  And there he stood once more before her face,
  Claiming her promise.  'Is it a year?' she ask'd.
  'Yes, if the nuts' he said 'be ripe again:
  Come out and see.'  But she--she put him off--
  So much to look to--such a change--a month--
  Give her a month--she knew that she was bound--
  A month--no more.  Then Philip with his eyes
  Full of that lifelong hunger, and his voice
  Shaking a little like a drunkard's hand,
  'Take your own time, Annie, take your own time.'
  And Annie could have wept for pity of him;
  And yet she held him on delayingly
  With many a scarce-believable excuse,
  Trying his truth and his long-sufferance,
  Till half-another year had slipt away.

    By this the lazy gossips of the port,
  Abhorrent of a calculation crost,
  Began to chafe as at a personal wrong.
  Some thought that Philip did but trifle with her;
  Some that she but held off to draw him on;
  And others laugh'd at her and Philip too,
  As simple folks that knew not their own minds;
  And one, in whom all evil fancies clung
  Like serpent eggs together, laughingly
  Would hint a worse in either.  Her own son
  Was silent, tho' he often look'd his wish;
  But evermore the daughter prest upon her
  To wed the man so dear to all of them
  And lift the household out of poverty;
  And Philip's rosy face contracting grew
  Careworn and wan; and all these things fell on her
  Sharp as reproach.

                     At last one night it chanced
  That Annie could not sleep, but earnestly
  Pray'd for a sign 'my Enoch is he gone?'
  Then compass'd round by the blind wall of night
  Brook'd not the expectant terror of her heart,
  Started from bed, and struck herself a light,
  Then desperately seized the holy Book,
  Suddenly set it wide to find a sign,
  Suddenly put her finger on the text,
  'Under a palmtree.'  That was nothing to her:
  No meaning there: she closed the book and slept:
  When lo! her Enoch sitting on a height,
  Under a palmtree, over him the Sun:
  'He is gone' she thought 'he is happy, he is singing
  Hosanna in the highest: yonder shines
  The Sun of Righteousness, and these be palms
  Whereof the happy people strowing cried
  "Hosanna in the highest!"'  Here she woke,
  Resolved, sent for him and said wildly to him
  'There is no reason why we should not wed.'
  'Then for God's sake,' he answer'd, 'both our sakes,
  So you will wed me, let it be at once.'

    So these were wed and merrily rang the bells,
  Merrily rang the bells and they were wed.
  But never merrily beat Annie's heart.
  A footstep seem'd to fall beside her path,
  She knew not whence; a whisper in her ear,
  She knew not what; nor loved she to be left
  Alone at home, nor ventured out alone.
  What ail'd her then, that ere she enter'd, often
  Her hand dwelt lingeringly on the latch,
  Fearing to enter: Philip thought he knew:
  Such doubts and fears were common to her state,
  Being with child: but when her child was born,
  Then her new child was as herself renew'd,
  Then the new mother came about her heart,
  Then her good Philip was her all-in-all,
  And that mysterious instinct wholly died.

    And where was Enoch? prosperously sail'd
  The ship 'Good Fortune,' tho' at setting forth
  The Biscay, roughly ridging eastward, shook
  And almost overwhelm'd her, yet unvext
  She slipt across the summer of the world,
  Then after a long tumble about the Cape
  And frequent interchange of foul and fair,
  She passing thro' the summer world again,
  The breath of heaven came continually
  And sent her sweetly by the golden isles,
  Till silent in her oriental haven.

    There Enoch traded for himself, and bought
  Quaint monsters for the market of those times,
  A gilded dragon, also, for the babes.

    Less lucky her home-voyage: at first indeed
  Thro' many a fair sea-circle, day by day,
  Scarce-rocking, her full-busted figure-head
  Stared o'er the ripple feathering from her bows:
  Then follow'd calms, and then winds variable,
  Then baffling, a long course of them; and last
  Storm, such as drove her under moonless heavens
  Till hard upon the cry of 'breakers' came
  The crash of ruin, and the loss of all
  But Enoch and two others.  Half the night,
  Buoy'd upon floating tackle and broken spars,
  These drifted, stranding on an isle at morn
  Rich, but loneliest in a lonely sea.

    No want was there of human sustenance,
  Soft fruitage, mighty nuts, and nourishing roots;
  Nor save for pity was it hard to take
  The helpless life so wild that it was tame.
  There in a seaward-gazing mountain-gorge
  They built, and thatch'd with leaves of palm, a hut,
  Half hut, half native cavern.  So the three,
  Set in this Eden of all plenteousness,
  Dwelt with eternal summer, ill-content.

    For one, the youngest, hardly more than boy,
  Hurt in that night of sudden ruin and wreck,
  Lay lingering out a three-years' death-in-life.
  They could not leave him.  After he was gone,
  The two remaining found a fallen stem;
  And Enoch's comrade, careless of himself,
  Fire-hollowing this in Indian fashion, fell
  Sun-stricken, and that other lived alone.
  In those two deaths he read God's warning 'wait.'

    The mountain wooded to the peak, the lawns
  And winding glades high up like ways to Heaven,
  The slender coco's drooping crown of plumes,
  The lightning flash of insect and of bird,
  The lustre of the long convolvuluses
  That coil'd around the stately stems, and ran
  Ev'n to the limit of the land, the glows
  And glories of the broad belt of the world,
  All these he saw; but what he fain had seen
  He could not see, the kindly human face,
  Nor ever hear a kindly voice, but heard
  The myriad shriek of wheeling ocean-fowl,
  The league-long roller thundering on the reef,
  The moving whisper of huge trees that branch'd
  And blossom'd in the zenith, or the sweep
  Of some precipitous rivulet to the wave,
  As down the shore he ranged, or all day long
  Sat often in the seaward-gazing gorge,
  A shipwreck'd sailor, waiting for a sail:
  No sail from day to day, but every day
  The sunrise broken into scarlet shafts
  Among the palms and ferns and precipices;
  The blaze upon the waters to the east;
  The blaze upon his island overhead;
  The blaze upon the waters to the west;
  Then the great stars that globed themselves in Heaven,
  The hollower-bellowing ocean, and again
  The scarlet shafts of sunrise--but no sail.

    There often as he watch'd or seem'd to watch,
  So still, the golden lizard on him paused,
  A phantom made of many phantoms moved
  Before him haunting him, or he himself
  Moved haunting people, things and places, known
  Far in a darker isle beyond the line;
  The babes, their babble, Annie, the small house,
  The climbing street, the mill, the leafy lanes,
  The peacock-yewtree and the lonely Hall,
  The horse he drove, the boat he sold, the chill
  November dawns and dewy-glooming downs,
  The gentle shower, the smell of dying leaves,
  And the low moan of leaden-color'd seas.

    Once likewise, in the ringing of his ears,
  Tho' faintly, merrily--far and far away--
  He heard the pealing of his parish bells;
  Then, tho' he knew not wherefore, started up
  Shuddering, and when the beauteous hateful isle
  Return'd upon him, had not his poor heart
  Spoken with That, which being everywhere
  Lets none, who speaks with Him, seem all alone,
  Surely the man had died of solitude.

    Thus over Enoch's early-silvering head
  The sunny and rainy seasons came and went
  Year after year.  His hopes to see his own,
  And pace the sacred old familiar fields,
  Not yet had perish'd, when his lonely doom
  Came suddenly to an end.  Another ship
  (She wanted water) blown by baffling winds,
  Like the Good Fortune, from her destined course,
  Stay'd by this isle, not knowing where she lay:
  For since the mate had seen at early dawn
  Across a break on the mist-wreathen isle
  The silent water slipping from the hills,
  They sent a crew that landing burst away
  In search of stream or fount, and fill'd the shores
  With clamor.  Downward from his mountain gorge
  Stept the long-hair'd long-bearded solitary,
  Brown, looking hardly human, strangely clad,
  Muttering and mumbling, idiotlike it seem'd,
  With inarticulate rage, and making signs
  They knew not what: and yet he led the way
  To where the rivulets of sweet water ran;
  And ever as he mingled with the crew,
  And heard them talking, his long-bounden tongue
  Was loosen'd, till he made them understand;
  Whom, when their casks were fill'd they took aboard:
  And there the tale he utter'd brokenly,
  Scarce credited at first but more and more,
  Amazed and melted all who listen'd to it:
  And clothes they gave him and free passage home;
  But oft he work'd among the rest and shook
  His isolation from him.  None of these
  Came from his county, or could answer him,
  If question'd, aught of what he cared to know.
  And dull the voyage was with long delays,
  The vessel scarce sea-worthy; but evermore
  His fancy fled before the lazy wind
  Returning, till beneath a clouded moon
  He like a lover down thro' all his blood
  Drew in the dewy meadowy morning-breath
  Of England, blown across her ghostly wall:
  And that same morning officers and men
  Levied a kindly tax upon themselves,
  Pitying the lonely man, and gave him it:
  Then moving up the coast they landed him,
  Ev'n in that harbor whence he sail'd before.

    There Enoch spoke no word to anyone,
  But homeward--home--what home? had he a home?
  His home, he walk'd.  Bright was that afternoon,
  Sunny but chill; till drawn thro' either chasm,
  Where either haven open'd on the deeps,
  Roll'd a sea-haze and whelm'd the world in gray;
  Cut off the length of highway on before,
  And left but narrow breadth to left and right
  Of wither'd holt or tilth or pasturage.
  On the nigh-naked tree the Robin piped
  Disconsolate, and thro' the dripping haze
  The dead weight of the dead leaf bore it down.
  Thicker the drizzle grew, deeper the gloom;
  Last, as it seem'd, a great mist-blotted light
  Flared on him, and he came upon the place.

    Then down the long street having slowly stolen,
  His heart foreshadowing all calamity,
  His eyes upon the stones, he reach'd the home
  Where Annie lived and loved him, and his babes
  In those far-off seven happy years were born;
  But finding neither light nor murmur there
  (A bill of sale gleam'd thro' the drizzle) crept
  Still downward thinking 'dead or dead to me!'

    Down to the pool and narrow wharf he went,
  Seeking a tavern which of old he knew,
  A front of timber-crost antiquity,
  So propt, worm-eaten, ruinously old,
  He thought it must have gone; but he was gone
  Who kept it; and his widow, Miriam Lane,
  With daily-dwindling profits held the house;
  A haunt of brawling seamen once, but now
  Stiller, with yet a bed for wandering men.
  There Enoch rested silently many days.

    But Miriam Lane was good and garrulous,
  Nor let him be, but often breaking in,
  Told him, with other annals of the port,
  Not knowing--Enoch was so brown, so bow'd,
  So broken--all the story of his house.
  His baby's death, her growing poverty,
  How Philip put her little ones to school,
  And kept them in it, his long wooing her,
  Her slow consent, and marriage, and the birth
  Of Philip's child: and o'er his countenance
  No shadow past, nor motion: anyone,
  Regarding, well had deem'd he felt the tale
  Less than the teller: only when she closed
  'Enoch, poor man, was cast away and lost'
  He, shaking his gray head pathetically,
  Repeated muttering 'cast away and lost;'
  Again in deeper inward whispers 'lost!'

      But Enoch yearn'd to see her face again;
   'If I might look on her sweet face gain
   And know that she is happy.'  So the thought
   Haunted and harass'd him, and drove him forth,
   At evening when the dull November day
   Was growing duller twilight, to the hill.
   There he sat down gazing on all below;
   There did a thousand memories roll upon him,
   Unspeakable for sadness.  By and by
   The ruddy square of comfortable light,
   Far-blazing from the rear of Philip's house,
   Allured him, as the beacon-blaze allures
   The bird of passage, till he madly strikes
   Against it, and beats out his weary life.

    For Philip's dwelling fronted on the street,
  The latest house to landward; but behind,
  With one small gate that open'd on the waste,
  Flourish'd a little garden square and wall'd:
  And in it throve an ancient evergreen,
  A yewtree, and all round it ran a walk
  Of shingle, and a walk divided it:
  But Enoch shunn'd the middle walk and stole
  Up by the wall, behind the yew; and thence
  That which he better might have shunn'd, if griefs
  Like his have worse or better, Enoch saw.

    For cups and silver on the burnish'd board
  Sparkled and shone; so genial was the hearth:
  And on the right hand of the hearth he saw
  Philip, the slighted suitor of old times,
  Stout, rosy, with his babe across his knees;
  And o'er her second father stoopt a girl,
  A later but a loftier Annie Lee,
  Fair-hair'd and tall, and from her lifted hand
  Dangled a length of ribbon and a ring
  To tempt the babe, who rear'd his creasy arms,
  Caught at and ever miss'd it, and they laugh'd:
  And on the left hand of the hearth he saw
  The mother glancing often toward her babe,
  But turning now and then to speak with him,
  Her son, who stood beside her tall and strong,
  And saying that which pleased him, for he smiled.

    Now when the dead man come to life beheld
  His wife his wife no more, and saw the babe
  Hers, yet not his, upon the father's knee,
  And all the warmth, the peace, the happiness,
  And his own children tall and beautiful,
  And him, that other, reigning in his place,
  Lord of his rights and of his children's love,--
  Then he, tho' Miriam Lane had told him all,
  Because things seen are mightier than things heard,
  Stagger'd and shook, holding the branch, and fear'd
  To send abroad a shrill and terrible cry,
  Which in one moment, like the blast of doom,
  Would shatter all the happiness of the hearth.

    He therefore turning softly like a thief,
  Lest the harsh shingle should grate underfoot,
  And feeling all along the garden-wall,
  Lest he should swoon and tumble and be found,
  Crept to the gate, and open'd it, and closed,
  As lightly as a sick man's chamber-door,
  Behind him, and came out upon the waste.

    And there he would have knelt, but that his knees
  Were feeble, so that falling prone he dug
  His fingers into the wet earth, and pray'd.

    'Too hard to bear! why did they take me hence?
  O God Almighty, blessed Saviour, Thou
  That didst uphold me on my lonely isle,
  Uphold me, Father, in my loneliness
  A little longer! aid me, give me strength
  Not to tell her, never to let her know.
  Help me no to break in upon her peace.
  My children too! must I not speak to these?
  They know me not.  I should betray myself.
  Never: not father's kiss for me--the girl
  So like her mother, and the boy, my son.'

    There speech and thought and nature fail'd a little,
  And he lay tranced; but when he rose and paced
  Back toward his solitary home again,
  All down the long and narrow street he went
  Beating it in upon his weary brain,
  As tho' it were the burthen of a song,
  'Not to tell her, never to let her know.'

    He was not all unhappy.  His resolve
  Upbore him, and firm faith, and evermore
  Prayer from a living source within the will,
  And beating up thro' all the bitter world,
  Like fountains of sweet water in the sea,
  Kept him a living soul.  'This miller's wife'
  He said to Miriam 'that you told me of,
  Has she no fear that her first husband lives?'
  'Ay ay, poor soul' said Miriam, 'fear enow!
  If you could tell her you had seen him dead,
  Why, that would be her comfort;' and he thought
  'After the Lord has call'd me she shall know,
  I wait His time' and Enoch set himself,
  Scorning an alms, to work whereby to live.
  Almost to all things could he turn his hand.
  Cooper he was and carpenter, and wrought
  To make the boatmen fishing-nets, or help'd
  At lading and unlading the tall barks,
  That brought the stinted commerce of those days;
  Thus earn'd a scanty living for himself:
  Yet since he did but labor for himself,
  Work without hope, there was not life in it
  Whereby the man could live; and as the year
  Roll'd itself round again to meet the day
  When Enoch had return'd, a languor came
  Upon him, gentle sickness, gradually
  Weakening the man, till he could do no more,
  But kept the house, his chair, and last his bed.
  And Enoch bore his weakness cheerfully.
  For sure no gladlier does the stranded wreck
  See thro' the gray skirts of a lifting squall
  The boat that bears the hope of life approach
  To save the life despair'd of, than he saw
  Death dawning on him, and the close of all.

    For thro' that dawning gleam'd a kindlier hope
  On Enoch thinking 'after I am gone,
  Then may she learn I loved her to the last.'
  He call'd aloud for Miriam Lane and said
  'Woman, I have a secret--only swear,
  Before I tell you--swear upon the book
  Not to reveal it, till you see me dead.'
  'Dead' clamor'd the good woman 'hear him talk!
  I warrant, man, that we shall bring you round.'
  'Swear' add Enoch sternly 'on the book.'
  And on the book, half-frighted, Miriam swore.
  Then Enoch rolling his gray eyes upon her,
  'Did you know Enoch Arden of this town?'
  'Know him?' she said 'I knew him far away.
  Ay, ay, I mind him coming down the street;
  Held his head high, and cared for no man, he.'
  Slowly and sadly Enoch answer'd her;
  'His head is low, and no man cares for him.
  I think I have not three days more to live;
  I am the man.'  At which the woman gave
  A half-incredulous, half-hysterical cry.
  'You Arden, you! nay,--sure he was a foot
  Higher than you be.'  Enoch said again
  'My God has bow'd me down to what I am;
  My grief and solitude have broken me;
  Nevertheless, know that I am he
  Who married--but that name has twice been changed--
  I married her who married Philip Ray.
  Sit, listen.'  Then he told her of his voyage,
  His wreck, his lonely life, his coming back,
  His gazing in on Annie, his resolve,
  And how he kept it.  As the woman heard,
  Fast flow'd the current of her easy tears,
  While in her heart she yearn'd incessantly
  To rush abroad all round the little haven,
  Proclaiming Enoch Arden and his woes;
  But awed and promise-bounded she forbore,
  Saying only 'See your bairns before you go!
  Eh, let me fetch 'em, Arden,' and arose
  Eager to bring them down, for Enoch hung
  A moment on her words, but then replied.

    'Woman, disturb me not now at the last,
  But let me hold my purpose till I die.
  Sit down again; mark me and understand,
  While I have power to speak.  I charge you now,
  When you shall see her, tell her that I died
  Blessing her, praying for her, loving her;
  Save for the bar between us, loving her
  As when she laid her head beside my own.
  And tell my daughter Annie, whom I saw
  So like her mother, that my latest breath
  Was spent in blessing her and praying for her.
  And tell my son that I died blessing him.
  And say to Philip that I blest him too;
  He never meant us any thing but good.
  But if my children care to see me dead,
  Who hardly saw me living, let them come,
  I am their father; but she must not come,
  For my dead face would vex her after-life.
  And now there is but one of all my blood,
  Who will embrace me in the world-to-be:
  This hair is his: she cut it off and gave it,
  And I have borne it with me all these years,
  And thought to bear it with me to my grave;
  But now my mind is changed, for I shall see him,
  My babe in bliss: wherefore when I am gone,
  Take, give her this, for it may comfort her:
  It will moreover be a token to her,
  That I am he.'

                  He ceased; and Miriam Lane
  Made such a voluble answer promising all,
  That once again he roll'd his eyes upon her
  Repeating all he wish'd, and once again
  She promised.

                 Then the third night after this,
  While Enoch slumber'd motionless and pale,
  And Miriam watch'd and dozed at intervals,
  There came so loud a calling of the sea,
  That all the houses in the haven rang.
  He woke, he rose, he spread his arms abroad
  Crying with a loud voice 'a sail! a sail!
  I am saved'; and so fell back and spoke no more.

    So past the strong heroic soul away.
  And when they buried him the little port
  Had seldom seen a costlier funeral.





  AYLMER'S FIELD.
       1793.





  AYLMER'S FIELD.
      1793.
  ------<>------


  Dust are our frames; and gilded dust, our pride
  Looks only for a moment whole and sound;
  Like that long-buried body of the king,
  Found lying with his urns and ornaments,
  Which at a touch of light, an air of heaven,
  Slipt into ashes and was found no more.

    Here is a story which in rougher shape
  Came from a grizzled cripple, whom I saw
  Sunning himself in a waste field alone--
  Old, and a mine of memories--who had served,
  Long since, a bygone Rector of the place,
  And been himself a part of what he told.

    Sir Aylmer Aylmer that almighty man,
  The county God--in whose capacious hall,
  Hung with a hundred shields, the family tree
  Sprang from the midriff of a prostrate king--
  Whose blazing wyvern weathercock'd the spire,
  Stood from his walls and wing'd his entry-gates
  And swang besides on many a windy sign--
  Whose eyes from under a pyramidal head
  Saw from his windows nothing save his own--
  What lovelier of his own had he than her,
  His only child, his Edith, whom he loved
  As heiress and not heir regretfully?
  But 'he that marries her marries her name'
  This fiat somewhat soothed himself and wife,
  His wife a faded beauty of the Baths,
  Insipid as the Queen upon a card;
  Her all of thought and bearing hardly more
  Than his own shadow in a sickly sun.

    A land of hops and poppy-mingled corn,
  Little about it stirring save a brook!
  A sleepy land where under the same wheel
  The same old rut would deepen year by year;
  Where almost all the village had one name;
  Where Aylmer follow'd Aylmer at the Hall
  And Averill Averill at the Rectory
  Thrice over; so that Rectory and Hall,
  Bound in an immemorial intimacy,
  Were open to each other; tho' to dream
  That Love could bind them closer well had made
  The hoar hair of the Baronet bristle up
  With horror, worse than had he heard his priest
  Preach an inverted scripture, sons of men
  Daughters of God; so sleepy was the land.

    And might not Averill, had he will'd it so,
  Somewhere beneath his own low range of roofs,
  Have also set his many-shielded tree?
  There was an Aylmer-Averill marriage once,
  When the red rose was redder than itself,
  And York's white rose as red as Lancaster's,
  With wounded peace which each had prick'd to death.
  'Not proven' Averill said, or laughingly
  'Some other race of Averills'--prov'n or no,
  What cared he? what, if other or the same?
  He lean'd not on his fathers but himself.
  But Leolin, his brother, living oft
  With Averill, and a year or two before
  Call'd to the bar, but ever call'd away
  By one low voice to one dear neighborhood,
  Would often, in his walks with Edith, claim
  A distant kinship to the gracious blood
  That shook the heart of Edith hearing him.

    Sanguine he was: a but less vivid hue
  Than of that islet in the chestnut-bloom
  Flamed his cheek; and eager eyes, that still
  Took joyful note of all things joyful, beam'd,
  Beneath a manelike mass of rolling gold,
  Their best and brightest, when they dwelt on hers.
  Edith, whose pensive beauty, perfect else,
  But subject to the season or the mood,
  Shone like a mystic star between the less
  And greater glory varying to and fro,
  We know not wherefore; bounteously made,
  And yet so finely, that a troublous touch
  Thinn'd, or would seem to thin her in a day,
  A joyous to dilate, as toward the light.
  And these had been together from the first.
  Leolin's first nurse was, five years after, hers:
  So much the boy foreran; but when his date
  Doubled her own, for want of playmates, he
  (Since Averill was a decad and a half
  His elder, and their parents underground)
  Had tost his ball and flown his kite, and roll'd
  His hoop to pleasure Edith, with her dipt
  Against the rush of the air in the prone swing,
  Made blossom-ball or daisy-chain, arranged
  Her garden, sow'd her name and kept it green
  In living letters, told her fairy-tales,
  Show'd here the fairy footings on the grass,
  The little dells of cowslip, fairy palms,
  The petty marestail forest, fairy pines,
  Or from the tiny pitted target blew
  What look'd a flight of fairy arrows aim'd
  All at one mark, all hitting: make-believes
  For Edith and himself: or else he forged,
  But that was later, boyish histories
  Of battle, bold adventure, dungeon, wreck,
  Flights, terrors, sudden rescues, and true love
  Crown'd after trial; sketches rude and faint,
  But where a passion yet unborn perhaps
  Lay hidden as the music of the moon
  Sleeps in the plain eggs of the nightingale.
  And thus together, save for college-times
  Or Temple-eaten terms, a couple, fair
  As ever painter painted, poet sang,
  Or Heav'n in lavish bounty moulded, grew.
  And more and more, the maiden woman-grown,
  He wasted hours with Averill; there, when first
  The tented winter-field was broken up
  Into that phalanx of the summer spears
  That soon should wear the garland; there again
  When burr and bine were gather'd; lastly there
  At Christmas; ever welcome at the Hall,
  On whose dull sameness his full tide of youth
  Broke with a phosphorescence cheering even
  My lady; and the Baronet yet had laid
  No bar between them: dull and self-involved,
  Tall and erect, but bending from his height
  With half-allowing smiles for all the world,
  And mighty courteous in the main--his pride
  Lay deeper than to wear it as his ring--
  He, like an Aylmer in his Aylmerism,
  Would care no more for Leolin's walking with her
  Than for his old Newfoundland's, when they ran
  To loose him at the stables, for he rose
  Twofooted at the limit of his chain,
  Roaring to make a third: and how should Love,
  Whom the cross-lightnings of four chance-met eyes
  Flash into fiery life from nothing, follow
  Such dear familiarities of dawn?
  Seldom, but when he does, Master of all.

    So these young hearts not knowing that they loved,
  Not she at least, nor conscious of a bar
  Between them, nor by plight or broken ring
  Bound, but an immemorial intimacy,
  Wander'd at will, but oft accompanied
  By Averill: his, a brother's love, that hung
  With wings of brooding shelter o'er her peace,
  Might have been other, save for Leolin's--
  Who knows? but so they wander'd, hour by hour
  Gather'd the blossom that rebloom'd, and drank
  The magic cup that fill'd itself anew.

    A whisper half reveal'd her to herself.
  For out beyond her lodges, where the brook
  Vocal, with here and there a silence, ran
  By sallowy rims, arose the laborers' homes,
  A frequent haunt of Edith, on low knolls
  That dimpling died into each other, huts
  At random scatter'd, each a nest in bloom.
  Her art, her hand, her counsel all had wrought
  About them: here was one that, summer-blanch'd,
  Was parcel-bearded with the traveller's-joy
  In Autumn, parcel ivy-clad; and here
  The warm-blue breathings of a hidden hearth
  Broke from a bower of vine and honeysuckle:
  One look'd all rosetree, and another wore
  A close-set robe of jasmine sown with stars:
  This had a rosy sea of gillyflowers
  About it; this, a milky-way on earth,
  Like visions in the Northern dreamer's heavens,
  A lily-avenue climbing to the doors;
  One, almost to the martin-haunted eaves
  A summer burial deep in hollyhocks;
  Each, its own charm; and Edith's everywhere;
  And Edith ever visitant with him,
  He but less loved than Edith, of her poor:
  For she--so lowly-lovely and so loving,
  Queenly responsive when the loyal hand
  Rose from the clay it work'd in as she past,
  Not sowing hedgerow texts and passing by,
  Nor dealing goodly counsel from a height
  That makes the lowest hate it, but a voice
  Of comfort and an open hand of help,
  A splendid presence flattering the poor roofs
  Revered as theirs, but kindlier than themselves
  To ailing wife or wailing infancy
  Or old bedridden palsy,--was adored;
  He, loved for her and for himself.  A grasp
  Having the warmth and muscle of the heart,
  A childly way with children, and a laugh
  Ringing like proved golden coinage true,
  Were no false passport to that easy realm,
  Where once with Leolin at her side the girl,
  Nursing a child, and turning to the warmth
  The tender pink five-beaded baby-soles,
  Heard the good mother softly whisper 'Bless,
  God bless 'em; marriages are made in Heaven.'

    A flash of semi-jealousy clear'd it to her.
  My Lady's Indian kinsman unannounced
  With half a score of swarthy faces came.
  His own, tho' keen and bold and soldierly,
  Sear'd by the close ecliptic, was not fair;
  Fairer his talk, a tongue that ruled the hour,
  Tho' seeming boastful: so when first he dash'd
  Into the chronicle of a deedful day,
  Sir Aylmer half forgot his lazy smile
  Of patron 'Good! my lady's kinsman! good!'
  My lady with her fingers interlock'd,
  And rotatory thumbs on silken knees,
  Call'd all her vital spirits into each ear
  To listen: unawares they flitted off,
  Busying themselves about the flowerage
  That stood from our a stiff brocade in which,
  The meteor of a splendid season, she,
  Once with this kinsman, ah so long ago,
  Stept thro' the stately minuet of those days:
  But Edith's eager fancy hurried with him
  Snatch'd thro' the perilous passes of his life:
  Till Leolin ever watchful of her eye
  Hated him with a momentary hate.
  Wife-hunting, as the rumor ran, was he:
  I know not, for he spoke not, only shower'd
  His oriental gifts on everyone
  And most on Edith: like a storm he came,
  And shook the house, and like a storm he went.

    Among the gifts he left her (possibly
  He flow'd and ebb'd uncertain, to return
  When others had been tested) there was one,
  A dagger, in rich sheath with jewels on it
  Sprinkled about in gold that branch'd itself
  Fine as ice-ferns on January panes
  Made by a breath.  I know not whence at first,
  Nor of what race, the work; but as he told
  The story, storming a hill-fort of thieves
  He got it; for their captain after fight,
  His comrades having fought their last below,
  Was climbing up the valley; at whom he shot:
  Down from the beetling crag to which he clung
  Tumbled the tawny rascal at his feet,
  This dagger with him, which when now admired
  By Edith whom his pleasure was to please,
  At once the costly Sahib yielded it to her.

    And Leolin, coming after he was gone,
  Tost over all her presents petulantly:
  And when she show'd the wealthy scabbard, saying
  'Look what a lovely piece of workmanship!'
  Slight was his answer 'Well--I care not for it:'
  Then playing with the blade he prick'd his hand,
  'A gracious gift to give a lady, this!'
  'But would it be more gracious' ask'd the girl
  'Were I to give this gift of his to one
  That is no lady?'  'Gracious?  No' said he.
  'Me?--but I cared not for it.  O pardon me,
  I seem to be ungraciousness itself.'
  'Take it' she added sweetly 'tho' his gift;
  For I am more ungracious ev'n than you,
  I care not for it either;' and he said
  'Why then I love it:' but Sir Aylmer past,
  And neither loved nor liked the thing he heard.

    The next day came a neighbor.  Blues and reds
  They talk'd of: blues were sure of it, he thought:
  Then of the latest fox--where started--kill'd
  In such a bottom: 'Peter had the brush,
  My Peter, first:' and did Sir Aylmer know
  That great pock-pitten fellow had been caught?
  Then made his pleasure echo, hand to hand,
  And rolling as it were the substance of it
  Between his palms a moment up and down--
  'The birds were warm, the birds were warm upon him;
  We have him now:' and had Sir Aylmer heard--
  Nay, but he must--the land was ringing of it--
  This blacksmith-border marriage--one they knew--
  Raw from the nursery--who could trust a child?
  That cursed France with her egalities!
  And did Sir Aylmer (deferentially
  With nearing chair and lower'd accent) think--
  For people talk'd--that it was wholly wise
  To let that handsome fellow Averill walk
  So freely with his daughter? people talk'd--
  The boy might get a notion into him;
  The girl might be entangled ere she knew.
  Sir Aylmer Aylmer slowly stiffening spoke:
  'The girl and boy, Sir, know their differences!'
  'Good' said his friend 'but watch!' and he 'enough,
  More than enough, Sir!  I can guard my own.'
  They parted, and Sir Aylmer Aylmer watch'd.

    Pale, for on her the thunders of the house
  Had fallen first, was Edith that same night;
  Pale as the Jeptha's daughter, a rough piece
  Of early rigid color, under which
  Withdrawing by the counter door to that
  Which Leolin open'd, she cast back upon him
  A piteous glance, and vanish'd.  He, as one
  Caught in a burst of unexpected storm,
  And pelted with outrageous epithets,
  Turning beheld the Powers of the House
  On either side the hearth, indignant; her,
  Cooling her false cheek with a featherfan,
  Him glaring, by his own stale devil spurr'd,
  And, like a beast hard-ridden, breathing hard.
  'Ungenerous, dishonorable, base,
  Presumptuous! trusted as he was with her,
  The sole succeeder to their wealth, their lands,
  The last remaining pillar of their house,
  The one transmitter of their ancient name,
  Their child.'  'Our child!'  'Our heiress!'  'Ours!' for
         still,
  Like echoes from beyond a hollow, came
  Her sicklier iteration.  Last he said
  'Boy, mark me! for your fortunes are to make.
  I swear you shall not make them out of mine.
  Now inasmuch as you have practised on her,
  Perplext her, made her half forget herself,
  Swerve from her duty to herself and us--
  Things in an Aylmer deem'd impossible,
  Far as we track ourselves--I say that this,--
  Else I withdraw favor and countenance
  From you and yours for ever--shall you do.
  Sir, when you see her--but you shall not see her--
  No, you shall write, and not to her, but me:
  And you shall say that having spoken with me,
  And after look'd into yourself, you find
  That you meant nothing--as indeed you know
  That you meant nothing.  Such as match as this!
  Impossible, prodigious!'  These were words,
  As meted by his measure of himself,
  Arguing boundless forbearance: after which,
  And Leolin's horror-stricken answer, 'I
  So foul a traitor to myself and her,
  Never oh never,' for about as long
  As the wind-hover hangs in the balance, paused
  Sir Aylmer reddening from the storm within,
  Then broke all bonds of courtesy, and crying
  'Boy, should I find you by my doors again,
  My men shall lash you from the like a dog;
  Hence!' with a sudden execration drove
  The footstool from before him, and arose;
  So, stammering 'scoundrel' out of teeth that ground
  As in a dreadful dream, while Leolin still
  Retreated half-aghast, the fierce old man
  Follow'd, and under his own lintel stood
  Storming with lifted hands, a hoary face
  Meet for the reverence of the hearth, but now,
  Beneath a pale and unimpassion'd moon,
  Vext with unworthy madness, and deform'd.

    Slowly and conscious of the rageful eye
  That watch'd him, till he heard the ponderous door
  Close, crashing with long echoes thro' the land,
  Went Leolin; then, his passions all in flood
  And masters of his motion, furiously
  Down thro' the bright lawns to his brother's ran,
  And foam'd away his heart at Averill's ear:
  Whom Averill solaced as he might, amazed:
  The man was his, had been his father's, friend:
  He must have seen, himself had seen it long;
  He must have known, himself had known: besides,
  He never yet had set his daughter forth
  Here in the woman-markets of the west,
  Where our Caucasians let themselves be sold.
  Some one, he thought, had slander'd Leolin to him.
  'Brother, for I have loved you more as a son
  Than brother, let me tell you: I myself--
  What is their pretty saying? jilted is it?
  Jilted I was: I say it for your peace.
  Pain'd, and, as bearing in myself the shame
  The woman should have borne, humiliated,
  I lived for years a stunted sunless life;
  Till after our good parents past away
  Watching your growth, I seem'd again to grow.
  Leolin, I almost sin in envying you:
  The very whitest lamb in all my fold
  Loves you: I know her: the worst thought she has
  Is whiter even than her pretty hand:
  She must prove true: for, brother, where two fight
  The strongest wins, and truth and love are strength,
  And you are happy: let her parents be.'

    But Leolin cried out the more upon them--
  Insolent, brainless, heartless! heiress, wealth,
  Their wealth, their heiress! wealth enough was theirs
  For twenty matches.  Were he lord of this,
  Why, twenty boys and girls should marry on it,
  And forty blest ones bless him, and himself
  Be wealthy still, ay wealthier.  He believed
  This filthy marriage-hindering Mammon made
  The harlot of the cities: nature crost
  Was mother of the foul adulteries
  That saturate soul with body.  Name, too! name,
  Their ancient name! they MIGHT be proud; its worth
  Was being Edith's.  Ah, how pale she had look'd
  Darling, to-night! they must have rated her
  Beyond all tolerance.  These old pheasant-lords,
  These partridge-breeders of a thousand years,
  Who had mildew'd in their thousands, doing nothing
  Since Egbert--why, the greater their disgrace!
  Fall back upon a name! rest, rot in that!
  Not KEEP it noble, make it nobler? fools,
  With such a vantage-ground for nobleness!
  He had known a man, a quintessence of man,
  The life of all--who madly loved--and he,
  Thwarted by one of these old father-fools,
  Had rioted his life out, and made an end.
  He would not do it! her sweet face and faith
  Held him from that: but he had powers, he knew it:
  Back would he to his studies, make a name,
  Name, fortune too: the world should ring of him
  To shame these mouldy Aylmers in their graves:
  Chancellor, or what is greatest would he be--
  'O brother, I am grieved to learn your grief--
  Give me my fling, and let me say my say.'

    At which, like one that sees his own excess,
  And easily forgives it as his own,
  He laugh'd; and then was mute; but presently
  Wept like a storm: and honest Averill seeing
  How low his brother's mood had fallen, fetch'd
  His richest beeswing from a binn reserved
  For banquets, praised the waning red, and told
  The vintage--when THIS Aylmer came of age--
  Then drank and past it; till at length the two,
  Tho' Leolin flamed and fell again, agreed
  That much allowance must be made for men.
  After an angry dream this kindlier glow
  Faded with morning, but his purpose held.

    Yet once by night again the lovers met,
  A perilous meeting under the tall pines
  That darken'd all the northward of her Hall.
  Him, to her meek and modest bosom prest
  In agony, she promised that no force,
  Persuasion, no, nor death could alter her:
  He, passionately hopefuller, would go,
  Labor for his own Edith, and return
  In such a sunlight of prosperity
  He should not be rejected.  'Write to me!
  They loved me, and because I love their child
  They hate me: there is war between us, dear,
  Which breaks all bonds but ours; we must remain
  Sacred to one another.'  So they talk'd,
  Poor children, for their comfort: the wind blew;
  The rain of heaven, and their own bitter tears,
  Tears, and the careless rain of heaven, mixt
  Upon their faces, as they kiss'd each other
  In darkness, and above them roar'd the pine.

    So Leolin went; and as we task ourselves
  To learn a language known but smatteringly
  In phrases here and there at random, toil'd
  Mastering the lawless science of our law,
  That codeless myriad of precedent,
  That wilderness of single instances,
  Thro' which a few, by wit or fortune led,
  May beat a pathway out to wealth and fame.
  The jests, that flash'd about the pleader's room,
  Lightning of the hour, the pun, the scurrilous tale,--
  Old scandals buried now seven decads deep
  In other scandals that have lived and died,
  And left the living scandal that shall die--
  Were dead to him already; bent as he was
  To make disproof of scorn, and strong in hopes,
  And prodigal of all brain-labor he,
  Charier of sleep, and wine and exercise,
  Except when for a breathing-while at eve,
  Some niggard fraction of an hour, he ran
  Beside the river-bank: and then indeed
  Harder the times were, and the hands of power
  Were bloodier, and the according hearts of men
  Seem'd harder too; but the soft river-breeze,
  Which fann'd the gardens of that rival rose
  Yet fragrant in a heart remembering
  His former talks with Edith, on him breathed
  Far purelier in his rushings to and fro,
  After his books, to flush his blood with air,
  Then to his books again.  My lady's cousin,
  Half-sickening of his pension'd afternoon,
  Drove in upon the student once or twice,
  Ran a Malayan muck against the times,
  Had golden hopes for France and all mankind,
  Answer'd all queries touching those at home
  With a heaved shoulder and a saucy smile,
  And fain had haled him out into the world,
  And air'd him there: his nearer friend would say
  'Screw not the chord too sharply lest it snap.'
  Then left alone he pluck'd her dagger forth
  From where his worldless heart had kept it warm,
  Kissing his vows upon it like a knight.
  And wrinkled benchers often talk'd of him
  Approvingly, and prophesied his rise:
  For heart, I think, help'd head: her letters too,
  Tho' far between, and coming fitfully
  Like broken music, written as she found
  Or made occasion, being strictly watch'd,
  Charm'd him thro' every labyrinth till he saw
  An end, a hope, a light breaking upon him.

    But they that cast her spirit into flesh,
  Her worldy-wise begetters, plagued themselves
  To sell her, those good parents, for her good.
  Whatever eldest-born of rank or wealth
  Might lie within their compass, him they lured
  Into their net made pleasant by the baits
  Of gold and beauty, wooing him to woo.
  So month by month the noise about their doors,
  And distant blaze of those dull banquets, made
  The nightly wirer of their innocent hare
  Falter before he took it.  All in vain.
  Sullen, defiant, pitying, wroth, return'd
  Leolin's rejected rivals from their suit
  So often, that the folly taking wings
  Slipt o'er those lazy limits down the wind
  With rumor, and became in other fields
  A mockery to the yeomen over ale,
  And laughter to their lords: but those at home,
  As hunters round a hunted creature draw
  The cordon close and closer toward the death,
  Narrow'd her goings out and comings in;
  Forbad her first the house of Averill,
  Then closed her access to the wealthiest farms,
  Last from her own home-circle of the poor
  They barr'd her: yet she bore it: yet her cheek
  Kept color: wondrous! but, O mystery!
  What amulet drew her down to that old oak,
  So old, that twenty years before, a part
  Falling had let appear the brand of John--
  Once grovelike, each huge arm a tree, but now
  The broken base of a black tower, a cave
  Of touchwood, with a single flourishing spray.
  There the manorial lord too curiously
  Raking in that millenial touchwood-dust
  Found for himself a bitter treasure-trove;
  Burst his own wyvern on the seal, and read
  Writhing a letter from his child, for which
  Came at the moment Leolin's emissary,
  A crippled lad, and coming turn'd to fly,
  But scared with threats of jail and halter gave
  To him that fluster'd his poor parish wits
  The letter which he brought, and swore besides
  To play their go-between as heretofore
  Nor let them know themselves betray'd, and then,
  Soul-stricken at their kindness to him, went
  Hating his own lean heart and miserable.

    Thenceforward oft from out a despot dream
  Panting he woke, and oft as early as dawn
  Aroused the black republic on his elms,
  Sweeping the frothfly from the fescue, brush'd
  Thro' the dim meadow toward his treasure-trove,
  Seized it, took home, and to my lady, who made
  A downward crescent of her minion mouth,
  Listless in all despondence, read; and tore,
  As if the living passion symbol'd there
  Were living nerves to feel the rent; and burnt,
  Now chafing at his own great self defied,
  Now striking on huge stumbling-blocks of scorn
  In babyisms, and dear diminutives
  Scatter'd all over the vocabulary
  Of such a love as like a chidden babe,
  After much wailing, hush'd itself at last
  Hopeless of answer: then tho' Averill wrote
  And bad him with good heart sustain himself--
  All would be well--the lover heeded not,
  But passionately restless came and went,
  And rustling once at night about the place,
  There by a keeper shot at, slightly hurt,
  Raging return'd: nor was it well for her
  Kept to the garden now, and grove of pines,
  Watch'd even there; and one was set to watch
  The watcher, and Sir Aylmer watch'd them all,
  Yet bitterer from his readings: once indeed,
  Warm'd with his wines, or taking pride in her,
  She look'd so sweet, he kiss'd her tenderly
  Not knowing what possess'd him: that one kiss
  Was Leolin's one strong rival upon earth;
  Seconded, for my lady follow'd suit,
  Seem'd hope's returning rose: and then ensued
  A Martin's summer of his faded love,
  Or ordeal by kindness; after this
  He seldom crost his child without a sneer;
  The mother flow'd in shallower acrimonies:
  Never one kindly smile, one kindly word:
  So that the gentle creature shut from all
  Her charitable use, and face to face
  With twenty months of silence, slowly lost
  Nor greatly cared to lose, her hold on life.
  Last, some low fever ranging round to spy
  The weakness of a people or a house,
  Like flies that haunt a wound, or deer, or men,
  Or almost all that is, hurting the hurt--
  Save Christ as we believe him--found the girl
  And flung her down upon a couch of fire,
  Where careless of the household faces near,
  And crying upon the name of Leolin,
  She, and with her the race of Aylmer, past.

    Star to star vibrates light: may soul to soul
  Strike thro' a finer element of her own?
  So,--from afar,--touch as at once? or why
  That night, that moment, when she named his name,
  Did the keen shriek 'yes love, yes Edith, yes,'
  Shrill, till the comrade of his chambers woke,
  And came upon him half-arisen from sleep,
  With a weird bright eye, sweating and trembling,
  His hair as it were crackling into flames,
  His body half flung forward in pursuit,
  And his long arms stretch'd as to grasp a flyer:
  Nor knew he wherefore he had made the cry;
  And being much befool'd and idioted
  By the rough amity of the other, sank
  As into sleep again.  The second day,
  My lady's Indian kinsman rushing in,
  A breaker of the bitter news from home,
  Found a dead man, a letter edged with death
  Beside him, and the dagger which himself
  Gave Edith, reddn'd with no bandit's blood:
  'From Edith' was engraven on the blade.

    Then Averill went and gazed upon his death.
  And when he came again, his flock believed--
  Beholding how the years which are not Time's
  Had blasted him--that many thousand days
  Were clipt by horror from his term of life.
  Yet the sad mother, for the second death
  Scarce touch'd her thro' that nearness of the first,
  And being used to find her pastor texts,
  Sent to the harrow'd brother, praying him
  To speak before the people of her child,
  And fixt the Sabbath.  Darkly that day rose:
  Autumn's mock sunshine of the faded woods
  Was all the life of it; for hard on these,
  A breathless burthen of low-folded heavens
  Stifled and chill'd at once: but every roof
  Sent out a listener: many too had known
  Edith among the hamlets round, and since
  The parents' harshness and the hapless loves
  And double death were widely murmur'd, left
  Their own gray tower, or plain-faced tabernacle,
  To hear him; all in mourning these, and those
  With blots of it about them, ribbon, glove
  Or kerchief; while the church,--one night, except
  For greenish glimmerings thro' the lancets,--made
  Still paler the pale head of him, who tower'd
  Above them, with his hopes in either grave.

    Long o'er his bent brows linger'd Averill,
  His face magnetic to the hand from which
  Livid he pluck'd it forth, and labor'd thro'
  His brief prayer-prelude, gave the verse 'Behold,
  Your house is left unto you desolate!'
  But lapsed into so long a pause again
  As half amazed half frighted all his flock:
  Then from his height and loneliness of grief
  Bore down in flood, and dash'd his angry heart
  Against the desolations of the world.

    Never since our bad earth became one sea,
  Which rolling o'er the palaces of the proud,
  And all but those who knew the living God--
  Eight that were left to make a purer world--
  When since had flood, fire, earthquake, thunder wrought
  Such waste and havoc as the idolatries,
  Which from the low light of mortality
  Shot up their shadows to the Heaven of Heavens,
  And worshipt their own darkness as the Highest?
  'Gash thyself, priest, and honor thy brute Baal,
  And to thy worst self sacrifice thyself,
  For with thy worst self hast thou clothed thy God.'
  Then came a Lord in no wise like to Baal.
  The babe shall lead the lion.  Surely now
  The wilderness shall blossom as the rose.
  Crown thyself, worm, and worship thine own lusts!--
  No coarse and blockish God of acreage
  Stands at thy gate for thee to grovel to--
  Thy God is far diffused in noble groves
  And princely halls, and farms, and flowing lawns,
  And heaps of living gold that daily grow,
  And title-scrolls and gorgeous heraldries.
  In such a shape dost thou behold thy God.
  Thou wilt not gash thy flesh for HIM; for thine
  Fares richly, in fine linen, not a hair
  Ruffled upon the scarfskin, even while
  The deathless ruler of thy dying house
  Is wounded to the death that cannot die;
  And tho' thou numberest with the followers
  Of One who cried 'leave all and follow me.'
  Thee therefore with His light about thy feet,
  Thee with His message ringing in thine ears,
  Thee shall thy brother man, the Lord from Heaven,
  Born of a village girl, carpenter's son,
  Wonderful, Prince of peace, the Mighty God,
  Count the more base idolater of the two;
  Crueller: as not passing thro' the fire
  Bodies, but souls--thy children's--thro' the smoke,
  The blight of low desires--darkening thine own
  To thine own likeness; or if one of these,
  Thy better born unhappily from thee,
  Should, as by miracle, grow straight and fair--
  Friends, I was bid to speak of such a one
  By those who most have cause to sorrow for her--
  Fairer than Rachel by the palmy well,
  Fairer than Ruth among the fields of corn,
  Fair as the Angel that said 'hail' she seem'd,
  Who entering fill'd the house with sudden light.
  For so mine own was brighten'd: where indeed
  The roof so lowly but that beam of Heaven
  Dawn'd sometime thro' the doorway? whose the babe
  Too ragged to be fondled on her lap,
  Warm'd at her bosom?  The poor child of shame,
  The common care whom no one cared for, leapt
  To greet her, wasting his forgotten heart,
  As with the mother he had never known,
  In gambols; for her fresh and innocent eyes
  Had such a star of morning in their blue,
  That all neglected places of the field
  Broke into nature's music when they saw her.
  Low was her voice, but won mysterious way
  Thro' the seal'd ear to which a louder one
  Was all but silence--free of alms her hand--
  The hand that robed your cottage-walls with flowers
  Has often toil'd to clothe your little ones;
  How often placed upon the sick man's brow
  Cool'd it, or laid his feverous pillow smooth!
  Had you one sorrow and she shared it not?
  One burthen and she would not lighten it?
  One spiritual doubt she did not soothe?
  Or when some heat of difference sparkled out,
  How sweetly would she glide between your wraths,
  And steal you from each other! for she walk'd
  Wearing the light yoke of that Lord of love,
  Who still'd the rolling wave of Galilee!
  And one--of him I was not bid to speak--
  Was always with her, whom you also knew.
  Him too you loved, for he was worthy love.
  And these had been together from the first;
  They might have been together till the last.
  Friends, this frail bark of ours, when sorely tried,
  May wreck itself without the pilot's guilt,
  Without the captain's knowledge: hope with me.
  Whose shame is that, if he went hence with shame?
  Nor mine the fault, if losing both of these
  I cry to vacant chairs and widow'd walls,
  "My house is left unto me desolate."

    While thus he spoke, his hearers wept; but some,
  Sons of the glebe, with other frowns than those
  That knit themselves for summer shadow, scowl'd
  At their great lord.  He, when it seem'd he saw
  No pale sheet-lightnings from afar, but fork'd
  Of the near storm, and aiming at his head,
  Sat anger-charm'd from sorrow, soldierlike,
  Erect: but when the preacher's cadence flow'd
  Softening thro' all the gentle attributes
  Of his lost child, the wife, who watch'd his face,
  Paled at a sudden twitch of his iron mouth;
  And 'O pray God that he hold up' she thought
  'Or surely I shall shame myself and him.'

    'Nor yours the blame--for who beside your hearths
  Can take her place--if echoing me you cry
  "Our house is left unto us desolate?"
  But thou, O thou that killest, hadst thou known,
  O thou that stonest, hadst thou understood
  The things belonging to thy peace and ours!
  Is there no prophet but the voice that calls
  Doom upon kings, or in the waste 'Repent'?
  Is not our own child on the narrow way,
  Who down to those that saunter in the broad
  Cries 'come up hither,' as a prophet to us?
  Is there no stoning save with flint and rock?
  Yes, as the dead we weep for testify--
  No desolation but by sword and fire?
  Yes, as your moanings witness, and myself
  Am lonelier, darker, earthlier for my loss.
  Give me your prayers, for he is past your prayers,
  Not past the living fount of pity in Heaven.
  But I that thought myself long-suffering, meek,
  Exceeding "poor in spirit"--how the words
  Have twisted back upon themselves, and mean
  Vileness, we are grown so proud--I wish'd my voice
  A rushing tempest of the wrath of God
  To blow these sacrifices thro' the world--
  Sent like the twelve-divided concubine
  To inflame the tribes: but there--out yonder--earth
  Lightens from her own central Hell--O there
  The red fruit of an old idolatry--
  The heads of chiefs and princes fall so fast,
  They cling together in the ghastly sack--
  The land all shambles--naked marriages
  Flash from the bridge, and ever-murder'd France,
  By shores that darken with the gathering wolf,
  Runs in a river of blood to the sick sea.
  Is this a time to madden madness then?
  Was this a time for these to flaunt their pride?
  May Pharaoh's darkness, folds as dense as those
  Which hid the Holiest from the people's eyes
  Ere the great death, shroud this great sin from all:
  Doubtless our narrow world must canvass it:
  O rather pray for those and pity them,
  Who thro' their own desire accomplish'd bring
  Their own gray hairs with sorrow to the grave--
  Who broke the bond which they desired to break,
  Which else had link'd their race with times to come--
  Who wove coarse webs to snare her purity,
  Grossly contriving their dear daughter's good--
  Poor souls, and knew not what they did, but sat
  Ignorant, devising their own daughter's death!
  May not that earthly chastisement suffice?
  Have not our love and reverence left them bare?
  Will not another take their heritage?
  Will there be children's laughter in their hall
  For ever and for ever, or one stone
  Left on another, or is it a light thing
  That I their guest, their host, their ancient friend,
  I made by these the last of all my race
  Must cry to these the last of theirs, as cried
  Christ ere His agony to those that swore
  Not by the temple but the gold, and made
  Their own traditions God, and slew the Lord,
  And left their memories a world's curse--"Behold,
  Your house is left unto you desolate?"'

    Ended he had not, but she brook'd no more:
  Long since her heart had beat remorselessly,
  Her crampt-up sorrow pain'd her, and a sense
  Of meanness in her unresisting life.
  Then their eyes vext her; for on entering
  He had cast the curtains of their seat aside--
  Black velvet of the costliest--she herself
  Had seen to that: fain had she closed them now,
  Yet dared not stir to do it, only near'd
  Her husband inch by inch, but when she laid,
  Wifelike, her hand in one of his, he veil'd
  His face with the other, and at once, as falls
  A creeper when the prop is broken, fell
  The woman shrieking at his feet, and swoon'd.
  Then her own people bore along the nave
  Her pendent hands, and narrow meagre face
  Seam'd with the shallow cares of fifty years:
  And here the Lord of all the landscape round
  Ev'n to its last horizon, and of all
  Who peer'd at him so keenly, follow'd out
  Tall and erect, but in the middle aisle
  Reel'd, as a footsore ox in crowded ways
  Stumbling across the market to his death,
  Unpitied; for he groped as blind, and seem'd
  Always about to fall, grasping the pews
  And oaken finials till he touch'd the door;
  Yet to the lychgate, where his chariot stood,
  Strode from the porch, tall and erect again.

    But nevermore did either pass the gate
  Save under pall with bearers.  In one month,
  Thro' weary and yet wearier hours,
  The childless mother went to seek her child;
  And when he felt the silence of his house
  About him, and the change and not the change,
  And those fixt eyes of painted ancestors
  Staring for ever from their gilded walls
  On him their last descendant, his own head
  Began to droop, to fall; the man became
  Imbecile; his one word was 'desolate';
  Dead for two years before his death was he;
  But when the second Christmas came, escaped
  His keepers, and the silence which he felt,
  To find a deeper in the narrow gloom
  By wife and child; nor wanted at his end
  The dark retinue reverencing death
  At golden thresholds; nor from tender hearts,
  And those who sorrow'd o'er a vanish'd race,
  Pity, the violet on the tyrant's grave.
  Then the great Hall was wholly broken down,
  And the broad woodland parcell'd into farms;
  And where the two contrived their daughter's good,
  Lies the hawk's cast, the mole has made his run,
  The hedgehog underneath the plaintain bores,
  The rabbit fondles his own harmless face,
  The slow-worm creeps, and the thin weasel there
  Follows the mouse, and all is open field.





    SEA DREAMS.





    SEA DREAMS.
  ------<>------


  A city clerk, but gently born and bred;
  His wife, an unknown artist's orphan child--
  One babe was theirs, a Margaret, three years old:
  They, thinking that her clear germander eye
  Droopt in the giant-factoried city-gloom,
  Came, with a month's leave given them, to the sea:
  For which his gains were dock'd, however small:
  Small were his gains, and hard his work; besides,
  Their slender household fortunes (for the man
  Had risk'd his little) like the little thrift,
  Trembled in perilous places o'er a deep:
  And oft, when sitting all alone, his face
  Would darken, as he cursed his credulousness,
  And that one unctuous mount which lured him, rogue,
  To buy strange shares in some Peruvian mine.
  Now seaward-bound for health they gain'd a coast,
  All sand and cliff and deep-inrunning cave,
  At close of day; slept, woke, and went the next,
  The Sabbath, pious variers from the church,
  To chapel; where a heated pulpiteer,
  Not preaching simple Christ to simple men,
  Announced the coming doom, and fulminated
  Against the scarlet woman and her creed:
  For sideways up he swung his arms, and shriek'd
  'Thus, thus with violence,' ev'n as if he held
  The Apocalyptic millstone, and himself
  Were that great Angel; 'Thus with violence
  Shall Babylon be cast into the sea;
  Then comes the close.'  The gentle-hearted wife
  Sat shuddering at the ruin of a world;
  He at his own: but when the wordy storm
  Had ended, forth they came and paced the shore,
  Ran in and out the long sea-framing caves,
  Drank the large air, and saw, but scarce believed
  (The sootflake of so many a summer still
  Clung to their fancies) that they saw, the sea.
  So now on sand they walk'd, and now on cliff,
  Lingering about the thymy promontories,
  Till all the sails were darken'd in the west,
  And rosed in the east: then homeward and to bed:
  Where she, who kept a tender Christian hope
  Haunting a holy text, and still to that
  Returning, as the bird returns, at night,
  'Let not the sun go down upon your wrath,'
  Said, 'Love, forgive him:' but he did not speak;
  And silenced by that silence lay the wife,
  Remembering her dear Lord who died for all,
  And musing on the little lives of men,
  And how they mar this little by their feuds.

    But while the two were sleeping, a full tide
  Rose with ground-swell, which, on the foremost rocks
  Touching, upjetted in spirts of wild sea-smoke,
  And scaled in sheets of wasteful foam, and fell
  In vast sea-cataracts--ever and anon
  Dead claps of thunder from within the cliffs
  Heard thro' the living roar.  At this the babe,
  Their Margaret cradled near them, wail'd and woke
  The mother, and the father suddenly cried,
  'A wreck, a wreck!' then turn'd, and groaning said,

    'Forgive!  How many will say, "forgive," and find
  A sort of absolution in the sound
  To hate a little longer!  No; the sin
  That neither God nor man can well forgive,
  Hypocrisy, I saw it in him at once.
  Is it so true that second thoughts are best?
  Not first, and third, which are a riper first?
  Too ripe, too late! they come too late for use.
  Ah love, there surely lives in man and beast
  Something divine to warn them of their foes:
  And such a sense, when first I fronted him,
  Said, "trust him not;" but after, when I came
  To know him more, I lost it, knew him less;
  Fought with what seem'd my own uncharity;
  Sat at his table; drank his costly wines;
  Made more and more allowance for his talk;
  Went further, fool! and trusted him with all,
  All my poor scrapings from a dozen years
  Of dust and deskwork: there is no such mine,
  None; but a gulf of ruin, swallowing gold,
  Not making.  Ruin'd! ruin'd! the sea roars
  Ruin: a fearful night!'

                          'Not fearful; fair,'
  Said the good wife, 'if every star in heaven
  Can make it fair: you do but bear the tide.
  Had you ill dreams?'

                        'O yes,' he said, 'I dream'd
  Of such a tide swelling toward the land,
  And I from out the boundless outer deep
  Swept with it to the shore, and enter'd one
  Of those dark caves that run beneath the cliffs.
  I thought the motion of the boundless deep
  Bore through the cave, and I was heaved upon it
  In darkness: then I saw one lovely star
  Larger and larger.  "What a world," I thought,
  "To live in!" but in moving I found
  Only the landward exit of the cave,
  Bright with the sun upon the stream beyond:
  And near the light a giant woman sat,
  All over earthy, like a piece of earth,
  A pickaxe in her hand: then out I slipt
  Into a land all of sun and blossom, trees
  As high as heaven, and every bird that sings:
  And here the night-light flickering in my eyes
  Awoke me.'

              'That was then your dream,' she said,
  'Not sad, but sweet.'

                        'So sweet, I lay,' said he,
  'And mused upon it, drifting up the stream
  In fancy, till I slept again, and pieced
  The broken vision; for I dream'd that still
  The motion of the great deep bore me on,
  And that the woman walk'd upon the brink:
  I wonder'd at her strength, and ask'd her of it:
  "It came," she said, "by working in the mines:"
  O then to ask her of my shares, I thought;
  And ask'd; but not a word; she shook her head.
  And then the motion of the current ceased,
  And there was rolling thunder; and we reach'd
  A mountain, like a wall of burs and thorns;
  But she with her strong feet up the steep hill
  Trod out a path: I follow'd; and at top
  She pointed seaward: there a fleet of glass,
  That seem'd a fleet of jewels under me,
  Sailing along before a gloomy cloud
  That not one moment ceased to thunder, past
  In sunshine: right across its track there lay,
  Down in the water, a long reef of gold,
  Or what seem'd gold: and I was glad at first
  To think that in our often-ransack'd world
  Still so much gold was left; and then I fear'd
  Lest the gay navy there should splinter on it,
  And fearing waved my arm to warn them off;
  An idle signal, for the brittle fleet
  (I thought I could have died to save it) near'd,
  Touch'd, clink'd, and clash'd, and vanish'd, and I woke,
  I heard the clash so clearly.  Now I see
  My dream was Life; the woman honest Work;
  And my poor venture but a fleet of glass
  Wreck'd on a reef of visionary gold.'

    'Nay,' said the kindly wife to comfort him,
  'You raised your arm, you tumbled down and broke
  The glass with little Margaret's medicine it it;
  And, breaking that, you made and broke your dream:
  A trifle makes a dream, a trifle breaks.'

    'No trifle,' groan'd the husband; 'yesterday
  I met him suddenly in the street, and ask'd
  That which I ask'd the woman in my dream.
  Like her, he shook his head.  "Show me the books!"
  He dodged me with a long and loose account.
  "The books, the books!" but he, he could not wait,
  Bound on a matter he of life and death:
  When the great Books (see Daniel seven and ten)
  Were open'd, I should find he meant me well;
  And then began to bloat himself, and ooze
  All over with the fat affectionate smile
  That makes the widow lean.  "My dearest friend,
  Have faith, have faith!  We live by faith," said he;
  "And all things work together for the good
  Of those"--it makes me sick to quote him--last
  Gript my hand hard, and with God-bless-you went.
  I stood like one that had received a blow:
  I found a hard friend in his loose accounts,
  A loose one in the hard grip of his hand,
  A curse in his God-bless-you: then my eyes
  Pursued him down the street, and far away,
  Among the honest shoulders of the crowd,
  Read rascal in the motions of his back,
  And scoundrel in the supple-sliding knee.'

    'Was he so bound, poor soul?' said the good wife;
  'So are we all: but do not call him, love,
  Before you prove him, rogue, and proved, forgive.
  His gain is loss; for he that wrongs his friend
  Wrongs himself more, and ever bears about
  A silent court of justice in his breast,
  Himself the judge and jury, and himself
  The prisoner at the bar, ever condemn'd:
  And that drags down his life: then comes what comes
  Hereafter: and he meant, he said he meant,
  Perhaps he meant, or partly meant, you well.'

    '"With all his conscience and one eye askew"--
  Love, let me quote these lines, that you may learn
  A man is likewise counsel for himself,
  Too often, in that silent court of yours--
  "With all his conscience and one eye askew,
  So false, he partly took himself for true;
  Whose pious talk, when most his heart was dry,
  Made wet the crafty crowsfoot round his eye;
  Who, never naming God except for gain,
  So never took that useful name in vain;
  Made Him his catspaw and the Cross his tool,
  And Christ the bait to trap his dupe and fool;
  Nor deeds of gift, but gifts of grace he forged,
  And snakelike slimed his victim ere he gorged;
  And oft at Bible meetings, o'er the rest
  Arising, did his holy oily best,
  Dropping the too rough H in Hell and Heaven,
  To spread the Word by which himself had thriven."
  How like you this old satire?'

                                  'Nay,' she said
  'I loathe it: he had never kindly heart,
  Nor ever cared to better his own kind,
  Who first wrote satire, with no pity in it.
  But will you hear MY dream, for I had one
  That altogether went to music?  Still
  It awed me.'

                Then she told it, having dream'd
  Of that same coast.

               --But round the North, a light,
  A belt, it seem'd, of luminous vapor, lay,
  And ever in it a low musical note
  Swell'd up and died; and, as it swell'd, a ridge
  Of breaker issued from the belt, and still
  Grew with the growing note, and when the note
  Had reach'd a thunderous fullness, on those cliffs
  Broke, mixt with awful light (the same as that
  Living within the belt) whereby she saw
  That all those lines of cliffs were cliffs no more,
  But huge cathedral fronts of every age,
  Grave, florid, stern, as far as eye could see.
  One after one: and then the great ridge drew,
  Lessening to the lessening music, back,
  And past into the belt and swell'd again
  Slowly to music: ever when it broke
  The statues, king or saint, or founder fell;
  Then from the gaps and chasms of ruin left
  Came men and women in dark clusters round,
  Some crying, "Set them up! they shall not fall!"
  And others "Let them lie, for they have fall'n."
  And still they strove and wrangled: and she grieved
  In her strange dream, she knew not why, to find
  Their wildest wailings never out of tune
  With that sweet note; and ever as their shrieks
  Ran highest up the gamut, that great wave
  Returning, while none mark'd it, on the crowd
  Broke, mixt with awful light, and show'd their eyes
  Glaring, and passionate looks, and swept away
  The men of flesh and blood, and men of stone,
  To the waste deeps together.

                                'Then I fixt
  My wistful eyes on two fair images,
  Both crown'd with stars and high among the stars,--
  The Virgin Mother standing with her child
  High up on one of those dark minster-fronts--
  Till she began to totter, and the child
  Clung to the mother, and sent out a cry
  Which mixt with little Margaret's, and I woke,
  And my dream awed me:--well--but what are dreams?
  Yours came but from the breaking of a glass,
  And mine but from the crying of a child.'

    'Child?  No!' said he, 'but this tide's roar, and his,
  Our Boanerges with his threats of doom,
  And loud-lung'd Antibabylonianisms
  (Altho' I grant but little music there)
  Went both to make your dream: but if there were
  A music harmonizing our wild cries,
  Sphere-music such as that you dream'd about,
  Why, that would make our passions far too like
  The discords dear to the musician.  No--
  One shriek of hate would jar all the hymns of heaven:
  True Devils with no ear, they howl in tune
  With nothing but the Devil!'

                                '"True" indeed!
  One of our town, but later by an hour
  Here than ourselves, spoke with me on the shore;
  While you were running down the sands, and made
  The dimpled flounce of the sea-furbelow flap,
  Good man, to please the child.  She brought strange news.
  Why were you silent when I spoke to-night?
  I had set my heart on your forgiving him
  Before you knew.  We MUST forgive the dead.'

    'Dead! who is dead?'

                           'The man your eye pursued.
  A little after you had parted with him,
  He suddenly dropt dead of heart-disease.'

    'Dead? he? of heart-disease? what heart had he
  To die of? dead!'

                     'Ah, dearest, if there be
  A devil in man, there is an angel too,
  And if he did that wrong you charge him with,
  His angel broke his heart.  But your rough voice
  (You spoke so loud) has roused the child again.
  Sleep, little birdie, sleep! will she not sleep
  Without her "little birdie?" well then, sleep,
  And I will sing you "birdie."'

                                  Saying this,
  The woman half turn'd round from him she loved,
  Left him one hand, and reaching thro' the night
  Her other, found (for it was close beside)
  And half embraced the basket cradle-head
  With one soft arm, which, like the pliant bough
  That moving moves the nest and nestling, sway'd
  The cradle, while she sang this baby song.

             What does the little birdie say
             In her nest at peep of day?
             Let me fly, says little birdie,
             Mother, let me fly away.
             Birdie, rest a little longer,
             Till the little wings are stronger.
             So she rests a little longer,
             Then she flies away.

             What does little baby say,
             In her bed at peep of day?
             Baby says, like little birdie,
             Let me rise and fly away.
             Baby, sleep a little longer,
             Till the little limbs are stronger.
             If she sleeps a little longer,
             Baby too shall fly away.

  'She sleeps: let us too, let all evil, sleep.
  He also sleeps--another sleep than ours.
  He can do no more wrong: forgive him, dear,
  And I shall sleep the sounder!'

                                   Then the man,
  'His deeds yet live, the worst is yet to come.
  Yet let your sleep for this one night be sound:
  I do forgive him!'

                      'Thanks, my love,' she said,
  'Your own will be the sweeter,' and they slept.





    THE GRANDMOTHER.





    THE GRANDMOTHER.
    -------<>-------


                           I.
  And Willy, my eldest-born, is gone, you say, little
        Anne?
  Ruddy and white, and strong on his legs, he looks
        like a man.
  And Willy's wife has written: she never was
        over-wise,
  Never the wife for Willy: he would n't take my advice.

                          II.
  For, Annie, you see, her father was not the man to
       save,
  Had n't a head to manage, and drank himself into his
       grave.
  Pretty enough, very pretty! but I was against it for
       one.
  Eh!--but he would n't hear me--and Willy, you say,
       is gone.

                          III.
  Willy, my beauty, my eldest-born, the flower of the
         flock;
  Never a man could fling him: for Willy stood like a
         rock.
  'Here's a leg for a babe of a week!' says doctor; and
         he would be bound,
  There was not his like that year in twenty parishes
         round.

                           IV.
  Strong of his hands, and strong on his legs, but still of
         his tongue!
  I ought to have gone before him: I wonder he went
         so young.
  I cannot cry for him, Annie: I have not long to
         stay;
  Perhaps I shall see him the sooner, for he lived far
         away.

                            V.
  Why do you look at me, Annie? you think I am hard
         and cold;
  But all my children have gone before me, I am so
         old:
  I cannot weep for Willy, nor can I weep for the
         rest;
  Only at your age, Annie, I could have wept with the
         best.

                           VI.
  For I remember a quarrel I had with your father, my
         dear,
  All for a slanderous story, that cost me many a
         tear.
  I mean your grandfather, Annie: it cost me a world
         of woe,
  Seventy years ago, my darling, seventy years
         ago.

                          VII.
  For Jenny, my cousin, had come to the place, and I
         knew right well
  That Jenny had tript in her time: I knew, but I
         would not tell.
  And she to be coming and slandering me, the base
         little liar!
  But the tongue is a fire as you know, my dear, the
         tongue is a fire.

                          VIII.
  And the parson made it his text that week, and he
         said likewise,
  That a lie which is half a truth is ever the blackest of
         lies,
  That a lie which is all a lie may be met and fought
         with outright,
  But a lie which is part a truth is a harder matter to
         fight.

                           IX.
  And Willy had not been down to the farm for a week
         and a day;
  And all things look'd half-dead, tho' it was the middle
         of May.
  Jenny, to slander me, who knew what Jenny had
         been!
  But soiling another, Annie, will never make oneself
         clean.

                            X.
  And I cried myself well-nigh blind, and all of an
         evening late
  I climb'd to the top of the garth, and stood by the
         road at the gate.
  The moon like a rick on fire was rising over the
         dale,
  And whit, whit, whit, in the bush beside me chirrupt
         the nightingale.

                           XI.
  All of a sudden he stopt: there past by the gate of
         the farm,
  Willy,--he did n't see me,--and Jenny hung on his
         arm.
  Out into the road I started, and spoke I scarce knew
         how;
  Ah, there's no fool like the old one--it makes me
         angry now.

                          XII.
  Willy stood up like a man, and look'd the thing that
         he meant;
  Jenny, the viper, made me a mocking courtesy and
         went.
  And I said, 'Let us part: in a hundred years it'll all
         be the same,
  You cannot love me at all, if you love not my good
         name.'

                          XIII.
  And he turn'd, and I saw his eyes all wet, in the sweet
         moonshine:
  Sweetheart, I love you so well that your good name
         is mine.
  And what do I care for Jane, let her speak of you well
         of ill;
  But marry me out of hand: we two shall be happy
         still.'

                           XIV.
  'Marry you, Willy!' said I, 'but I needs must speak
         my mind,
  And I fear you'll listen to tales, be jealous and hard
         and unkind.'
  But he turn'd and claspt me in his arms, and answer'd,
         'No, love, no;'
  Seventy years ago, my darling, seventy years
         ago.

                            XV.
  So Willy and I were wedded: I wore a lilac
         gown;
  And the ringers rang with a will, and he gave the
         ringers a crown.
  But the first that ever I bare was dead before he was
         born,
  Shadow and shine is life, little Annie, flower and
         thorn.

                           XVI.
  That was the first time, too, that ever I thought of
         death.
  There lay the sweet little body that never had drawn
         a breath.
  I had not wept, little Anne, not since I had been a
         wife;
  But I wept like a child that day, for the babe had
         fought for his life.

                           XVII.
  His dear little face was troubled, as if with anger or
         pain:
  I look'd at the still little body--his trouble had all
         been in vain.
  For Willy I cannot weep, I shall see him another
         morn:
  But I wept like a child for the child that was dead
         before he was born.

                          XVIII.
  But he cheer'd me, my good man, for he seldom said me
         nay:
  Kind, like a man, was he; like a man, too, would have
         his way:
  Never jealous--not he: we had many a happy
         year;
  And he died, and I could not weep--my own time
         seem'd so near.

                           XIX.
  But I wish'd it had been God's will that I, too, then
         could have died:
  I began to be tired a little, and fain had slept at his
         side.
  And that was ten years back, or more, if I don't
         forget:
  But as to the children, Annie, they're all about me
         yet.

                           XX.
  Pattering over the boards, my Annie who left me at
         two,
  Patter she goes, my own little Annie, an Annie like
         you:
  Pattering over the boards, she comes and goes at her
         will,
  While Harry is in the five-acre and Charlie ploughing
         the hill.

                          XXI.
  And Harry and Charlie, I hear them too--they sing
         to their team:
  Often they come to the door in a pleasant kind of a
         dream.
  They come and sit by my chair, they hover about my
         bed--
  I am not always certain if they be alive or
         dead.

                         XXII.
  And yet I know for a truth, there's none of them
         left alive;
  For Harry went at sixty, your father at sixty-five:
  And Willy, my eldest born, at nigh threescore and
         ten;
  I knew them all as babies, and now they're elderly
         men.

                        XXIII.
  For mine is a time of peace, it is not often I
         grieve;
  I am oftener sitting at home in my father's farm
         at eve:
  And the neighbors come and laugh and gossip, and
         so do I;
  I find myself often laughing at things that have long
         gone by.

                         XXIV.
  To be sure the preacher says, our sins should make
         us sad:
  But mine is a time of peace, and there is Grace to
         be had;
  And God, not man, is the Judge of us all when life
         shall cease;
  And in this Book, little Annie, the message is one of
         Peace.

                         XXV.
  And age is a time of peace, so it be free from
         pain,
  And happy has been my life; but I would not live
         it again.
  I seem to be tired a little, that's all, and long for
         rest;
  Only at your age, Annie, I could have wept with the
         best.

                        XXVI.
  So Willy has gone, my beauty, my eldest-born, my
         flower;
  But how can I weep for Willy, he has but gone for
         an hour,--
  Gone for a minute, my son, from this room into the
         next;
  I, too, shall go in a minute.  What time have I to
         be vext?

                       XXVII.
  And Willy's wife has written, she never was over-wise.
  Get me my glasses, Annie: thank God that I keep
         my eyes.
  There is but a trifle left you, when I shall have past
         away.
  But stay with the old woman now: you cannot have
         long to stay.





    NORTHERN FARMER.





    NORTHERN FARMER.
       old style.
    -------<>-------


                         I.
  Wheer 'asta bean saw long and mea liggin' 'ere
       aloan?
  Noorse? thoort nowt o' a noorse: whoy, doctor's abean
       an' agoan:
  Says that I moant 'a naw moor yaale: but I beant a
       fool:
  Git ma my yaale, fur I beant a-gooin' to break my
       rule.

                        II.
  Doctors, they knaws nowt, for a says what's nawways
       true:
  Naw soort o' koind o' use to saay the things that
       a do.
  I've 'ed my point o' yaale ivry noight sin' I bean
       'ere,
  An' I've 'ed my quart ivry market-noight for foorty
       year.

                       III.
  Parson's a bean loikewoise, an' a sittin' ere o' my
       bed.
  'The amoighty's a taakin o' you to 'issen, my friend,'
       'a said,
  An' a towd ma my sins, an's toithe were due, an' I gied
       it in hond;
  I done my duty by un, as I 'a done by the
       lond.

                        IV.
  Larn'd a ma' bea. I reckons I 'annot sa mooch to
       larn.
  But a cost oop, thot a did, 'boot Bessy Marris's
       barn.
  Thof a knaws I hallus voated wi' Squoire an' choorch
       an staate,
  An' i' the woost o' toimes I wur niver agin the
       raate.

                         V.
  An' I hallus comed to 's choorch afoor moy Sally wur
       dead,
  An' 'eerd un a bummin' awaay loike a buzzard-clock*
       ower my yead,
  An' I niver knaw'd whot a mean'd but I thowt a 'ad
       summut to saay,
  An I thowt a said whot a owt to 'a said an' I comed
       awaay.
                       *Cockchafer.

                        VI.
  Bessy Marris's barn! tha knaws she laaid it to
       mea.
  Mowt 'a bean, mayhap, for she wur a bad un,
       shea.
  'Siver, I kep un, I kep un, my lass, tha mun under-stond;
  I done my duty by un as I 'a done by the
       lond.

                       VII.
  But Parson a comes an' a goos, an' a says it easy an'
       freea
  'The amoighty's a taakin o' you to 'issen, my friend,'
       says 'ea.
  I weant saay men be loiars, thof summun said it in
       'aaste:
  But a reads wonn sarmin a weeak, an' I 'a stubb'd
       Thornaby waaste.

                      VIII.
  D'ya moind the waaste, my lass? naw, naw, tha was
       not born then;
  Theer wur a boggle in it, I often 'eerd un
       mysen;
  Moast loike a butter-bump,* for I 'eerd un aboot an
       aboot,
  But I stubb'd un oop wi' the lot, an' raaved an
       rembled un oot.
                        *Bittern.

                        IX.
  Keaper's it wur; fo' they fun un theer a laaid on 'is
       faace
  Doon i' the woild 'enemies* afoor I comed to the
       plaace.
  Noaks or Thimbleby--toner 'ed shot un as dead as
       a naail.
  Noaks wur 'ang'd for it oop at 'soize--but git ma
       my yaale.
                        *Anenomes.

                         X.
  Dubbut looak at the waaste: theer warn't not fead
       for a cow:
  Nowt at all but bracken an' fuzz, an' looak at it
       now--
  Warn't worth nowt a haacre, an' now theer's lots o'
       fead,
  Fourscore yows upon it an' some on it doon in
       sead.

                        XI.
  Nobbut a bit on it's left, an' I mean'd to 'a stubb'd
       it at fall,
  Done it ta-year I mean'd, an' runn'd plow thruff it
       an' all,
  If godamoighty an' parson 'ud nobbut let ma
       aloan,
  Mea, wi' haate oonderd haacre o' Squoire's an' lond
       o' my oan.

                       XII.
  Do godamoighty knaw what a's doing a-taakin' o'
       mea?
  I beant wonn as saws 'ere a bean an' yonder a
       pea;
  An' Squoire 'ull be sa mad an' all--a' dear a'
       dear!
  And I 'a monaged for Squoire come Michaelmas
       thirty year.

                      XIII.
  A mowt 'a taaken Joanes, as 'ant a 'aapoth o'
       sense,
  Or a mowt a' taaken Robins--a niver mended a
       fence:
  But godamoighty a moost taake mea an' taake ma
       now
  Wi 'auf the cows to cauve an' Thornaby holms to
       plow!

                       XIV.
  Looak 'ow quoloty smoiles when they sees ma a
       passin' by,
  Says to thessen naw doot 'what a mon a be
       sewer-ly!'
  For they knaws what I bean to Squoire sin fust a
       comed to the 'All;
  I done my duty by Squoire an' I done my duty
       by all.

                        XV.
  Squoire's in Lunnon, an' summun I reckons 'ull 'a to
       wroite,
  For who's to howd the lond ater mea thot muddles
       ma quoit;
  Sartin-sewer I bea, thot a weant niver give it to
       Joanes,
  Noither a moant to Robins--a niver rembles the
       stoans.

                       XVI.
  But summun 'ull come ater mea mayhap wi' 'is kittle
       o' steam
  Huzzin' an' maazin' the blessed fealds wi' the Divil's
       oan team.
  Gin I mun doy I mun doy, an' loife they says is
       sweet,
  But gin I mun doy I mun doy, for I couldn abear to
       see it.

                      XVII.
  What atta stannin' theer for, an' doesn bring ma the
       yaale?
  Doctor's a 'tottler, lass, an a's hallus i' the owd
       taale;
  I weant break rules for Doctor, a knaws naw moor
       nor a floy;
  Git ma my yaale, I tell tha, an' gin I mun doy I
       mun doy.





  MISCELLANEOUS.





      TITHONUS.
    -----<>-----


  The woods decay, the woods decay and fall,
  The vapors weep their burthen to the ground,
  Man comes and tills the field and lies beneath,
  And after many a summer dies the swan.
  Me only cruel immortality
  Consumes: I wither slowly in thine arms,
  Here at the quiet limit of the world,
  A white-hair'd shadow roaming like a dream
  The ever-silent spaces of the East,
  Far-folded mists, and gleaming halls of morn.

    Alas! for this gray shadow, once a man--
  So glorious in his beauty and thy choice,
  Who madest him thy chosen, that he seem'd
  To his great heart none other than a God!
  I ask'd thee, 'Give me immortality.'
  Then didst thou grant mine asking with a smile,
  Like wealthy men who care not how they give.
  But thy strong Hours indignant work'd their wills,
  And beat me down and marr'd and wasted me,
  And tho' they could not end me, left me maim'd
  To dwell in presence of immortal youth,
  Immortal age beside immortal youth,
  And all I was, in ashes.  Can thy love,
  Thy beauty, make amends, tho' even now,
  Close over us, the silver star, thy guide,
  Shines in those tremulous eyes that fill with tears
  To hear me?  Let me go: take back thy gift:
  Why should a man desire in any way
  To vary from the kindly race of men,
  Or pass beyond the goal of ordinance
  Where all should pause, as is most meet for all?

    A soft air fans the cloud apart; there comes
  A glimpse of that dark world where I was born.
  Once more the old mysterious glimmer steals
  From thy pure brows, and from thy shoulders pure,
  And bosom beating with a heart renew'd.
  Thy cheek begins to redden thro' the gloom,
  Thy sweet eyes brighten slowly close to mine,
  Ere yet they blind the stars, and the wild team
  Which love thee, yearning for thy yoke, arise,
  And shake the darkness from their loosen'd manes,
  And beat the twilight into flakes of fire.

    Lo! ever thus thou growest beautiful
  In silence, then before thine answer given
  Departest, and thy tears are on my cheek.

    Why wilt thou ever scare me with thy tears,
  And make me tremble lest a saying learnt,
  In days far-off, on that dark earth, be true?
  'The Gods themselves cannot recall their gifts.'

    Ay me! ay me! with what another heart
  In days far-off, and with what other eyes
  I used to watch--if I be he that watch'd--
  The lucid outline forming round thee; saw
  The dim curls kindle into sunny rings;
  Changed with thy mystic change, and felt my blood
  Glow with the glow that slowly crimson'd all
  Thy presence and thy portals, while I lay,
  Mouth, forehead, eyelids, growing dewy-warm
  With kisses balmier than half-opening buds
  Of April, and could hear the lips that kiss'd
  Whispering I knew not what of wild and sweet,
  Like that strange song I heard Apollo sing,
  While Ilion like a mist rose into towers.

    Yet hold me not for ever in thine East:
  How can my nature longer mix with thine?
  Coldly thy rosy shadows bathe me, cold
  Are all thy lights, and cold my wrinkled feet
  Upon thy glimmering thresholds, when the steam
  Floats up from those dim fields about the homes
  Of happy men that have the power to die,
  And grassy barrows of the happier dead.
  Release me, and restore me to the ground;
  Thou seest all things, thou wilt see my grave:
  Thou wilt renew thy beauty morn by morn;
  I earth in earth forget these empty courts,
  And thee returning on thy silver wheels.



    THE VOYAGE.
    -----<>-----


                  I.
  We left behind the painted buoy
    That tosses at the harbor-mouth;
  And madly danced our hearts with joy,
    As fast we fleeted to the South:
  How fresh was every sight and sound
    On open main or winding shore!
  We knew the merry world was round,
    And we might sail for evermore.

                 II.
  Warm broke the breeze against the brow,
    Dry sang the tackle, sang the sail:
  The Lady's-head upon the prow
    Caught the shrill salt, and sheer'd the gale.
  The broad seas swell'd to meet the keel,
    And swept behind: so quick the run,
  We felt the good ship shake and reel,
    We seem'd to sail into the Sun!

                    III.
  How oft we saw the Sun retire,
    And burn the threshold of the night,
  Fall from his Ocean-lane of fire,
    And sleep beneath his pillar'd light!
  How oft the purple-skirted robe
    Of twilight slowly downward drawn,
  As thro' the slumber of the globe
    Again we dash'd into the dawn!

                     IV.
  New stars all night above the brim
    Of waters lighten'd into view;
  They climb'd as quickly, for the rim
    Changed every moment as we flew.
  Far ran the naked moon across
    The houseless ocean's heaving field,
  Or flying shone, the silver boss
    Of her own halo's dusky shield;

                      V.
  The peaky islet shifted shapes,
    High towns on hills were dimly seen,
  We past long lines of Northern capes
    And dewy Northern meadows green.
  We came to warmer waves, and deep
    Across the boundless east we drove,
  Where those long swells of breaker sweep
    The nutmeg rocks and isles clove.

                     VI.
  By peaks that flamed, or, all in shade,
    Gloom'd the low coast and quivering brine
  With ashy rains, that spreading made
    Fantastic plume or sable pine;
  By sands and steaming flats, and floods
    Of mighty mouth, we scudded fast,
  And hills and scarlet-mingled woods
    Glow'd for a moment as we past.

                    VII.
  O hundred shores of happy climes,
    How swiftly stream'd ye by the bark!
  At times the whole sea burn'd, at times
    With wakes of fire we tore the dark;
  At times a carven craft would shoot
    From havens hid in fairy bowers,
  With naked limbs and flowers and fruit,
    But we nor paused for fruit nor flowers.

                   VIII.
  For one fair Vision ever fled
    Down the waste waters day and night,
  And still we follow'd where she led,
    In hope to gain upon her flight.
  Her face was evermore unseen,
    And fixt upon the far sea-line;
  But each man murmur'd 'O my Queen,
    I follow till I make thee mine.'

                     IX.
  And now we lost her, now she gleam'd
    Like Fancy made of golden air,
  Now nearer to the prow she seem'd
    Like Virtue firm, like Knowledge fair,
  Now high on waves that idly burst
    Like Heavenly Hope she crown'd the sea
  And now, the bloodless point reversed,
    She bore the blade of Liberty.

                      X.
  And only one among us--him
    We please not--he was seldom pleased:
  He saw not far: his eyes were dim:
    But ours he swore were all diseased.
  'A ship of fools' he shriek'd in spite,
    'A ship of fools' he sneer'd and wept.
  And overboard one stormy night
    He cast his body, and on we swept.

                     XI.
  And never sail of ours was furl'd,
    Nor anchor dropt at eve or morn;
  We loved the glories of the world,
    But laws of nature were our scorn;
  For blasts would rise and rave and cease,
    But whence were those that drove the sail
  Across the whirlwind's heart of peace,
    And to and thro' the counter-gale?

                    XII.
  Again to colder climes we came,
    For still we follow'd where she led:
  Now mate is blind and captain lame,
    And half the crew are sick or dead.
  But blind or lame or sick or sound
    We follow that which flies before:
  We know the merry world is round,
    And we may sail for evermore.



    IN THE VALLEY OF CAUTERETZ.
             -----<>-----


  All along the valley, stream that flashest white,
  Deepening thy voice with the deepening of the night,
  All along the valley, where thy waters flow,
  I walk'd with one I loved two and thirty years ago.
  All along the valley while I walk'd to-day,
  The two and thirty years were a mist that rolls away;
  For all along the valley, down thy rocky bed
  Thy living voice to me was as the voice of the dead,
  And all along the valley, by rock and cave and tree,
  The voice of the dead was a living voice to me.



    THE FLOWER.
    -----<>-----


  Once in a golden hour
    I cast to earth a seed.
  Up there came a flower,
    The people said, a weed.

  To and fro they went
    Thro' my garden-bower,
  And muttering discontent
    Cursed me and my flower.

  Then it grew so tall
    It wore a crown of light,
  But thieves from o'er the wall
    Stole the seed by night.

  Sow'd it far and wide
    By every town and tower,
  Till all the people cried
    'Splendid is the flower.'

  Read my little fable:
    He that runs may read.
  Most can raise the flowers now,
    For all have got the seed.

  And some are pretty enough,
    And some are poor indeed;
  And now again the people
    Call it but a weed.



    REQUIESCAT.
    -----<>-----


  Fair is her cottage in its place,
    Where yon broad water sweetly slowly glides.
  It sees itself from thatch to base
    Dream in the sliding tides.

  And fairer she, but ah how soon to die!
    Her quiet dream of life this hour may cease.
  Her peaceful being slowly passes by
    To some more perfect peace.



    THE SAILOR BOY.
    -------<>-------


  He rose at dawn and, fired with hope,
    Shot o'er the seething harbor-bar,
  And reach'd the ship and caught the rope,
    And whistled to the morning star.

  And while he whistled long and loud
    He heard a fierce mermaiden cry,
  'O boy, tho' thou art young and proud,
    I see the place where thou wilt lie.

  'The sands and yeasty surges mix
    In caves about the dreary bay,
  And on thy ribs the limpet sticks,
    And in thy heart the scrawl shall play.'

  'Fool,' he answer'd, 'death is sure
    To those that stay and those that roam,
  But I will nevermore endure
    To sit with empty hands at home.

  'My mother clings about my neck,
    My sisters crying "stay for shame;"
  My father raves of death and wreck,
    They are all to blame, they are all to blame.

  'God help me! save I take my part
    Of danger in the roaring sea,
  A devil rises in my heart,
    Far worse than any death to me.'



       THE ISLET.
       ----<>----


  'Whither O whither love shall we go,
  For a score of sweet little summers or so'
  The sweet little wife of the singer said,
  On the day that follow'd the day she was wed,
  'Whither O whither love shall we go?'
  And the singer shaking his curly head
  Turn'd as he sat, and struck the keys
  There at his right with a sudden crash,
  Singing, 'and shall it be over the seas
  With a crew that is neither rude nor rash,
  But a bevy of Eroses apple-cheek'd,
  In a shallop of crystal ivory-beak'd,
  With a satin sail of a ruby glow,
  To a sweet little Eden on earth that I know,
  A mountain islet pointed and peak'd;
  Waves on a diamond shingle dash,
  Cataract brooks to the ocean run,
  Fairily-delicate palaces shine
  Mixt with myrtle and clad with vine,
  And overstream'd and silvery-streak'd
  With many a rivulet high against the Sun
  The facets of the glorious mountain flash
  Above the valleys of palm and pine.'

  'Thither O thither, love, let us go.'

  'No, no, no!
  For in all that exquisite isle, my dear,
  There is but one bird with a musical throat,
  And his compass is but of a single note,
  That it makes one weary to hear.'

  'Mock me not! mock me not! love, let us go.'

  'No, love, no.
  For the bud ever breaks into bloom on the tree,
  And a storm never wakes on the lonely sea,
  And a worm is there in the lonely wood,
  That pierces the liver and blackens the blood,
  And makes it a sorrow to be.'



       THE RINGLET.
       -----<>-----


  'Your ringlets, your ringlets,
    That look so golden-gay,
  If you will give me one, but one,
    To kiss it night and day,
  Then never chilling touch of Time
    Will turn it silver-gray;
  And then shall I know it is all true gold
  To flame and sparkle and stream as of old,
  Till all the comets in heaven are cold,
    And all her stars decay.'
  'Then take it, love, and put it by;
  This cannot change, nor yet can I.'


                  2.
  'My ringlet, my ringlet,
    That art so golden-gay,
  Now never chilling touch of Time
    Can turn thee silver-gray;
  And a lad may wink, and a girl may hint,
    And a fool may say his say;
  For my doubts and fears were all amiss,
  And I swear henceforth by this and this,
  That a doubt will only come for a kiss,
    And a fear to be kiss'd away.'
  'Then kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'

                 II.
  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I kiss'd you night and day,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You still are golden-gay,
  But Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You should be silver-gray:
  For what is this which now I'm told,
  I that took you for true gold,
  She that gave you's bought and sold,
              Sold, sold.

                  2.
  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She blush'd a rosy red,
  When Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She clipt you from her head,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She gave you me, and said,
  'Come, kiss it, love, and put it by
  If this can change, why so can I.'
  O fie, you golden nothing, fie
              You golden lie.

                  3.
  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I count you much to blame,
  For Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You put me much to shame,
  So Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I doom you to the flame.
  For what is this which now I learn,
  Has given all my faith a turn?
  Burn, you glossy heretic, burn,
               Burn, burn.



   A WELCOME TO ALEXANDRA.
       March 7, 1863.
       -----<>-----


  Sea-kings' daughter from over the sea,
                                    Alexandra!
  Saxon and Norman and Dane are we,
  But all of us Danes in our welcome of thee,
                                    Alexandra!
  Welcome her, thunders of fort and of fleet!
  Welcome her, thundering cheer of the street!
  Welcome her, all things youthful and sweet,
  Scatter the blossom under her feet!
  Break, happy land, into earlier flowers!
  Make music, O bird, in the new-budded bowers!
  Blazon your mottos of blessing and prayer!
  Welcome her, welcome her, all that is ours!
  Warble, O bugle, and trumpet, blare!
  Flags, flutter out upon turrets and towers!
  Flames, on the windy headland flare!
  Utter your jubilee, steeple and spire!
  Clash, ye bells, in the merry March air!
  Flash, ye cities, in rivers of fire!
  Rush to the roof, sudden rocket, and higher
  Melt into stars for the land's desire!
  Roll and rejoice, jubilant voice,
  Roll as a ground-swell dash'd on the strand,
  Roar as the sea when he welcomes the land,
  And welcome her, welcome the land's desire,
  The sea-kings' daughter as happy as fair,
  Blissful bride of a blissful heir,
  Bride of the heir of the kings of the sea--
  O joy to the people and joy to the throne,
  Come to us, love us, and make us your own:
  For Saxon or Dane or Norman we,
  Teuton or Celt, or whatever we be,
  We are each all Dane in our welcome of thee,
                                     Alexandra!



            ODE
  SUNG AT THE OPENING OF THE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.
       -----<>-----


  Uplift a thousand voices full and sweet,
    In this wide hall with earth's inventions stored,
    And praise th' invisible universal Lord,
  Who lets once more in peace the nations meet,
    Where Science, Art, and Labor have outpour'd
  Their myriad horns of plenty at our feet.

  O silent father of our Kings to be
  Mourn'd in this golden hour of jubilee,
  For this, for all, we weep our thanks to thee!

      The world-compelling plan was thine,
      And, lo! the long laborious miles
      Of Palace; lo! the giant aisles,
      Rich in model and design;
      Harvest-tool and husbandry,
      Loom and wheel and engin'ry,
      Secrets of the sullen mine,
      Steel and gold, and corn and wine,
      Fabric rough, or Fairy fine,
      Sunny tokens of the Line,
      Polar marvels, and a feast
      Of wonder, out of West and East,
      And shapes and hues of Part divine!
      All of beauty, all of use,
      That one fair planet can produce.
        Brought from under every star,
      Blown from over every main,
      And mixt, as life is mixt with pain,
        The works of peace with works of war.

  O ye, the wise who think, the wise who reign,
  From growing commerce loose her latest chain,
  And let the fair white-winged peacemaker fly
  To happy havens under all the sky,
  And mix the seasons and the golden hours,
  Till each man finds his own in all men's good,
  And all men work in noble brotherhood,
  Breaking their mailed fleets and armed towers,
  And ruling by obeying Nature's powers,
  And gathering all the fruits of peace and crown'd with
        all her flowers.



   A DEDICATION.
   -----<>-----


  Dear, near and true--no truer Time himself
  Can prove you, tho' he make you evermore
  Dearer and nearer, as the rapid of life
  Shoots to the fall--take this, and pray that he,
  Who wrote it, honoring your sweet faith in him,
  May trust himself; and spite of praise and scorn,
  As one who feels the immeasurable world,
  Attain the wise indifference of the wise;
  And after Autumn past--if left to pass
  His autumn into seeming-leafless days--
  Draw toward the long frost and longest night,
  Wearing his wisdom lightly, like the fruit
  Which in our winter woodland looks a flower.*

    *The fruit of the Spindle-tree (Euonymus Europaeus).





  EXPERIMENTS.





      BOADICEA.
    -----<>-----


  While about the shore of Mona those Neronian legionaries
  Burnt and broke the grove and altar of the Druid and Druidess,
  Far in the East Boadicea, standing loftily charioted,
  Mad and maddening all that heard her in her fierce volubility,
  Girt by half the tribes of Britain, near the colony Camulodune,
  Yell'd and shriek'd between her daughters o'er a wild confederacy.

    'They that scorn the tribes and call us Britain's barbarous populaces,
  Did they hear me, would they listen, did they pity me supplicating?
  Shall I heed them in their anguish? shall I brook to be supplicated?
  Hear Icenian, Catieuchlanian, hear Coritanian, Trinobant!
  Must their ever-ravening eagle's beak and talon annihilate us?
  Tear the noble hear of Britain, leave it gorily quivering?
  Bark an answer, Britain's raven! bark and blacken innumerable,
  Blacken round the Roman carrion, make the carcase a skeleton,
  Kite and kestrel, wolf and wolfkin, from the wilderness, wallow in it,
  Till the face of Bel be brighten'd, Taranis be propitiated.
  Lo their colony half-defended! lo their colony, Camulodune!
  There the horde of Roman robbers mock at a barbarous adversary.
  There the hive of Roman liars worship a gluttonous emperor-idiot.
  Such is Rome, and this her deity: hear it, Spirit of Cassivelaun!

    'Hear it, Gods! the Gods have heard it, O Icenian, O Coritanian!
  Doubt not ye the Gods have answer'd, Catieuchlanian, Trinobant.
  These have told us all their anger in miraculous utterances,
  Thunder, a flying fire in heaven, a murmur heard aerially,
  Phantom sound of blows descending, moan of an enemy massacred,
  Phantom wail of women and children, multitudinous agonies.
  Bloodily flow'd the Tamesa rolling phantom bodies of horses and men;
  Then a phantom colony smoulder'd on the refluent estuary;
  Lastly yonder yester-even, suddenly giddily tottering--
  There was one who watch'd and told me--down their statue of Victory fell.
  Lo their precious Roman bantling, lo the colony Camulodune,
  Shall we teach it a Roman lesson? shall we care to be pitiful?
  Shall we deal with it as an infant? shall we dandle it amorously?

    'Hear Icenian, Catieuchlanian, hear Coritanian, Trinobant!
  While I roved about the forest, long and bitterly meditating,
  There I heard them in the darkness, at the mystical ceremony,
  Loosely robed in flying raiment, sang the terrible prophetesses.
  "Fear not, isle of blowing woodland, isle of silvery parapets!
  Tho' the Roman eagle shadow thee, tho' the gathering enemy narrow thee,
  Thou shalt wax and he shall dwindle, thou shalt be the mighty one yet!
  Thine the liberty, thine the glory, thine the deeds to be celebrated,
  Thine the myriad-rolling ocean, light and shadow illimitable,
  Thine the lands of lasting summer, many-blossoming Paradises,
  Thine the North and thine the South and thine the battle-thunder of God."
  So they chanted: how shall Britain light upon auguries happier?
  So they chanted in the darkness, and there cometh a victory now.

    Hear Icenian, Catieuchlanian, hear Coritanian, Trinobant!
  Me the wife of rich Prasutagus, me the lover of liberty,
  Me they seized and me they tortured, me they lash'd and humiliated,
  Me the sport of ribald Veterans, mine of ruffian violators!
  See they sit, they hide their faces, miserable in ignominy!
  Wherefore in me burns an anger, not by blood to be satiated.
  Lo the palaces and the temple, lo the colony Camulodune!
  There they ruled, and thence they wasted all the flourishing territory,
  Thither at their will they haled the yellow-ringleted Britoness--
  Bloodily, bloodily fall the battle-axe, unexhausted, inexorable.
  Shout Icenian, Catieuchlanian, shout Coritanian, Trinobant,
  Till the victim hear within and yearn to hurry precipitously
  Like the leaf in a roaring whirlwind, like the smoke in a hurricane whirl'd.
  Lo the colony, there they rioted in the city of Cunobeline!
  There they drank in cups of emerald, there at tables of ebony lay,
  Rolling on their purple couches in their tender effeminacy.
  There they dwelt and there they rioted; there--there--they dwell no more.
  Burst the gates, and burn the palaces, break the works of the statuary,
  Take the hoary Roman head and shatter it, hold it abominable,
  Cut the Roman boy to pieces in his lust and voluptuousness,
  Lash the maiden into swooning, me they lash'd and humiliated,
  Chop the breasts from off the mother, dash the brains of the little one out,
  Up my Britons, on my chariot, on my chargers, trample them under us.'

    So the Queen Boadicea, standing loftily charioted,
  Brandishing in her hand a dart and rolling glances lioness-like,
  Yell'd and shriek'd between her daughters in her fierce volubility.
  Till her people all around the royal chariot agitated,
  Madly dash'd the darts together, writhing barbarous lineaments,
  Made the noise of frosty woodlands, when they shiver in January,
  Roar'd as when the rolling breakers boom and blanch on the precipices,
  Yell'd as when the winds of winter tear an oak on a promontory.
  So the silent colony hearing her tumultuous adversaries
  Clash the darts and on the buckler beat with rapid unanimous hand,
  Thought on all her evil tyrannies, all her pitiless avarice,
  Till she felt the heart within her fall and flutter tremulously,
  Then her pulses at the clamoring of her enemy fainted away.
  Out of evil evil flourishes, out of tyranny tyranny buds.
  Ran the land with Roman slaughter, multitudinous agonies.
  Perish'd many a maid and matron, many a valorous legionary.
  Fell the colony, city, and citadel, London, Verulam, Camulodune.



   IN QUANTITY.
   -----<>-----


    MILTON.

    Alcaics.

  O mighty-mouth'd inventor of harmonies,
  O skill'd to sing of Time or Eternity,
      God-gifted organ-voice of England,
          Milton, a name to resound for ages;
  Whose Titan angels, Gabriel, Abdiel,
  Starr'd from Jehovah's gorgeous armouries,
      Tower, as the deep-domed empyrean
          Rings to the roar of an angel onset--
  Me rather all that bowery loneliness,
  The brooks of Eden mazily murmuring,
      And bloom profuse and cedar arches
          Charm, as a wanderer out in ocean,
  Where some refulgent sunset of India
  Streams o'er a rich ambrosial ocean isle,
      And crimson-hued the stately palmwoods
          Whisper in odorous heights of even.


  --------------

  Hendecasyllabics.

  O you chorus of indolent reviewers,
  Irresponsible, indolent reviewers,
  Look, I come to the test, a tiny poem
  All composed in a metre of Catullus,
  All in quantity, careful of my motion,
  Like the skater on ice that hardly bears him,
  Lest I fall unawares before the people,
  Waking laughter in indolent reviewers.
  Should I flounder awhile without a tumble
  Thro' this metrification of Catullus,
  They should speak to me not without a welcome,
  All that chorus of indolent reviewers.
  Hard, hard, hard is it, only not to tumble,
  So fantastical is the dainty metre.
  Wherefore slight me not wholly, nor believe me
  Too presumptuous, indolent reviewers.
  O blatant Magazines, regard me rather--
  Since I blush to belaud myself a moment--
  As some rare little rose, a piece of inmost
  Horticultural art, or half coquette-like
  Maiden, not to be greeted unbenignly.



  SPECIMEN OF A TRANSLATION OF THE ILIAD
           IN BLANK VERSE.


  So Hector said, and sea-like roar'd his host;
  Then loosed their sweating horses from the yoke,
  And each beside his chariot bound his own;
  And oxen from the city, and goodly sheep
  In haste they drove, and honey-hearted wine
  And bread from out the houses brought, and heap'd
  Their firewood, and the winds from off the plain
  Roll'd the rich vapor far into the heaven.
  And these all night upon the[1] bridge of war
  Sat glorying; many a fire before them blazed:
  As when in heaven the stars about the moon
  Look beautiful, when all the winds are laid,
  And every height comes out, and jutting peak
  And valley, and the immeasurable heavens
  Break open to their highest, and all the stars
  Shine, and the Shepherd gladdens in his heart:
  So many a fire between the ships and stream
  Of Xanthus blazed before the towers of Troy,
  A thousand on the plain; and close by each
  Sat fifty in the blaze of burning fire;
  And champing golden grain, the horses stood
  Hard by their chariots, waiting for the dawn.[2]
                             Iliad VIII. 542-561.


[1] Or, ridge.

[2] Or more literally--

             And eating hoary grain and pulse the steeds
             Stood by their cars, waiting the throned morn.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Enoch Arden, &c., by Alfred Tennyson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENOCH ARDEN, &C. ***

***** This file should be named 1358.txt or 1358.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/5/1358/

Produced by Stewart A. Levin

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Idylls of the King, by Alfred, Lord Tennyson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Idylls of the King

Author: Alfred, Lord Tennyson

Posting Date: August 4, 2008 [EBook #610]
Release Date: August, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDYLLS OF THE KING ***




Produced by Ng E-Ching.








  Idylls of the King

  IN TWELVE BOOKS


  by

  Alfred, Lord Tennyson



  Flos Regum Arthurus (Joseph of Exeter)




  Contents


  Dedication
  The Coming of Arthur


  THE ROUND TABLE

  Gareth and Lynette
  The Marriage of Geraint
  Geraint and Enid
  Balin and Balan
  Merlin and Vivien
  Lancelot and Elaine
  The Holy Grail
  Pelleas and Ettarre
  The Last Tournament
  Guinevere

  The Passing of Arthur
  To the Queen



  Dedication


  These to His Memory--since he held them dear,
  Perchance as finding there unconsciously
  Some image of himself--I dedicate,
  I dedicate, I consecrate with tears--
  These Idylls.

               And indeed He seems to me
  Scarce other than my king's ideal knight,
  'Who reverenced his conscience as his king;
  Whose glory was, redressing human wrong;
  Who spake no slander, no, nor listened to it;
  Who loved one only and who clave to her--'
  Her--over all whose realms to their last isle,
  Commingled with the gloom of imminent war,
  The shadow of His loss drew like eclipse,
  Darkening the world.  We have lost him:  he is gone:
  We know him now:  all narrow jealousies
  Are silent; and we see him as he moved,
  How modest, kindly, all-accomplished, wise,
  With what sublime repression of himself,
  And in what limits, and how tenderly;
  Not swaying to this faction or to that;
  Not making his high place the lawless perch
  Of winged ambitions, nor a vantage-ground
  For pleasure; but through all this tract of years
  Wearing the white flower of a blameless life,
  Before a thousand peering littlenesses,
  In that fierce light which beats upon a throne,
  And blackens every blot:  for where is he,
  Who dares foreshadow for an only son
  A lovelier life, a more unstained, than his?
  Or how should England dreaming of his sons
  Hope more for these than some inheritance
  Of such a life, a heart, a mind as thine,
  Thou noble Father of her Kings to be,
  Laborious for her people and her poor--
  Voice in the rich dawn of an ampler day--
  Far-sighted summoner of War and Waste
  To fruitful strifes and rivalries of peace--
  Sweet nature gilded by the gracious gleam
  Of letters, dear to Science, dear to Art,
  Dear to thy land and ours, a Prince indeed,
  Beyond all titles, and a household name,
  Hereafter, through all times, Albert the Good.

     Break not, O woman's-heart, but still endure;
  Break not, for thou art Royal, but endure,
  Remembering all the beauty of that star
  Which shone so close beside Thee that ye made
  One light together, but has past and leaves
  The Crown a lonely splendour.

                               May all love,
  His love, unseen but felt, o'ershadow Thee,
  The love of all Thy sons encompass Thee,
  The love of all Thy daughters cherish Thee,
  The love of all Thy people comfort Thee,
  Till God's love set Thee at his side again!



  The Coming of Arthur

  Leodogran, the King of Cameliard,
  Had one fair daughter, and none other child;
  And she was the fairest of all flesh on earth,
  Guinevere, and in her his one delight.

     For many a petty king ere Arthur came
  Ruled in this isle, and ever waging war
  Each upon other, wasted all the land;
  And still from time to time the heathen host
  Swarmed overseas, and harried what was left.
  And so there grew great tracts of wilderness,
  Wherein the beast was ever more and more,
  But man was less and less, till Arthur came.
  For first Aurelius lived and fought and died,
  And after him King Uther fought and died,
  But either failed to make the kingdom one.
  And after these King Arthur for a space,
  And through the puissance of his Table Round,
  Drew all their petty princedoms under him.
  Their king and head, and made a realm, and reigned.

     And thus the land of Cameliard was waste,
  Thick with wet woods, and many a beast therein,
  And none or few to scare or chase the beast;
  So that wild dog, and wolf and boar and bear
  Came night and day, and rooted in the fields,
  And wallowed in the gardens of the King.
  And ever and anon the wolf would steal
  The children and devour, but now and then,
  Her own brood lost or dead, lent her fierce teat
  To human sucklings; and the children, housed
  In her foul den, there at their meat would growl,
  And mock their foster mother on four feet,
  Till, straightened, they grew up to wolf-like men,
  Worse than the wolves.  And King Leodogran
  Groaned for the Roman legions here again,
  And Caesar's eagle:  then his brother king,
  Urien, assailed him:  last a heathen horde,
  Reddening the sun with smoke and earth with blood,
  And on the spike that split the mother's heart
  Spitting the child, brake on him, till, amazed,
  He knew not whither he should turn for aid.

     But--for he heard of Arthur newly crowned,
  Though not without an uproar made by those
  Who cried, 'He is not Uther's son'--the King
  Sent to him, saying, 'Arise, and help us thou!
  For here between the man and beast we die.'

     And Arthur yet had done no deed of arms,
  But heard the call, and came:  and Guinevere
  Stood by the castle walls to watch him pass;
  But since he neither wore on helm or shield
  The golden symbol of his kinglihood,
  But rode a simple knight among his knights,
  And many of these in richer arms than he,
  She saw him not, or marked not, if she saw,
  One among many, though his face was bare.
  But Arthur, looking downward as he past,
  Felt the light of her eyes into his life
  Smite on the sudden, yet rode on, and pitched
  His tents beside the forest.  Then he drave
  The heathen; after, slew the beast, and felled
  The forest, letting in the sun, and made
  Broad pathways for the hunter and the knight
  And so returned.

                  For while he lingered there,
  A doubt that ever smouldered in the hearts
  Of those great Lords and Barons of his realm
  Flashed forth and into war:  for most of these,
  Colleaguing with a score of petty kings,
  Made head against him, crying, 'Who is he
  That he should rule us? who hath proven him
  King Uther's son? for lo! we look at him,
  And find nor face nor bearing, limbs nor voice,
  Are like to those of Uther whom we knew.
  This is the son of Gorlois, not the King;
  This is the son of Anton, not the King.'

     And Arthur, passing thence to battle, felt
  Travail, and throes and agonies of the life,
  Desiring to be joined with Guinevere;
  And thinking as he rode, 'Her father said
  That there between the man and beast they die.
  Shall I not lift her from this land of beasts
  Up to my throne, and side by side with me?
  What happiness to reign a lonely king,
  Vext--O ye stars that shudder over me,
  O earth that soundest hollow under me,
  Vext with waste dreams? for saving I be joined
  To her that is the fairest under heaven,
  I seem as nothing in the mighty world,
  And cannot will my will, nor work my work
  Wholly, nor make myself in mine own realm
  Victor and lord.  But were I joined with her,
  Then might we live together as one life,
  And reigning with one will in everything
  Have power on this dark land to lighten it,
  And power on this dead world to make it live.'

     Thereafter--as he speaks who tells the tale--
  When Arthur reached a field-of-battle bright
  With pitched pavilions of his foe, the world
  Was all so clear about him, that he saw
  The smallest rock far on the faintest hill,
  And even in high day the morning star.
  So when the King had set his banner broad,
  At once from either side, with trumpet-blast,
  And shouts, and clarions shrilling unto blood,
  The long-lanced battle let their horses run.
  And now the Barons and the kings prevailed,
  And now the King, as here and there that war
  Went swaying; but the Powers who walk the world
  Made lightnings and great thunders over him,
  And dazed all eyes, till Arthur by main might,
  And mightier of his hands with every blow,
  And leading all his knighthood threw the kings
  Carados, Urien, Cradlemont of Wales,
  Claudias, and Clariance of Northumberland,
  The King Brandagoras of Latangor,
  With Anguisant of Erin, Morganore,
  And Lot of Orkney.  Then, before a voice
  As dreadful as the shout of one who sees
  To one who sins, and deems himself alone
  And all the world asleep, they swerved and brake
  Flying, and Arthur called to stay the brands
  That hacked among the flyers, 'Ho! they yield!'
  So like a painted battle the war stood
  Silenced, the living quiet as the dead,
  And in the heart of Arthur joy was lord.
  He laughed upon his warrior whom he loved
  And honoured most.  'Thou dost not doubt me King,
  So well thine arm hath wrought for me today.'
  'Sir and my liege,' he cried, 'the fire of God
  Descends upon thee in the battle-field:
  I know thee for my King!'  Whereat the two,
  For each had warded either in the fight,
  Sware on the field of death a deathless love.
  And Arthur said, 'Man's word is God in man:
  Let chance what will, I trust thee to the death.'

     Then quickly from the foughten field he sent
  Ulfius, and Brastias, and Bedivere,
  His new-made knights, to King Leodogran,
  Saying, 'If I in aught have served thee well,
  Give me thy daughter Guinevere to wife.'

     Whom when he heard, Leodogran in heart
  Debating--'How should I that am a king,
  However much he holp me at my need,
  Give my one daughter saving to a king,
  And a king's son?'--lifted his voice, and called
  A hoary man, his chamberlain, to whom
  He trusted all things, and of him required
  His counsel:  'Knowest thou aught of Arthur's birth?'

     Then spake the hoary chamberlain and said,
  'Sir King, there be but two old men that know:
  And each is twice as old as I; and one
  Is Merlin, the wise man that ever served
  King Uther through his magic art; and one
  Is Merlin's master (so they call him) Bleys,
  Who taught him magic, but the scholar ran
  Before the master, and so far, that Bleys,
  Laid magic by, and sat him down, and wrote
  All things and whatsoever Merlin did
  In one great annal-book, where after-years
  Will learn the secret of our Arthur's birth.'

     To whom the King Leodogran replied,
  'O friend, had I been holpen half as well
  By this King Arthur as by thee today,
  Then beast and man had had their share of me:
  But summon here before us yet once more
  Ulfius, and Brastias, and Bedivere.'

     Then, when they came before him, the King said,
  'I have seen the cuckoo chased by lesser fowl,
  And reason in the chase:  but wherefore now
  Do these your lords stir up the heat of war,
  Some calling Arthur born of Gorlois,
  Others of Anton?  Tell me, ye yourselves,
  Hold ye this Arthur for King Uther's son?'

     And Ulfius and Brastias answered, 'Ay.'
  Then Bedivere, the first of all his knights
  Knighted by Arthur at his crowning, spake--
  For bold in heart and act and word was he,
  Whenever slander breathed against the King--

     'Sir, there be many rumours on this head:
  For there be those who hate him in their hearts,
  Call him baseborn, and since his ways are sweet,
  And theirs are bestial, hold him less than man:
  And there be those who deem him more than man,
  And dream he dropt from heaven:  but my belief
  In all this matter--so ye care to learn--
  Sir, for ye know that in King Uther's time
  The prince and warrior Gorlois, he that held
  Tintagil castle by the Cornish sea,
  Was wedded with a winsome wife, Ygerne:
  And daughters had she borne him,--one whereof,
  Lot's wife, the Queen of Orkney, Bellicent,
  Hath ever like a loyal sister cleaved
  To Arthur,--but a son she had not borne.
  And Uther cast upon her eyes of love:
  But she, a stainless wife to Gorlois,
  So loathed the bright dishonour of his love,
  That Gorlois and King Uther went to war:
  And overthrown was Gorlois and slain.
  Then Uther in his wrath and heat besieged
  Ygerne within Tintagil, where her men,
  Seeing the mighty swarm about their walls,
  Left her and fled, and Uther entered in,
  And there was none to call to but himself.
  So, compassed by the power of the King,
  Enforced was she to wed him in her tears,
  And with a shameful swiftness:  afterward,
  Not many moons, King Uther died himself,
  Moaning and wailing for an heir to rule
  After him, lest the realm should go to wrack.
  And that same night, the night of the new year,
  By reason of the bitterness and grief
  That vext his mother, all before his time
  Was Arthur born, and all as soon as born
  Delivered at a secret postern-gate
  To Merlin, to be holden far apart
  Until his hour should come; because the lords
  Of that fierce day were as the lords of this,
  Wild beasts, and surely would have torn the child
  Piecemeal among them, had they known; for each
  But sought to rule for his own self and hand,
  And many hated Uther for the sake
  Of Gorlois.  Wherefore Merlin took the child,
  And gave him to Sir Anton, an old knight
  And ancient friend of Uther; and his wife
  Nursed the young prince, and reared him with her own;
  And no man knew.  And ever since the lords
  Have foughten like wild beasts among themselves,
  So that the realm has gone to wrack:  but now,
  This year, when Merlin (for his hour had come)
  Brought Arthur forth, and set him in the hall,
  Proclaiming, "Here is Uther's heir, your king,"
  A hundred voices cried, "Away with him!
  No king of ours! a son of Gorlois he,
  Or else the child of Anton, and no king,
  Or else baseborn."  Yet Merlin through his craft,
  And while the people clamoured for a king,
  Had Arthur crowned; but after, the great lords
  Banded, and so brake out in open war.'

     Then while the King debated with himself
  If Arthur were the child of shamefulness,
  Or born the son of Gorlois, after death,
  Or Uther's son, and born before his time,
  Or whether there were truth in anything
  Said by these three, there came to Cameliard,
  With Gawain and young Modred, her two sons,
  Lot's wife, the Queen of Orkney, Bellicent;
  Whom as he could, not as he would, the King
  Made feast for, saying, as they sat at meat,

     'A doubtful throne is ice on summer seas.
  Ye come from Arthur's court.  Victor his men
  Report him!  Yea, but ye--think ye this king--
  So many those that hate him, and so strong,
  So few his knights, however brave they be--
  Hath body enow to hold his foemen down?'

     'O King,' she cried, 'and I will tell thee:  few,
  Few, but all brave, all of one mind with him;
  For I was near him when the savage yells
  Of Uther's peerage died, and Arthur sat
  Crowned on the dais, and his warriors cried,
  "Be thou the king, and we will work thy will
  Who love thee."  Then the King in low deep tones,
  And simple words of great authority,
  Bound them by so strait vows to his own self,
  That when they rose, knighted from kneeling, some
  Were pale as at the passing of a ghost,
  Some flushed, and others dazed, as one who wakes
  Half-blinded at the coming of a light.

     'But when he spake and cheered his Table Round
  With large, divine, and comfortable words,
  Beyond my tongue to tell thee--I beheld
  From eye to eye through all their Order flash
  A momentary likeness of the King:
  And ere it left their faces, through the cross
  And those around it and the Crucified,
  Down from the casement over Arthur, smote
  Flame-colour, vert and azure, in three rays,
  One falling upon each of three fair queens,
  Who stood in silence near his throne, the friends
  Of Arthur, gazing on him, tall, with bright
  Sweet faces, who will help him at his need.

     'And there I saw mage Merlin, whose vast wit
  And hundred winters are but as the hands
  Of loyal vassals toiling for their liege.

     'And near him stood the Lady of the Lake,
  Who knows a subtler magic than his own--
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful.
  She gave the King his huge cross-hilted sword,
  Whereby to drive the heathen out:  a mist
  Of incense curled about her, and her face
  Wellnigh was hidden in the minster gloom;
  But there was heard among the holy hymns
  A voice as of the waters, for she dwells
  Down in a deep; calm, whatsoever storms
  May shake the world, and when the surface rolls,
  Hath power to walk the waters like our Lord.

     'There likewise I beheld Excalibur
  Before him at his crowning borne, the sword
  That rose from out the bosom of the lake,
  And Arthur rowed across and took it--rich
  With jewels, elfin Urim, on the hilt,
  Bewildering heart and eye--the blade so bright
  That men are blinded by it--on one side,
  Graven in the oldest tongue of all this world,
  "Take me," but turn the blade and ye shall see,
  And written in the speech ye speak yourself,
  "Cast me away!"  And sad was Arthur's face
  Taking it, but old Merlin counselled him,
  "Take thou and strike! the time to cast away
  Is yet far-off."  So this great brand the king
  Took, and by this will beat his foemen down.'

     Thereat Leodogran rejoiced, but thought
  To sift his doubtings to the last, and asked,
  Fixing full eyes of question on her face,
  'The swallow and the swift are near akin,
  But thou art closer to this noble prince,
  Being his own dear sister;' and she said,
  'Daughter of Gorlois and Ygerne am I;'
  'And therefore Arthur's sister?' asked the King.
  She answered, 'These be secret things,' and signed
  To those two sons to pass, and let them be.
  And Gawain went, and breaking into song
  Sprang out, and followed by his flying hair
  Ran like a colt, and leapt at all he saw:
  But Modred laid his ear beside the doors,
  And there half-heard; the same that afterward
  Struck for the throne, and striking found his doom.

     And then the Queen made answer, 'What know I?
  For dark my mother was in eyes and hair,
  And dark in hair and eyes am I; and dark
  Was Gorlois, yea and dark was Uther too,
  Wellnigh to blackness; but this King is fair
  Beyond the race of Britons and of men.
  Moreover, always in my mind I hear
  A cry from out the dawning of my life,
  A mother weeping, and I hear her say,
  "O that ye had some brother, pretty one,
  To guard thee on the rough ways of the world."'

     'Ay,' said the King, 'and hear ye such a cry?
  But when did Arthur chance upon thee first?'

     'O King!' she cried, 'and I will tell thee true:
  He found me first when yet a little maid:
  Beaten I had been for a little fault
  Whereof I was not guilty; and out I ran
  And flung myself down on a bank of heath,
  And hated this fair world and all therein,
  And wept, and wished that I were dead; and he--
  I know not whether of himself he came,
  Or brought by Merlin, who, they say, can walk
  Unseen at pleasure--he was at my side,
  And spake sweet words, and comforted my heart,
  And dried my tears, being a child with me.
  And many a time he came, and evermore
  As I grew greater grew with me; and sad
  At times he seemed, and sad with him was I,
  Stern too at times, and then I loved him not,
  But sweet again, and then I loved him well.
  And now of late I see him less and less,
  But those first days had golden hours for me,
  For then I surely thought he would be king.

     'But let me tell thee now another tale:
  For Bleys, our Merlin's master, as they say,
  Died but of late, and sent his cry to me,
  To hear him speak before he left his life.
  Shrunk like a fairy changeling lay the mage;
  And when I entered told me that himself
  And Merlin ever served about the King,
  Uther, before he died; and on the night
  When Uther in Tintagil past away
  Moaning and wailing for an heir, the two
  Left the still King, and passing forth to breathe,
  Then from the castle gateway by the chasm
  Descending through the dismal night--a night
  In which the bounds of heaven and earth were lost--
  Beheld, so high upon the dreary deeps
  It seemed in heaven, a ship, the shape thereof
  A dragon winged, and all from stern to stern
  Bright with a shining people on the decks,
  And gone as soon as seen.  And then the two
  Dropt to the cove, and watched the great sea fall,
  Wave after wave, each mightier than the last,
  Till last, a ninth one, gathering half the deep
  And full of voices, slowly rose and plunged
  Roaring, and all the wave was in a flame:
  And down the wave and in the flame was borne
  A naked babe, and rode to Merlin's feet,
  Who stoopt and caught the babe, and cried "The King!
  Here is an heir for Uther!"  And the fringe
  Of that great breaker, sweeping up the strand,
  Lashed at the wizard as he spake the word,
  And all at once all round him rose in fire,
  So that the child and he were clothed in fire.
  And presently thereafter followed calm,
  Free sky and stars:  "And this the same child," he said,
  "Is he who reigns; nor could I part in peace
  Till this were told."  And saying this the seer
  Went through the strait and dreadful pass of death,
  Not ever to be questioned any more
  Save on the further side; but when I met
  Merlin, and asked him if these things were truth--
  The shining dragon and the naked child
  Descending in the glory of the seas--
  He laughed as is his wont, and answered me
  In riddling triplets of old time, and said:

     '"Rain, rain, and sun! a rainbow in the sky!
  A young man will be wiser by and by;
  An old man's wit may wander ere he die.
     Rain, rain, and sun! a rainbow on the lea!
  And truth is this to me, and that to thee;
  And truth or clothed or naked let it be.
     Rain, sun, and rain! and the free blossom blows:
  Sun, rain, and sun! and where is he who knows?
  From the great deep to the great deep he goes."

     'So Merlin riddling angered me; but thou
  Fear not to give this King thy only child,
  Guinevere:  so great bards of him will sing
  Hereafter; and dark sayings from of old
  Ranging and ringing through the minds of men,
  And echoed by old folk beside their fires
  For comfort after their wage-work is done,
  Speak of the King; and Merlin in our time
  Hath spoken also, not in jest, and sworn
  Though men may wound him that he will not die,
  But pass, again to come; and then or now
  Utterly smite the heathen underfoot,
  Till these and all men hail him for their king.'

     She spake and King Leodogran rejoiced,
  But musing, 'Shall I answer yea or nay?'
  Doubted, and drowsed, nodded and slept, and saw,
  Dreaming, a slope of land that ever grew,
  Field after field, up to a height, the peak
  Haze-hidden, and thereon a phantom king,
  Now looming, and now lost; and on the slope
  The sword rose, the hind fell, the herd was driven,
  Fire glimpsed; and all the land from roof and rick,
  In drifts of smoke before a rolling wind,
  Streamed to the peak, and mingled with the haze
  And made it thicker; while the phantom king
  Sent out at times a voice; and here or there
  Stood one who pointed toward the voice, the rest
  Slew on and burnt, crying, 'No king of ours,
  No son of Uther, and no king of ours;'
  Till with a wink his dream was changed, the haze
  Descended, and the solid earth became
  As nothing, but the King stood out in heaven,
  Crowned.  And Leodogran awoke, and sent
  Ulfius, and Brastias and Bedivere,
  Back to the court of Arthur answering yea.

     Then Arthur charged his warrior whom he loved
  And honoured most, Sir Lancelot, to ride forth
  And bring the Queen;--and watched him from the gates:
  And Lancelot past away among the flowers,
  (For then was latter April) and returned
  Among the flowers, in May, with Guinevere.
  To whom arrived, by Dubric the high saint,
  Chief of the church in Britain, and before
  The stateliest of her altar-shrines, the King
  That morn was married, while in stainless white,
  The fair beginners of a nobler time,
  And glorying in their vows and him, his knights
  Stood around him, and rejoicing in his joy.
  Far shone the fields of May through open door,
  The sacred altar blossomed white with May,
  The Sun of May descended on their King,
  They gazed on all earth's beauty in their Queen,
  Rolled incense, and there past along the hymns
  A voice as of the waters, while the two
  Sware at the shrine of Christ a deathless love:
  And Arthur said, 'Behold, thy doom is mine.
  Let chance what will, I love thee to the death!'
  To whom the Queen replied with drooping eyes,
  'King and my lord, I love thee to the death!'
  And holy Dubric spread his hands and spake,
  'Reign ye, and live and love, and make the world
  Other, and may thy Queen be one with thee,
  And all this Order of thy Table Round
  Fulfil the boundless purpose of their King!'

     So Dubric said; but when they left the shrine
  Great Lords from Rome before the portal stood,
  In scornful stillness gazing as they past;
  Then while they paced a city all on fire
  With sun and cloth of gold, the trumpets blew,
  And Arthur's knighthood sang before the King:--

     'Blow, trumpet, for the world is white with May;
  Blow trumpet, the long night hath rolled away!
  Blow through the living world--"Let the King reign."

     'Shall Rome or Heathen rule in Arthur's realm?
  Flash brand and lance, fall battleaxe upon helm,
  Fall battleaxe, and flash brand!  Let the King reign.

     'Strike for the King and live! his knights have heard
  That God hath told the King a secret word.
  Fall battleaxe, and flash brand!  Let the King reign.

     'Blow trumpet! he will lift us from the dust.
  Blow trumpet! live the strength and die the lust!
  Clang battleaxe, and clash brand!  Let the King reign.

     'Strike for the King and die! and if thou diest,
  The King is King, and ever wills the highest.
  Clang battleaxe, and clash brand!  Let the King reign.

     'Blow, for our Sun is mighty in his May!
  Blow, for our Sun is mightier day by day!
  Clang battleaxe, and clash brand!  Let the King reign.

     'The King will follow Christ, and we the King
  In whom high God hath breathed a secret thing.
  Fall battleaxe, and flash brand!  Let the King reign.'

     So sang the knighthood, moving to their hall.
  There at the banquet those great Lords from Rome,
  The slowly-fading mistress of the world,
  Strode in, and claimed their tribute as of yore.
  But Arthur spake, 'Behold, for these have sworn
  To wage my wars, and worship me their King;
  The old order changeth, yielding place to new;
  And we that fight for our fair father Christ,
  Seeing that ye be grown too weak and old
  To drive the heathen from your Roman wall,
  No tribute will we pay:' so those great lords
  Drew back in wrath, and Arthur strove with Rome.

     And Arthur and his knighthood for a space
  Were all one will, and through that strength the King
  Drew in the petty princedoms under him,
  Fought, and in twelve great battles overcame
  The heathen hordes, and made a realm and reigned.



  Gareth and Lynette

  The last tall son of Lot and Bellicent,
  And tallest, Gareth, in a showerful spring
  Stared at the spate.  A slender-shafted Pine
  Lost footing, fell, and so was whirled away.
  'How he went down,' said Gareth, 'as a false knight
  Or evil king before my lance if lance
  Were mine to use--O senseless cataract,
  Bearing all down in thy precipitancy--
  And yet thou art but swollen with cold snows
  And mine is living blood:  thou dost His will,
  The Maker's, and not knowest, and I that know,
  Have strength and wit, in my good mother's hall
  Linger with vacillating obedience,
  Prisoned, and kept and coaxed and whistled to--
  Since the good mother holds me still a child!
  Good mother is bad mother unto me!
  A worse were better; yet no worse would I.
  Heaven yield her for it, but in me put force
  To weary her ears with one continuous prayer,
  Until she let me fly discaged to sweep
  In ever-highering eagle-circles up
  To the great Sun of Glory, and thence swoop
  Down upon all things base, and dash them dead,
  A knight of Arthur, working out his will,
  To cleanse the world.  Why, Gawain, when he came
  With Modred hither in the summertime,
  Asked me to tilt with him, the proven knight.
  Modred for want of worthier was the judge.
  Then I so shook him in the saddle, he said,
  "Thou hast half prevailed against me," said so--he--
  Though Modred biting his thin lips was mute,
  For he is alway sullen:  what care I?'

     And Gareth went, and hovering round her chair
  Asked, 'Mother, though ye count me still the child,
  Sweet mother, do ye love the child?'  She laughed,
  'Thou art but a wild-goose to question it.'
  'Then, mother, an ye love the child,' he said,
  'Being a goose and rather tame than wild,
  Hear the child's story.'  'Yea, my well-beloved,
  An 'twere but of the goose and golden eggs.'

     And Gareth answered her with kindling eyes,
  'Nay, nay, good mother, but this egg of mine
  Was finer gold than any goose can lay;
  For this an Eagle, a royal Eagle, laid
  Almost beyond eye-reach, on such a palm
  As glitters gilded in thy Book of Hours.
  And there was ever haunting round the palm
  A lusty youth, but poor, who often saw
  The splendour sparkling from aloft, and thought
  "An I could climb and lay my hand upon it,
  Then were I wealthier than a leash of kings."
  But ever when he reached a hand to climb,
  One, that had loved him from his childhood, caught
  And stayed him, "Climb not lest thou break thy neck,
  I charge thee by my love," and so the boy,
  Sweet mother, neither clomb, nor brake his neck,
  But brake his very heart in pining for it,
  And past away.'

                 To whom the mother said,
  'True love, sweet son, had risked himself and climbed,
  And handed down the golden treasure to him.'

     And Gareth answered her with kindling eyes,
  'Gold?' said I gold?--ay then, why he, or she,
  Or whosoe'er it was, or half the world
  Had ventured--had the thing I spake of been
  Mere gold--but this was all of that true steel,
  Whereof they forged the brand Excalibur,
  And lightnings played about it in the storm,
  And all the little fowl were flurried at it,
  And there were cries and clashings in the nest,
  That sent him from his senses:  let me go.'

     Then Bellicent bemoaned herself and said,
  'Hast thou no pity upon my loneliness?
  Lo, where thy father Lot beside the hearth
  Lies like a log, and all but smouldered out!
  For ever since when traitor to the King
  He fought against him in the Barons' war,
  And Arthur gave him back his territory,
  His age hath slowly droopt, and now lies there
  A yet-warm corpse, and yet unburiable,
  No more; nor sees, nor hears, nor speaks, nor knows.
  And both thy brethren are in Arthur's hall,
  Albeit neither loved with that full love
  I feel for thee, nor worthy such a love:
  Stay therefore thou; red berries charm the bird,
  And thee, mine innocent, the jousts, the wars,
  Who never knewest finger-ache, nor pang
  Of wrenched or broken limb--an often chance
  In those brain-stunning shocks, and tourney-falls,
  Frights to my heart; but stay:  follow the deer
  By these tall firs and our fast-falling burns;
  So make thy manhood mightier day by day;
  Sweet is the chase:  and I will seek thee out
  Some comfortable bride and fair, to grace
  Thy climbing life, and cherish my prone year,
  Till falling into Lot's forgetfulness
  I know not thee, myself, nor anything.
  Stay, my best son! ye are yet more boy than man.'

     Then Gareth, 'An ye hold me yet for child,
  Hear yet once more the story of the child.
  For, mother, there was once a King, like ours.
  The prince his heir, when tall and marriageable,
  Asked for a bride; and thereupon the King
  Set two before him.  One was fair, strong, armed--
  But to be won by force--and many men
  Desired her; one good lack, no man desired.
  And these were the conditions of the King:
  That save he won the first by force, he needs
  Must wed that other, whom no man desired,
  A red-faced bride who knew herself so vile,
  That evermore she longed to hide herself,
  Nor fronted man or woman, eye to eye--
  Yea--some she cleaved to, but they died of her.
  And one--they called her Fame; and one,--O Mother,
  How can ye keep me tethered to you--Shame.
  Man am I grown, a man's work must I do.
  Follow the deer? follow the Christ, the King,
  Live pure, speak true, right wrong, follow the King--
  Else, wherefore born?'

                        To whom the mother said
  'Sweet son, for there be many who deem him not,
  Or will not deem him, wholly proven King--
  Albeit in mine own heart I knew him King,
  When I was frequent with him in my youth,
  And heard him Kingly speak, and doubted him
  No more than he, himself; but felt him mine,
  Of closest kin to me:  yet--wilt thou leave
  Thine easeful biding here, and risk thine all,
  Life, limbs, for one that is not proven King?
  Stay, till the cloud that settles round his birth
  Hath lifted but a little.  Stay, sweet son.'

     And Gareth answered quickly, 'Not an hour,
  So that ye yield me--I will walk through fire,
  Mother, to gain it--your full leave to go.
  Not proven, who swept the dust of ruined Rome
  From off the threshold of the realm, and crushed
  The Idolaters, and made the people free?
  Who should be King save him who makes us free?'

     So when the Queen, who long had sought in vain
  To break him from the intent to which he grew,
  Found her son's will unwaveringly one,
  She answered craftily, 'Will ye walk through fire?
  Who walks through fire will hardly heed the smoke.
  Ay, go then, an ye must:  only one proof,
  Before thou ask the King to make thee knight,
  Of thine obedience and thy love to me,
  Thy mother,--I demand.

                        And Gareth cried,
  'A hard one, or a hundred, so I go.
  Nay--quick! the proof to prove me to the quick!'

     But slowly spake the mother looking at him,
  'Prince, thou shalt go disguised to Arthur's hall,
  And hire thyself to serve for meats and drinks
  Among the scullions and the kitchen-knaves,
  And those that hand the dish across the bar.
  Nor shalt thou tell thy name to anyone.
  And thou shalt serve a twelvemonth and a day.'

     For so the Queen believed that when her son
  Beheld his only way to glory lead
  Low down through villain kitchen-vassalage,
  Her own true Gareth was too princely-proud
  To pass thereby; so should he rest with her,
  Closed in her castle from the sound of arms.

     Silent awhile was Gareth, then replied,
  'The thrall in person may be free in soul,
  And I shall see the jousts.  Thy son am I,
  And since thou art my mother, must obey.
  I therefore yield me freely to thy will;
  For hence will I, disguised, and hire myself
  To serve with scullions and with kitchen-knaves;
  Nor tell my name to any--no, not the King.'

     Gareth awhile lingered.  The mother's eye
  Full of the wistful fear that he would go,
  And turning toward him wheresoe'er he turned,
  Perplext his outward purpose, till an hour,
  When wakened by the wind which with full voice
  Swept bellowing through the darkness on to dawn,
  He rose, and out of slumber calling two
  That still had tended on him from his birth,
  Before the wakeful mother heard him, went.

     The three were clad like tillers of the soil.
  Southward they set their faces.  The birds made
  Melody on branch, and melody in mid air.
  The damp hill-slopes were quickened into green,
  And the live green had kindled into flowers,
  For it was past the time of Easterday.

     So, when their feet were planted on the plain
  That broadened toward the base of Camelot,
  Far off they saw the silver-misty morn
  Rolling her smoke about the Royal mount,
  That rose between the forest and the field.
  At times the summit of the high city flashed;
  At times the spires and turrets half-way down
  Pricked through the mist; at times the great gate shone
  Only, that opened on the field below:
  Anon, the whole fair city had disappeared.

     Then those who went with Gareth were amazed,
  One crying, 'Let us go no further, lord.
  Here is a city of Enchanters, built
  By fairy Kings.'  The second echoed him,
  'Lord, we have heard from our wise man at home
  To Northward, that this King is not the King,
  But only changeling out of Fairyland,
  Who drave the heathen hence by sorcery
  And Merlin's glamour.'  Then the first again,
  'Lord, there is no such city anywhere,
  But all a vision.'

                    Gareth answered them
  With laughter, swearing he had glamour enow
  In his own blood, his princedom, youth and hopes,
  To plunge old Merlin in the Arabian sea;
  So pushed them all unwilling toward the gate.
  And there was no gate like it under heaven.
  For barefoot on the keystone, which was lined
  And rippled like an ever-fleeting wave,
  The Lady of the Lake stood:  all her dress
  Wept from her sides as water flowing away;
  But like the cross her great and goodly arms
  Stretched under the cornice and upheld:
  And drops of water fell from either hand;
  And down from one a sword was hung, from one
  A censer, either worn with wind and storm;
  And o'er her breast floated the sacred fish;
  And in the space to left of her, and right,
  Were Arthur's wars in weird devices done,
  New things and old co-twisted, as if Time
  Were nothing, so inveterately, that men
  Were giddy gazing there; and over all
  High on the top were those three Queens, the friends
  Of Arthur, who should help him at his need.

     Then those with Gareth for so long a space
  Stared at the figures, that at last it seemed
  The dragon-boughts and elvish emblemings
  Began to move, seethe, twine and curl:  they called
  To Gareth, 'Lord, the gateway is alive.'

     And Gareth likewise on them fixt his eyes
  So long, that even to him they seemed to move.
  Out of the city a blast of music pealed.
  Back from the gate started the three, to whom
  From out thereunder came an ancient man,
  Long-bearded, saying, 'Who be ye, my sons?'

     Then Gareth, 'We be tillers of the soil,
  Who leaving share in furrow come to see
  The glories of our King:  but these, my men,
  (Your city moved so weirdly in the mist)
  Doubt if the King be King at all, or come
  From Fairyland; and whether this be built
  By magic, and by fairy Kings and Queens;
  Or whether there be any city at all,
  Or all a vision:  and this music now
  Hath scared them both, but tell thou these the truth.'

     Then that old Seer made answer playing on him
  And saying, 'Son, I have seen the good ship sail
  Keel upward, and mast downward, in the heavens,
  And solid turrets topsy-turvy in air:
  And here is truth; but an it please thee not,
  Take thou the truth as thou hast told it me.
  For truly as thou sayest, a Fairy King
  And Fairy Queens have built the city, son;
  They came from out a sacred mountain-cleft
  Toward the sunrise, each with harp in hand,
  And built it to the music of their harps.
  And, as thou sayest, it is enchanted, son,
  For there is nothing in it as it seems
  Saving the King; though some there be that hold
  The King a shadow, and the city real:
  Yet take thou heed of him, for, so thou pass
  Beneath this archway, then wilt thou become
  A thrall to his enchantments, for the King
  Will bind thee by such vows, as is a shame
  A man should not be bound by, yet the which
  No man can keep; but, so thou dread to swear,
  Pass not beneath this gateway, but abide
  Without, among the cattle of the field.
  For an ye heard a music, like enow
  They are building still, seeing the city is built
  To music, therefore never built at all,
  And therefore built for ever.'

                                Gareth spake
  Angered, 'Old master, reverence thine own beard
  That looks as white as utter truth, and seems
  Wellnigh as long as thou art statured tall!
  Why mockest thou the stranger that hath been
  To thee fair-spoken?'

                       But the Seer replied,
  'Know ye not then the Riddling of the Bards?
  "Confusion, and illusion, and relation,
  Elusion, and occasion, and evasion"?
  I mock thee not but as thou mockest me,
  And all that see thee, for thou art not who
  Thou seemest, but I know thee who thou art.
  And now thou goest up to mock the King,
  Who cannot brook the shadow of any lie.'

     Unmockingly the mocker ending here
  Turned to the right, and past along the plain;
  Whom Gareth looking after said, 'My men,
  Our one white lie sits like a little ghost
  Here on the threshold of our enterprise.
  Let love be blamed for it, not she, nor I:
  Well, we will make amends.'

                             With all good cheer
  He spake and laughed, then entered with his twain
  Camelot, a city of shadowy palaces
  And stately, rich in emblem and the work
  Of ancient kings who did their days in stone;
  Which Merlin's hand, the Mage at Arthur's court,
  Knowing all arts, had touched, and everywhere
  At Arthur's ordinance, tipt with lessening peak
  And pinnacle, and had made it spire to heaven.
  And ever and anon a knight would pass
  Outward, or inward to the hall:  his arms
  Clashed; and the sound was good to Gareth's ear.
  And out of bower and casement shyly glanced
  Eyes of pure women, wholesome stars of love;
  And all about a healthful people stept
  As in the presence of a gracious king.

     Then into hall Gareth ascending heard
  A voice, the voice of Arthur, and beheld
  Far over heads in that long-vaulted hall
  The splendour of the presence of the King
  Throned, and delivering doom--and looked no more--
  But felt his young heart hammering in his ears,
  And thought, 'For this half-shadow of a lie
  The truthful King will doom me when I speak.'
  Yet pressing on, though all in fear to find
  Sir Gawain or Sir Modred, saw nor one
  Nor other, but in all the listening eyes
  Of those tall knights, that ranged about the throne,
  Clear honour shining like the dewy star
  Of dawn, and faith in their great King, with pure
  Affection, and the light of victory,
  And glory gained, and evermore to gain.
     Then came a widow crying to the King,
  'A boon, Sir King!  Thy father, Uther, reft
  From my dead lord a field with violence:
  For howsoe'er at first he proffered gold,
  Yet, for the field was pleasant in our eyes,
  We yielded not; and then he reft us of it
  Perforce, and left us neither gold nor field.'

     Said Arthur, 'Whether would ye? gold or field?'
  To whom the woman weeping, 'Nay, my lord,
  The field was pleasant in my husband's eye.'

     And Arthur, 'Have thy pleasant field again,
  And thrice the gold for Uther's use thereof,
  According to the years.  No boon is here,
  But justice, so thy say be proven true.
  Accursed, who from the wrongs his father did
  Would shape himself a right!'

                               And while she past,
  Came yet another widow crying to him,
  'A boon, Sir King!  Thine enemy, King, am I.
  With thine own hand thou slewest my dear lord,
  A knight of Uther in the Barons' war,
  When Lot and many another rose and fought
  Against thee, saying thou wert basely born.
  I held with these, and loathe to ask thee aught.
  Yet lo! my husband's brother had my son
  Thralled in his castle, and hath starved him dead;
  And standeth seized of that inheritance
  Which thou that slewest the sire hast left the son.
  So though I scarce can ask it thee for hate,
  Grant me some knight to do the battle for me,
  Kill the foul thief, and wreak me for my son.'

     Then strode a good knight forward, crying to him,
  'A boon, Sir King!  I am her kinsman, I.
  Give me to right her wrong, and slay the man.'

     Then came Sir Kay, the seneschal, and cried,
  'A boon, Sir King! even that thou grant her none,
  This railer, that hath mocked thee in full hall--
  None; or the wholesome boon of gyve and gag.'

     But Arthur, 'We sit King, to help the wronged
  Through all our realm.  The woman loves her lord.
  Peace to thee, woman, with thy loves and hates!
  The kings of old had doomed thee to the flames,
  Aurelius Emrys would have scourged thee dead,
  And Uther slit thy tongue:  but get thee hence--
  Lest that rough humour of the kings of old
  Return upon me!  Thou that art her kin,
  Go likewise; lay him low and slay him not,
  But bring him here, that I may judge the right,
  According to the justice of the King:
  Then, be he guilty, by that deathless King
  Who lived and died for men, the man shall die.'

     Then came in hall the messenger of Mark,
  A name of evil savour in the land,
  The Cornish king.  In either hand he bore
  What dazzled all, and shone far-off as shines
  A field of charlock in the sudden sun
  Between two showers, a cloth of palest gold,
  Which down he laid before the throne, and knelt,
  Delivering, that his lord, the vassal king,
  Was even upon his way to Camelot;
  For having heard that Arthur of his grace
  Had made his goodly cousin, Tristram, knight,
  And, for himself was of the greater state,
  Being a king, he trusted his liege-lord
  Would yield him this large honour all the more;
  So prayed him well to accept this cloth of gold,
  In token of true heart and fealty.

     Then Arthur cried to rend the cloth, to rend
  In pieces, and so cast it on the hearth.
  An oak-tree smouldered there.  'The goodly knight!
  What! shall the shield of Mark stand among these?'
  For, midway down the side of that long hall
  A stately pile,--whereof along the front,
  Some blazoned, some but carven, and some blank,
  There ran a treble range of stony shields,--
  Rose, and high-arching overbrowed the hearth.
  And under every shield a knight was named:
  For this was Arthur's custom in his hall;
  When some good knight had done one noble deed,
  His arms were carven only; but if twain
  His arms were blazoned also; but if none,
  The shield was blank and bare without a sign
  Saving the name beneath; and Gareth saw
  The shield of Gawain blazoned rich and bright,
  And Modred's blank as death; and Arthur cried
  To rend the cloth and cast it on the hearth.

     'More like are we to reave him of his crown
  Than make him knight because men call him king.
  The kings we found, ye know we stayed their hands
  From war among themselves, but left them kings;
  Of whom were any bounteous, merciful,
  Truth-speaking, brave, good livers, them we enrolled
  Among us, and they sit within our hall.
  But as Mark hath tarnished the great name of king,
  As Mark would sully the low state of churl:
  And, seeing he hath sent us cloth of gold,
  Return, and meet, and hold him from our eyes,
  Lest we should lap him up in cloth of lead,
  Silenced for ever--craven--a man of plots,
  Craft, poisonous counsels, wayside ambushings--
  No fault of thine:  let Kay the seneschal
  Look to thy wants, and send thee satisfied--
  Accursed, who strikes nor lets the hand be seen!'

     And many another suppliant crying came
  With noise of ravage wrought by beast and man,
  And evermore a knight would ride away.

     Last, Gareth leaning both hands heavily
  Down on the shoulders of the twain, his men,
  Approached between them toward the King, and asked,
  'A boon, Sir King (his voice was all ashamed),
  For see ye not how weak and hungerworn
  I seem--leaning on these? grant me to serve
  For meat and drink among thy kitchen-knaves
  A twelvemonth and a day, nor seek my name.
  Hereafter I will fight.'

                          To him the King,
  'A goodly youth and worth a goodlier boon!
  But so thou wilt no goodlier, then must Kay,
  The master of the meats and drinks, be thine.'

     He rose and past; then Kay, a man of mien
  Wan-sallow as the plant that feels itself
  Root-bitten by white lichen,

                              'Lo ye now!
  This fellow hath broken from some Abbey, where,
  God wot, he had not beef and brewis enow,
  However that might chance! but an he work,
  Like any pigeon will I cram his crop,
  And sleeker shall he shine than any hog.'

     Then Lancelot standing near, 'Sir Seneschal,
  Sleuth-hound thou knowest, and gray, and all the hounds;
  A horse thou knowest, a man thou dost not know:
  Broad brows and fair, a fluent hair and fine,
  High nose, a nostril large and fine, and hands
  Large, fair and fine!--Some young lad's mystery--
  But, or from sheepcot or king's hall, the boy
  Is noble-natured.  Treat him with all grace,
  Lest he should come to shame thy judging of him.'

     Then Kay, 'What murmurest thou of mystery?
  Think ye this fellow will poison the King's dish?
  Nay, for he spake too fool-like:  mystery!
  Tut, an the lad were noble, he had asked
  For horse and armour:  fair and fine, forsooth!
  Sir Fine-face, Sir Fair-hands? but see thou to it
  That thine own fineness, Lancelot, some fine day
  Undo thee not--and leave my man to me.'

     So Gareth all for glory underwent
  The sooty yoke of kitchen-vassalage;
  Ate with young lads his portion by the door,
  And couched at night with grimy kitchen-knaves.
  And Lancelot ever spake him pleasantly,
  But Kay the seneschal, who loved him not,
  Would hustle and harry him, and labour him
  Beyond his comrade of the hearth, and set
  To turn the broach, draw water, or hew wood,
  Or grosser tasks; and Gareth bowed himself
  With all obedience to the King, and wrought
  All kind of service with a noble ease
  That graced the lowliest act in doing it.
  And when the thralls had talk among themselves,
  And one would praise the love that linkt the King
  And Lancelot--how the King had saved his life
  In battle twice, and Lancelot once the King's--
  For Lancelot was the first in Tournament,
  But Arthur mightiest on the battle-field--
  Gareth was glad.  Or if some other told,
  How once the wandering forester at dawn,
  Far over the blue tarns and hazy seas,
  On Caer-Eryri's highest found the King,
  A naked babe, of whom the Prophet spake,
  'He passes to the Isle Avilion,
  He passes and is healed and cannot die'--
  Gareth was glad.  But if their talk were foul,
  Then would he whistle rapid as any lark,
  Or carol some old roundelay, and so loud
  That first they mocked, but, after, reverenced him.
  Or Gareth telling some prodigious tale
  Of knights, who sliced a red life-bubbling way
  Through twenty folds of twisted dragon, held
  All in a gap-mouthed circle his good mates
  Lying or sitting round him, idle hands,
  Charmed; till Sir Kay, the seneschal, would come
  Blustering upon them, like a sudden wind
  Among dead leaves, and drive them all apart.
  Or when the thralls had sport among themselves,
  So there were any trial of mastery,
  He, by two yards in casting bar or stone
  Was counted best; and if there chanced a joust,
  So that Sir Kay nodded him leave to go,
  Would hurry thither, and when he saw the knights
  Clash like the coming and retiring wave,
  And the spear spring, and good horse reel, the boy
  Was half beyond himself for ecstasy.

     So for a month he wrought among the thralls;
  But in the weeks that followed, the good Queen,
  Repentant of the word she made him swear,
  And saddening in her childless castle, sent,
  Between the in-crescent and de-crescent moon,
  Arms for her son, and loosed him from his vow.

     This, Gareth hearing from a squire of Lot
  With whom he used to play at tourney once,
  When both were children, and in lonely haunts
  Would scratch a ragged oval on the sand,
  And each at either dash from either end--
  Shame never made girl redder than Gareth joy.
  He laughed; he sprang.  'Out of the smoke, at once
  I leap from Satan's foot to Peter's knee--
  These news be mine, none other's--nay, the King's--
  Descend into the city:' whereon he sought
  The King alone, and found, and told him all.

     'I have staggered thy strong Gawain in a tilt
  For pastime; yea, he said it:  joust can I.
  Make me thy knight--in secret! let my name
  Be hidden, and give me the first quest, I spring
  Like flame from ashes.'

                         Here the King's calm eye
  Fell on, and checked, and made him flush, and bow
  Lowly, to kiss his hand, who answered him,
  'Son, the good mother let me know thee here,
  And sent her wish that I would yield thee thine.
  Make thee my knight? my knights are sworn to vows
  Of utter hardihood, utter gentleness,
  And, loving, utter faithfulness in love,
  And uttermost obedience to the King.'

     Then Gareth, lightly springing from his knees,
  'My King, for hardihood I can promise thee.
  For uttermost obedience make demand
  Of whom ye gave me to, the Seneschal,
  No mellow master of the meats and drinks!
  And as for love, God wot, I love not yet,
  But love I shall, God willing.'

                                 And the King
  'Make thee my knight in secret? yea, but he,
  Our noblest brother, and our truest man,
  And one with me in all, he needs must know.'

     'Let Lancelot know, my King, let Lancelot know,
  Thy noblest and thy truest!'

                              And the King--
  'But wherefore would ye men should wonder at you?
  Nay, rather for the sake of me, their King,
  And the deed's sake my knighthood do the deed,
  Than to be noised of.'

                        Merrily Gareth asked,
  'Have I not earned my cake in baking of it?
  Let be my name until I make my name!
  My deeds will speak:  it is but for a day.'
  So with a kindly hand on Gareth's arm
  Smiled the great King, and half-unwillingly
  Loving his lusty youthhood yielded to him.
  Then, after summoning Lancelot privily,
  'I have given him the first quest:  he is not proven.
  Look therefore when he calls for this in hall,
  Thou get to horse and follow him far away.
  Cover the lions on thy shield, and see
  Far as thou mayest, he be nor ta'en nor slain.'

     Then that same day there past into the hall
  A damsel of high lineage, and a brow
  May-blossom, and a cheek of apple-blossom,
  Hawk-eyes; and lightly was her slender nose
  Tip-tilted like the petal of a flower;
  She into hall past with her page and cried,

     'O King, for thou hast driven the foe without,
  See to the foe within! bridge, ford, beset
  By bandits, everyone that owns a tower
  The Lord for half a league.  Why sit ye there?
  Rest would I not, Sir King, an I were king,
  Till even the lonest hold were all as free
  From cursed bloodshed, as thine altar-cloth
  From that best blood it is a sin to spill.'

     'Comfort thyself,' said Arthur.  'I nor mine
  Rest:  so my knighthood keep the vows they swore,
  The wastest moorland of our realm shall be
  Safe, damsel, as the centre of this hall.
  What is thy name? thy need?'

                              'My name?' she said--
  'Lynette my name; noble; my need, a knight
  To combat for my sister, Lyonors,
  A lady of high lineage, of great lands,
  And comely, yea, and comelier than myself.
  She lives in Castle Perilous:  a river
  Runs in three loops about her living-place;
  And o'er it are three passings, and three knights
  Defend the passings, brethren, and a fourth
  And of that four the mightiest, holds her stayed
  In her own castle, and so besieges her
  To break her will, and make her wed with him:
  And but delays his purport till thou send
  To do the battle with him, thy chief man
  Sir Lancelot whom he trusts to overthrow,
  Then wed, with glory:  but she will not wed
  Save whom she loveth, or a holy life.
  Now therefore have I come for Lancelot.'

     Then Arthur mindful of Sir Gareth asked,
  'Damsel, ye know this Order lives to crush
  All wrongers of the Realm.  But say, these four,
  Who be they?  What the fashion of the men?'

     'They be of foolish fashion, O Sir King,
  The fashion of that old knight-errantry
  Who ride abroad, and do but what they will;
  Courteous or bestial from the moment, such
  As have nor law nor king; and three of these
  Proud in their fantasy call themselves the Day,
  Morning-Star, and Noon-Sun, and Evening-Star,
  Being strong fools; and never a whit more wise
  The fourth, who alway rideth armed in black,
  A huge man-beast of boundless savagery.
  He names himself the Night and oftener Death,
  And wears a helmet mounted with a skull,
  And bears a skeleton figured on his arms,
  To show that who may slay or scape the three,
  Slain by himself, shall enter endless night.
  And all these four be fools, but mighty men,
  And therefore am I come for Lancelot.'

     Hereat Sir Gareth called from where he rose,
  A head with kindling eyes above the throng,
  'A boon, Sir King--this quest!' then--for he marked
  Kay near him groaning like a wounded bull--
  'Yea, King, thou knowest thy kitchen-knave am I,
  And mighty through thy meats and drinks am I,
  And I can topple over a hundred such.
  Thy promise, King,' and Arthur glancing at him,
  Brought down a momentary brow.  'Rough, sudden,
  And pardonable, worthy to be knight--
  Go therefore,' and all hearers were amazed.

     But on the damsel's forehead shame, pride, wrath
  Slew the May-white:  she lifted either arm,
  'Fie on thee, King! I asked for thy chief knight,
  And thou hast given me but a kitchen-knave.'
  Then ere a man in hall could stay her, turned,
  Fled down the lane of access to the King,
  Took horse, descended the slope street, and past
  The weird white gate, and paused without, beside
  The field of tourney, murmuring 'kitchen-knave.'

     Now two great entries opened from the hall,
  At one end one, that gave upon a range
  Of level pavement where the King would pace
  At sunrise, gazing over plain and wood;
  And down from this a lordly stairway sloped
  Till lost in blowing trees and tops of towers;
  And out by this main doorway past the King.
  But one was counter to the hearth, and rose
  High that the highest-crested helm could ride
  Therethrough nor graze:  and by this entry fled
  The damsel in her wrath, and on to this
  Sir Gareth strode, and saw without the door
  King Arthur's gift, the worth of half a town,
  A warhorse of the best, and near it stood
  The two that out of north had followed him:
  This bare a maiden shield, a casque; that held
  The horse, the spear; whereat Sir Gareth loosed
  A cloak that dropt from collar-bone to heel,
  A cloth of roughest web, and cast it down,
  And from it like a fuel-smothered fire,
  That lookt half-dead, brake bright, and flashed as those
  Dull-coated things, that making slide apart
  Their dusk wing-cases, all beneath there burns
  A jewelled harness, ere they pass and fly.
  So Gareth ere he parted flashed in arms.
  Then as he donned the helm, and took the shield
  And mounted horse and graspt a spear, of grain
  Storm-strengthened on a windy site, and tipt
  With trenchant steel, around him slowly prest
  The people, while from out of kitchen came
  The thralls in throng, and seeing who had worked
  Lustier than any, and whom they could but love,
  Mounted in arms, threw up their caps and cried,
  'God bless the King, and all his fellowship!'
  And on through lanes of shouting Gareth rode
  Down the slope street, and past without the gate.

     So Gareth past with joy; but as the cur
  Pluckt from the cur he fights with, ere his cause
  Be cooled by fighting, follows, being named,
  His owner, but remembers all, and growls
  Remembering, so Sir Kay beside the door
  Muttered in scorn of Gareth whom he used
  To harry and hustle.

                      'Bound upon a quest
  With horse and arms--the King hath past his time--
  My scullion knave!  Thralls to your work again,
  For an your fire be low ye kindle mine!
  Will there be dawn in West and eve in East?
  Begone!--my knave!--belike and like enow
  Some old head-blow not heeded in his youth
  So shook his wits they wander in his prime--
  Crazed!  How the villain lifted up his voice,
  Nor shamed to bawl himself a kitchen-knave.
  Tut:  he was tame and meek enow with me,
  Till peacocked up with Lancelot's noticing.
  Well--I will after my loud knave, and learn
  Whether he know me for his master yet.
  Out of the smoke he came, and so my lance
  Hold, by God's grace, he shall into the mire--
  Thence, if the King awaken from his craze,
  Into the smoke again.'

                        But Lancelot said,
  'Kay, wherefore wilt thou go against the King,
  For that did never he whereon ye rail,
  But ever meekly served the King in thee?
  Abide:  take counsel; for this lad is great
  And lusty, and knowing both of lance and sword.'
  'Tut, tell not me,' said Kay, 'ye are overfine
  To mar stout knaves with foolish courtesies:'
  Then mounted, on through silent faces rode
  Down the slope city, and out beyond the gate.

     But by the field of tourney lingering yet
  Muttered the damsel, 'Wherefore did the King
  Scorn me? for, were Sir Lancelot lackt, at least
  He might have yielded to me one of those
  Who tilt for lady's love and glory here,
  Rather than--O sweet heaven!  O fie upon him--
  His kitchen-knave.'

                     To whom Sir Gareth drew
  (And there were none but few goodlier than he)
  Shining in arms, 'Damsel, the quest is mine.
  Lead, and I follow.'  She thereat, as one
  That smells a foul-fleshed agaric in the holt,
  And deems it carrion of some woodland thing,
  Or shrew, or weasel, nipt her slender nose
  With petulant thumb and finger, shrilling, 'Hence!
  Avoid, thou smellest all of kitchen-grease.
  And look who comes behind,' for there was Kay.
  'Knowest thou not me? thy master? I am Kay.
  We lack thee by the hearth.'

                              And Gareth to him,
  'Master no more! too well I know thee, ay--
  The most ungentle knight in Arthur's hall.'
  'Have at thee then,' said Kay:  they shocked, and Kay
  Fell shoulder-slipt, and Gareth cried again,
  'Lead, and I follow,' and fast away she fled.

     But after sod and shingle ceased to fly
  Behind her, and the heart of her good horse
  Was nigh to burst with violence of the beat,
  Perforce she stayed, and overtaken spoke.

     'What doest thou, scullion, in my fellowship?
  Deem'st thou that I accept thee aught the more
  Or love thee better, that by some device
  Full cowardly, or by mere unhappiness,
  Thou hast overthrown and slain thy master--thou!--
  Dish-washer and broach-turner, loon!--to me
  Thou smellest all of kitchen as before.'

     'Damsel,' Sir Gareth answered gently, 'say
  Whate'er ye will, but whatsoe'er ye say,
  I leave not till I finish this fair quest,
  Or die therefore.'

                    'Ay, wilt thou finish it?
  Sweet lord, how like a noble knight he talks!
  The listening rogue hath caught the manner of it.
  But, knave, anon thou shalt be met with, knave,
  And then by such a one that thou for all
  The kitchen brewis that was ever supt
  Shalt not once dare to look him in the face.'

     'I shall assay,' said Gareth with a smile
  That maddened her, and away she flashed again
  Down the long avenues of a boundless wood,
  And Gareth following was again beknaved.

     'Sir Kitchen-knave, I have missed the only way
  Where Arthur's men are set along the wood;
  The wood is nigh as full of thieves as leaves:
  If both be slain, I am rid of thee; but yet,
  Sir Scullion, canst thou use that spit of thine?
  Fight, an thou canst:  I have missed the only way.'

     So till the dusk that followed evensong
  Rode on the two, reviler and reviled;
  Then after one long slope was mounted, saw,
  Bowl-shaped, through tops of many thousand pines
  A gloomy-gladed hollow slowly sink
  To westward--in the deeps whereof a mere,
  Round as the red eye of an Eagle-owl,
  Under the half-dead sunset glared; and shouts
  Ascended, and there brake a servingman
  Flying from out of the black wood, and crying,
  'They have bound my lord to cast him in the mere.'
  Then Gareth, 'Bound am I to right the wronged,
  But straitlier bound am I to bide with thee.'
  And when the damsel spake contemptuously,
  'Lead, and I follow,' Gareth cried again,
  'Follow, I lead!' so down among the pines
  He plunged; and there, blackshadowed nigh the mere,
  And mid-thigh-deep in bulrushes and reed,
  Saw six tall men haling a seventh along,
  A stone about his neck to drown him in it.
  Three with good blows he quieted, but three
  Fled through the pines; and Gareth loosed the stone
  From off his neck, then in the mere beside
  Tumbled it; oilily bubbled up the mere.
  Last, Gareth loosed his bonds and on free feet
  Set him, a stalwart Baron, Arthur's friend.

     'Well that ye came, or else these caitiff rogues
  Had wreaked themselves on me; good cause is theirs
  To hate me, for my wont hath ever been
  To catch my thief, and then like vermin here
  Drown him, and with a stone about his neck;
  And under this wan water many of them
  Lie rotting, but at night let go the stone,
  And rise, and flickering in a grimly light
  Dance on the mere.  Good now, ye have saved a life
  Worth somewhat as the cleanser of this wood.
  And fain would I reward thee worshipfully.
  What guerdon will ye?'
                        Gareth sharply spake,
  'None! for the deed's sake have I done the deed,
  In uttermost obedience to the King.
  But wilt thou yield this damsel harbourage?'

     Whereat the Baron saying, 'I well believe
  You be of Arthur's Table,' a light laugh
  Broke from Lynette, 'Ay, truly of a truth,
  And in a sort, being Arthur's kitchen-knave!--
  But deem not I accept thee aught the more,
  Scullion, for running sharply with thy spit
  Down on a rout of craven foresters.
  A thresher with his flail had scattered them.
  Nay--for thou smellest of the kitchen still.
  But an this lord will yield us harbourage,
  Well.'

        So she spake.  A league beyond the wood,
  All in a full-fair manor and a rich,
  His towers where that day a feast had been
  Held in high hall, and many a viand left,
  And many a costly cate, received the three.
  And there they placed a peacock in his pride
  Before the damsel, and the Baron set
  Gareth beside her, but at once she rose.

     'Meseems, that here is much discourtesy,
  Setting this knave, Lord Baron, at my side.
  Hear me--this morn I stood in Arthur's hall,
  And prayed the King would grant me Lancelot
  To fight the brotherhood of Day and Night--
  The last a monster unsubduable
  Of any save of him for whom I called--
  Suddenly bawls this frontless kitchen-knave,
  "The quest is mine; thy kitchen-knave am I,
  And mighty through thy meats and drinks am I."
  Then Arthur all at once gone mad replies,
  "Go therefore," and so gives the quest to him--
  Him--here--a villain fitter to stick swine
  Than ride abroad redressing women's wrong,
  Or sit beside a noble gentlewoman.'

     Then half-ashamed and part-amazed, the lord
  Now looked at one and now at other, left
  The damsel by the peacock in his pride,
  And, seating Gareth at another board,
  Sat down beside him, ate and then began.

     'Friend, whether thou be kitchen-knave, or not,
  Or whether it be the maiden's fantasy,
  And whether she be mad, or else the King,
  Or both or neither, or thyself be mad,
  I ask not:  but thou strikest a strong stroke,
  For strong thou art and goodly therewithal,
  And saver of my life; and therefore now,
  For here be mighty men to joust with, weigh
  Whether thou wilt not with thy damsel back
  To crave again Sir Lancelot of the King.
  Thy pardon; I but speak for thine avail,
  The saver of my life.'

                        And Gareth said,
  'Full pardon, but I follow up the quest,
  Despite of Day and Night and Death and Hell.'

     So when, next morn, the lord whose life he saved
  Had, some brief space, conveyed them on their way
  And left them with God-speed, Sir Gareth spake,
  'Lead, and I follow.'  Haughtily she replied.

     'I fly no more:  I allow thee for an hour.
  Lion and stout have isled together, knave,
  In time of flood.  Nay, furthermore, methinks
  Some ruth is mine for thee.  Back wilt thou, fool?
  For hard by here is one will overthrow
  And slay thee:  then will I to court again,
  And shame the King for only yielding me
  My champion from the ashes of his hearth.'

     To whom Sir Gareth answered courteously,
  'Say thou thy say, and I will do my deed.
  Allow me for mine hour, and thou wilt find
  My fortunes all as fair as hers who lay
  Among the ashes and wedded the King's son.'

     Then to the shore of one of those long loops
  Wherethrough the serpent river coiled, they came.
  Rough-thicketed were the banks and steep; the stream
  Full, narrow; this a bridge of single arc
  Took at a leap; and on the further side
  Arose a silk pavilion, gay with gold
  In streaks and rays, and all Lent-lily in hue,
  Save that the dome was purple, and above,
  Crimson, a slender banneret fluttering.
  And therebefore the lawless warrior paced
  Unarmed, and calling, 'Damsel, is this he,
  The champion thou hast brought from Arthur's hall?
  For whom we let thee pass.'  'Nay, nay,' she said,
  'Sir Morning-Star.  The King in utter scorn
  Of thee and thy much folly hath sent thee here
  His kitchen-knave:  and look thou to thyself:
  See that he fall not on thee suddenly,
  And slay thee unarmed:  he is not knight but knave.'

     Then at his call, 'O daughters of the Dawn,
  And servants of the Morning-Star, approach,
  Arm me,' from out the silken curtain-folds
  Bare-footed and bare-headed three fair girls
  In gilt and rosy raiment came:  their feet
  In dewy grasses glistened; and the hair
  All over glanced with dewdrop or with gem
  Like sparkles in the stone Avanturine.
  These armed him in blue arms, and gave a shield
  Blue also, and thereon the morning star.
  And Gareth silent gazed upon the knight,
  Who stood a moment, ere his horse was brought,
  Glorying; and in the stream beneath him, shone
  Immingled with Heaven's azure waveringly,
  The gay pavilion and the naked feet,
  His arms, the rosy raiment, and the star.

     Then she that watched him, 'Wherefore stare ye so?
  Thou shakest in thy fear:  there yet is time:
  Flee down the valley before he get to horse.
  Who will cry shame?  Thou art not knight but knave.'

     Said Gareth, 'Damsel, whether knave or knight,
  Far liefer had I fight a score of times
  Than hear thee so missay me and revile.
  Fair words were best for him who fights for thee;
  But truly foul are better, for they send
  That strength of anger through mine arms, I know
  That I shall overthrow him.'

                              And he that bore
  The star, when mounted, cried from o'er the bridge,
  'A kitchen-knave, and sent in scorn of me!
  Such fight not I, but answer scorn with scorn.
  For this were shame to do him further wrong
  Than set him on his feet, and take his horse
  And arms, and so return him to the King.
  Come, therefore, leave thy lady lightly, knave.
  Avoid:  for it beseemeth not a knave
  To ride with such a lady.'

                            'Dog, thou liest.
  I spring from loftier lineage than thine own.'
  He spake; and all at fiery speed the two
  Shocked on the central bridge, and either spear
  Bent but not brake, and either knight at once,
  Hurled as a stone from out of a catapult
  Beyond his horse's crupper and the bridge,
  Fell, as if dead; but quickly rose and drew,
  And Gareth lashed so fiercely with his brand
  He drave his enemy backward down the bridge,
  The damsel crying, 'Well-stricken, kitchen-knave!'
  Till Gareth's shield was cloven; but one stroke
  Laid him that clove it grovelling on the ground.

     Then cried the fallen, 'Take not my life:  I yield.'
  And Gareth, 'So this damsel ask it of me
  Good--I accord it easily as a grace.'
  She reddening, 'Insolent scullion:  I of thee?
  I bound to thee for any favour asked!'
  'Then he shall die.'  And Gareth there unlaced
  His helmet as to slay him, but she shrieked,
  'Be not so hardy, scullion, as to slay
  One nobler than thyself.'  'Damsel, thy charge
  Is an abounding pleasure to me.  Knight,
  Thy life is thine at her command.  Arise
  And quickly pass to Arthur's hall, and say
  His kitchen-knave hath sent thee.  See thou crave
  His pardon for thy breaking of his laws.
  Myself, when I return, will plead for thee.
  Thy shield is mine--farewell; and, damsel, thou,
  Lead, and I follow.'

                      And fast away she fled.
  Then when he came upon her, spake, 'Methought,
  Knave, when I watched thee striking on the bridge
  The savour of thy kitchen came upon me
  A little faintlier:  but the wind hath changed:
  I scent it twenty-fold.'  And then she sang,
  '"O morning star" (not that tall felon there
  Whom thou by sorcery or unhappiness
  Or some device, hast foully overthrown),
  "O morning star that smilest in the blue,
  O star, my morning dream hath proven true,
  Smile sweetly, thou! my love hath smiled on me."

     'But thou begone, take counsel, and away,
  For hard by here is one that guards a ford--
  The second brother in their fool's parable--
  Will pay thee all thy wages, and to boot.
  Care not for shame:  thou art not knight but knave.'

     To whom Sir Gareth answered, laughingly,
  'Parables?  Hear a parable of the knave.
  When I was kitchen-knave among the rest
  Fierce was the hearth, and one of my co-mates
  Owned a rough dog, to whom he cast his coat,
  "Guard it," and there was none to meddle with it.
  And such a coat art thou, and thee the King
  Gave me to guard, and such a dog am I,
  To worry, and not to flee--and--knight or knave--
  The knave that doth thee service as full knight
  Is all as good, meseems, as any knight
  Toward thy sister's freeing.'

                               'Ay, Sir Knave!
  Ay, knave, because thou strikest as a knight,
  Being but knave, I hate thee all the more.'

     'Fair damsel, you should worship me the more,
  That, being but knave, I throw thine enemies.'

     'Ay, ay,' she said, 'but thou shalt meet thy match.'

     So when they touched the second river-loop,
  Huge on a huge red horse, and all in mail
  Burnished to blinding, shone the Noonday Sun
  Beyond a raging shallow.  As if the flower,
  That blows a globe of after arrowlets,
  Ten thousand-fold had grown, flashed the fierce shield,
  All sun; and Gareth's eyes had flying blots
  Before them when he turned from watching him.
  He from beyond the roaring shallow roared,
  'What doest thou, brother, in my marches here?'
  And she athwart the shallow shrilled again,
  'Here is a kitchen-knave from Arthur's hall
  Hath overthrown thy brother, and hath his arms.'
  'Ugh!' cried the Sun, and vizoring up a red
  And cipher face of rounded foolishness,
  Pushed horse across the foamings of the ford,
  Whom Gareth met midstream:  no room was there
  For lance or tourney-skill:  four strokes they struck
  With sword, and these were mighty; the new knight
  Had fear he might be shamed; but as the Sun
  Heaved up a ponderous arm to strike the fifth,
  The hoof of his horse slipt in the stream, the stream
  Descended, and the Sun was washed away.

     Then Gareth laid his lance athwart the ford;
  So drew him home; but he that fought no more,
  As being all bone-battered on the rock,
  Yielded; and Gareth sent him to the King,
  'Myself when I return will plead for thee.'
  'Lead, and I follow.'  Quietly she led.
  'Hath not the good wind, damsel, changed again?'
  'Nay, not a point:  nor art thou victor here.
  There lies a ridge of slate across the ford;
  His horse thereon stumbled--ay, for I saw it.

     '"O Sun" (not this strong fool whom thou, Sir Knave,
  Hast overthrown through mere unhappiness),
  "O Sun, that wakenest all to bliss or pain,
  O moon, that layest all to sleep again,
  Shine sweetly:  twice my love hath smiled on me."

     What knowest thou of lovesong or of love?
  Nay, nay, God wot, so thou wert nobly born,
  Thou hast a pleasant presence.  Yea, perchance,--

     '"O dewy flowers that open to the sun,
  O dewy flowers that close when day is done,
  Blow sweetly:  twice my love hath smiled on me."

     'What knowest thou of flowers, except, belike,
  To garnish meats with? hath not our good King
  Who lent me thee, the flower of kitchendom,
  A foolish love for flowers? what stick ye round
  The pasty? wherewithal deck the boar's head?
  Flowers? nay, the boar hath rosemaries and bay.

     '"O birds, that warble to the morning sky,
  O birds that warble as the day goes by,
  Sing sweetly:  twice my love hath smiled on me."

     'What knowest thou of birds, lark, mavis, merle,
  Linnet? what dream ye when they utter forth
  May-music growing with the growing light,
  Their sweet sun-worship? these be for the snare
  (So runs thy fancy) these be for the spit,
  Larding and basting.  See thou have not now
  Larded thy last, except thou turn and fly.
  There stands the third fool of their allegory.'

     For there beyond a bridge of treble bow,
  All in a rose-red from the west, and all
  Naked it seemed, and glowing in the broad
  Deep-dimpled current underneath, the knight,
  That named himself the Star of Evening, stood.

     And Gareth, 'Wherefore waits the madman there
  Naked in open dayshine?'  'Nay,' she cried,
  'Not naked, only wrapt in hardened skins
  That fit him like his own; and so ye cleave
  His armour off him, these will turn the blade.'

     Then the third brother shouted o'er the bridge,
  'O brother-star, why shine ye here so low?
  Thy ward is higher up:  but have ye slain
  The damsel's champion?' and the damsel cried,

     'No star of thine, but shot from Arthur's heaven
  With all disaster unto thine and thee!
  For both thy younger brethren have gone down
  Before this youth; and so wilt thou, Sir Star;
  Art thou not old?'
                    'Old, damsel, old and hard,
  Old, with the might and breath of twenty boys.'
  Said Gareth, 'Old, and over-bold in brag!
  But that same strength which threw the Morning Star
  Can throw the Evening.'

                         Then that other blew
  A hard and deadly note upon the horn.
  'Approach and arm me!'  With slow steps from out
  An old storm-beaten, russet, many-stained
  Pavilion, forth a grizzled damsel came,
  And armed him in old arms, and brought a helm
  With but a drying evergreen for crest,
  And gave a shield whereon the Star of Even
  Half-tarnished and half-bright, his emblem, shone.
  But when it glittered o'er the saddle-bow,
  They madly hurled together on the bridge;
  And Gareth overthrew him, lighted, drew,
  There met him drawn, and overthrew him again,
  But up like fire he started:  and as oft
  As Gareth brought him grovelling on his knees,
  So many a time he vaulted up again;
  Till Gareth panted hard, and his great heart,
  Foredooming all his trouble was in vain,
  Laboured within him, for he seemed as one
  That all in later, sadder age begins
  To war against ill uses of a life,
  But these from all his life arise, and cry,
  'Thou hast made us lords, and canst not put us down!'
  He half despairs; so Gareth seemed to strike
  Vainly, the damsel clamouring all the while,
  'Well done, knave-knight, well-stricken, O good knight-knave--
  O knave, as noble as any of all the knights--
  Shame me not, shame me not.  I have prophesied--
  Strike, thou art worthy of the Table Round--
  His arms are old, he trusts the hardened skin--
  Strike--strike--the wind will never change again.'
  And Gareth hearing ever stronglier smote,
  And hewed great pieces of his armour off him,
  But lashed in vain against the hardened skin,
  And could not wholly bring him under, more
  Than loud Southwesterns, rolling ridge on ridge,
  The buoy that rides at sea, and dips and springs
  For ever; till at length Sir Gareth's brand
  Clashed his, and brake it utterly to the hilt.
  'I have thee now;' but forth that other sprang,
  And, all unknightlike, writhed his wiry arms
  Around him, till he felt, despite his mail,
  Strangled, but straining even his uttermost
  Cast, and so hurled him headlong o'er the bridge
  Down to the river, sink or swim, and cried,
  'Lead, and I follow.'

                       But the damsel said,
  'I lead no longer; ride thou at my side;
  Thou art the kingliest of all kitchen-knaves.

     '"O trefoil, sparkling on the rainy plain,
  O rainbow with three colours after rain,
  Shine sweetly:  thrice my love hath smiled on me."

     'Sir,--and, good faith, I fain had added--Knight,
  But that I heard thee call thyself a knave,--
  Shamed am I that I so rebuked, reviled,
  Missaid thee; noble I am; and thought the King
  Scorned me and mine; and now thy pardon, friend,
  For thou hast ever answered courteously,
  And wholly bold thou art, and meek withal
  As any of Arthur's best, but, being knave,
  Hast mazed my wit:  I marvel what thou art.'

     'Damsel,' he said, 'you be not all to blame,
  Saving that you mistrusted our good King
  Would handle scorn, or yield you, asking, one
  Not fit to cope your quest.  You said your say;
  Mine answer was my deed.  Good sooth!  I hold
  He scarce is knight, yea but half-man, nor meet
  To fight for gentle damsel, he, who lets
  His heart be stirred with any foolish heat
  At any gentle damsel's waywardness.
  Shamed? care not! thy foul sayings fought for me:
  And seeing now thy words are fair, methinks
  There rides no knight, not Lancelot, his great self,
  Hath force to quell me.'
                          Nigh upon that hour
  When the lone hern forgets his melancholy,
  Lets down his other leg, and stretching, dreams
  Of goodly supper in the distant pool,
  Then turned the noble damsel smiling at him,
  And told him of a cavern hard at hand,
  Where bread and baken meats and good red wine
  Of Southland, which the Lady Lyonors
  Had sent her coming champion, waited him.

     Anon they past a narrow comb wherein
  Where slabs of rock with figures, knights on horse
  Sculptured, and deckt in slowly-waning hues.
  'Sir Knave, my knight, a hermit once was here,
  Whose holy hand hath fashioned on the rock
  The war of Time against the soul of man.
  And yon four fools have sucked their allegory
  From these damp walls, and taken but the form.
  Know ye not these?' and Gareth lookt and read--
  In letters like to those the vexillary
  Hath left crag-carven o'er the streaming Gelt--
  'PHOSPHORUS,' then 'MERIDIES'--'HESPERUS'--
  'NOX'--'MORS,' beneath five figures, armed men,
  Slab after slab, their faces forward all,
  And running down the Soul, a Shape that fled
  With broken wings, torn raiment and loose hair,
  For help and shelter to the hermit's cave.
  'Follow the faces, and we find it.  Look,
  Who comes behind?'

                    For one--delayed at first
  Through helping back the dislocated Kay
  To Camelot, then by what thereafter chanced,
  The damsel's headlong error through the wood--
  Sir Lancelot, having swum the river-loops--
  His blue shield-lions covered--softly drew
  Behind the twain, and when he saw the star
  Gleam, on Sir Gareth's turning to him, cried,
  'Stay, felon knight, I avenge me for my friend.'
  And Gareth crying pricked against the cry;
  But when they closed--in a moment--at one touch
  Of that skilled spear, the wonder of the world--
  Went sliding down so easily, and fell,
  That when he found the grass within his hands
  He laughed; the laughter jarred upon Lynette:
  Harshly she asked him, 'Shamed and overthrown,
  And tumbled back into the kitchen-knave,
  Why laugh ye? that ye blew your boast in vain?'
  'Nay, noble damsel, but that I, the son
  Of old King Lot and good Queen Bellicent,
  And victor of the bridges and the ford,
  And knight of Arthur, here lie thrown by whom
  I know not, all through mere unhappiness--
  Device and sorcery and unhappiness--
  Out, sword; we are thrown!'  And Lancelot answered, 'Prince,
  O Gareth--through the mere unhappiness
  Of one who came to help thee, not to harm,
  Lancelot, and all as glad to find thee whole,
  As on the day when Arthur knighted him.'

     Then Gareth, 'Thou--Lancelot!--thine the hand
  That threw me?  An some chance to mar the boast
  Thy brethren of thee make--which could not chance--
  Had sent thee down before a lesser spear,
  Shamed had I been, and sad--O Lancelot--thou!'

     Whereat the maiden, petulant, 'Lancelot,
  Why came ye not, when called? and wherefore now
  Come ye, not called?  I gloried in my knave,
  Who being still rebuked, would answer still
  Courteous as any knight--but now, if knight,
  The marvel dies, and leaves me fooled and tricked,
  And only wondering wherefore played upon:
  And doubtful whether I and mine be scorned.
  Where should be truth if not in Arthur's hall,
  In Arthur's presence?  Knight, knave, prince and fool,
  I hate thee and for ever.'

                            And Lancelot said,
  'Blessed be thou, Sir Gareth! knight art thou
  To the King's best wish.  O damsel, be you wise
  To call him shamed, who is but overthrown?
  Thrown have I been, nor once, but many a time.
  Victor from vanquished issues at the last,
  And overthrower from being overthrown.
  With sword we have not striven; and thy good horse
  And thou are weary; yet not less I felt
  Thy manhood through that wearied lance of thine.
  Well hast thou done; for all the stream is freed,
  And thou hast wreaked his justice on his foes,
  And when reviled, hast answered graciously,
  And makest merry when overthrown.  Prince, Knight
  Hail, Knight and Prince, and of our Table Round!'

     And then when turning to Lynette he told
  The tale of Gareth, petulantly she said,
  'Ay well--ay well--for worse than being fooled
  Of others, is to fool one's self.  A cave,
  Sir Lancelot, is hard by, with meats and drinks
  And forage for the horse, and flint for fire.
  But all about it flies a honeysuckle.
  Seek, till we find.'  And when they sought and found,
  Sir Gareth drank and ate, and all his life
  Past into sleep; on whom the maiden gazed.
  'Sound sleep be thine! sound cause to sleep hast thou.
  Wake lusty!  Seem I not as tender to him
  As any mother?  Ay, but such a one
  As all day long hath rated at her child,
  And vext his day, but blesses him asleep--
  Good lord, how sweetly smells the honeysuckle
  In the hushed night, as if the world were one
  Of utter peace, and love, and gentleness!
  O Lancelot, Lancelot'--and she clapt her hands--
  'Full merry am I to find my goodly knave
  Is knight and noble.  See now, sworn have I,
  Else yon black felon had not let me pass,
  To bring thee back to do the battle with him.
  Thus an thou goest, he will fight thee first;
  Who doubts thee victor? so will my knight-knave
  Miss the full flower of this accomplishment.'

     Said Lancelot, 'Peradventure he, you name,
  May know my shield.  Let Gareth, an he will,
  Change his for mine, and take my charger, fresh,
  Not to be spurred, loving the battle as well
  As he that rides him.'  'Lancelot-like,' she said,
  'Courteous in this, Lord Lancelot, as in all.'

     And Gareth, wakening, fiercely clutched the shield;
  'Ramp ye lance-splintering lions, on whom all spears
  Are rotten sticks! ye seem agape to roar!
  Yea, ramp and roar at leaving of your lord!--
  Care not, good beasts, so well I care for you.
  O noble Lancelot, from my hold on these
  Streams virtue--fire--through one that will not shame
  Even the shadow of Lancelot under shield.
  Hence:  let us go.'

                     Silent the silent field
  They traversed.  Arthur's harp though summer-wan,
  In counter motion to the clouds, allured
  The glance of Gareth dreaming on his liege.
  A star shot:  'Lo,' said Gareth, 'the foe falls!'
  An owl whoopt:  'Hark the victor pealing there!'
  Suddenly she that rode upon his left
  Clung to the shield that Lancelot lent him, crying,
  'Yield, yield him this again:  'tis he must fight:
  I curse the tongue that all through yesterday
  Reviled thee, and hath wrought on Lancelot now
  To lend thee horse and shield:  wonders ye have done;
  Miracles ye cannot:  here is glory enow
  In having flung the three:  I see thee maimed,
  Mangled:  I swear thou canst not fling the fourth.'

     'And wherefore, damsel? tell me all ye know.
  You cannot scare me; nor rough face, or voice,
  Brute bulk of limb, or boundless savagery
  Appal me from the quest.'

                           'Nay, Prince,' she cried,
  'God wot, I never looked upon the face,
  Seeing he never rides abroad by day;
  But watched him have I like a phantom pass
  Chilling the night:  nor have I heard the voice.
  Always he made his mouthpiece of a page
  Who came and went, and still reported him
  As closing in himself the strength of ten,
  And when his anger tare him, massacring
  Man, woman, lad and girl--yea, the soft babe!
  Some hold that he hath swallowed infant flesh,
  Monster!  O Prince, I went for Lancelot first,
  The quest is Lancelot's:  give him back the shield.'

     Said Gareth laughing, 'An he fight for this,
  Belike he wins it as the better man:
  Thus--and not else!'

                      But Lancelot on him urged
  All the devisings of their chivalry
  When one might meet a mightier than himself;
  How best to manage horse, lance, sword and shield,
  And so fill up the gap where force might fail
  With skill and fineness.  Instant were his words.

     Then Gareth, 'Here be rules.  I know but one--
  To dash against mine enemy and win.
  Yet have I seen thee victor in the joust,
  And seen thy way.'  'Heaven help thee,' sighed Lynette.

     Then for a space, and under cloud that grew
  To thunder-gloom palling all stars, they rode
  In converse till she made her palfrey halt,
  Lifted an arm, and softly whispered, 'There.'
  And all the three were silent seeing, pitched
  Beside the Castle Perilous on flat field,
  A huge pavilion like a mountain peak
  Sunder the glooming crimson on the marge,
  Black, with black banner, and a long black horn
  Beside it hanging; which Sir Gareth graspt,
  And so, before the two could hinder him,
  Sent all his heart and breath through all the horn.
  Echoed the walls; a light twinkled; anon
  Came lights and lights, and once again he blew;
  Whereon were hollow tramplings up and down
  And muffled voices heard, and shadows past;
  Till high above him, circled with her maids,
  The Lady Lyonors at a window stood,
  Beautiful among lights, and waving to him
  White hands, and courtesy; but when the Prince
  Three times had blown--after long hush--at last--
  The huge pavilion slowly yielded up,
  Through those black foldings, that which housed therein.
  High on a nightblack horse, in nightblack arms,
  With white breast-bone, and barren ribs of Death,
  And crowned with fleshless laughter--some ten steps--
  In the half-light--through the dim dawn--advanced
  The monster, and then paused, and spake no word.

     But Gareth spake and all indignantly,
  'Fool, for thou hast, men say, the strength of ten,
  Canst thou not trust the limbs thy God hath given,
  But must, to make the terror of thee more,
  Trick thyself out in ghastly imageries
  Of that which Life hath done with, and the clod,
  Less dull than thou, will hide with mantling flowers
  As if for pity?'  But he spake no word;
  Which set the horror higher:  a maiden swooned;
  The Lady Lyonors wrung her hands and wept,
  As doomed to be the bride of Night and Death;
  Sir Gareth's head prickled beneath his helm;
  And even Sir Lancelot through his warm blood felt
  Ice strike, and all that marked him were aghast.

     At once Sir Lancelot's charger fiercely neighed,
  And Death's dark war-horse bounded forward with him.
  Then those that did not blink the terror, saw
  That Death was cast to ground, and slowly rose.
  But with one stroke Sir Gareth split the skull.
  Half fell to right and half to left and lay.
  Then with a stronger buffet he clove the helm
  As throughly as the skull; and out from this
  Issued the bright face of a blooming boy
  Fresh as a flower new-born, and crying, 'Knight,
  Slay me not:  my three brethren bad me do it,
  To make a horror all about the house,
  And stay the world from Lady Lyonors.
  They never dreamed the passes would be past.'
  Answered Sir Gareth graciously to one
  Not many a moon his younger, 'My fair child,
  What madness made thee challenge the chief knight
  Of Arthur's hall?'  'Fair Sir, they bad me do it.
  They hate the King, and Lancelot, the King's friend,
  They hoped to slay him somewhere on the stream,
  They never dreamed the passes could be past.'

     Then sprang the happier day from underground;
  And Lady Lyonors and her house, with dance
  And revel and song, made merry over Death,
  As being after all their foolish fears
  And horrors only proven a blooming boy.
  So large mirth lived and Gareth won the quest.

     And he that told the tale in older times
  Says that Sir Gareth wedded Lyonors,
  But he, that told it later, says Lynette.



  The Marriage of Geraint

  The brave Geraint, a knight of Arthur's court,
  A tributary prince of Devon, one
  Of that great Order of the Table Round,
  Had married Enid, Yniol's only child,
  And loved her, as he loved the light of Heaven.
  And as the light of Heaven varies, now
  At sunrise, now at sunset, now by night
  With moon and trembling stars, so loved Geraint
  To make her beauty vary day by day,
  In crimsons and in purples and in gems.
  And Enid, but to please her husband's eye,
  Who first had found and loved her in a state
  Of broken fortunes, daily fronted him
  In some fresh splendour; and the Queen herself,
  Grateful to Prince Geraint for service done,
  Loved her, and often with her own white hands
  Arrayed and decked her, as the loveliest,
  Next after her own self, in all the court.
  And Enid loved the Queen, and with true heart
  Adored her, as the stateliest and the best
  And loveliest of all women upon earth.
  And seeing them so tender and so close,
  Long in their common love rejoiced Geraint.
  But when a rumour rose about the Queen,
  Touching her guilty love for Lancelot,
  Though yet there lived no proof, nor yet was heard
  The world's loud whisper breaking into storm,
  Not less Geraint believed it; and there fell
  A horror on him, lest his gentle wife,
  Through that great tenderness for Guinevere,
  Had suffered, or should suffer any taint
  In nature:  wherefore going to the King,
  He made this pretext, that his princedom lay
  Close on the borders of a territory,
  Wherein were bandit earls, and caitiff knights,
  Assassins, and all flyers from the hand
  Of Justice, and whatever loathes a law:
  And therefore, till the King himself should please
  To cleanse this common sewer of all his realm,
  He craved a fair permission to depart,
  And there defend his marches; and the King
  Mused for a little on his plea, but, last,
  Allowing it, the Prince and Enid rode,
  And fifty knights rode with them, to the shores
  Of Severn, and they past to their own land;
  Where, thinking, that if ever yet was wife
  True to her lord, mine shall be so to me,
  He compassed her with sweet observances
  And worship, never leaving her, and grew
  Forgetful of his promise to the King,
  Forgetful of the falcon and the hunt,
  Forgetful of the tilt and tournament,
  Forgetful of his glory and his name,
  Forgetful of his princedom and its cares.
  And this forgetfulness was hateful to her.
  And by and by the people, when they met
  In twos and threes, or fuller companies,
  Began to scoff and jeer and babble of him
  As of a prince whose manhood was all gone,
  And molten down in mere uxoriousness.
  And this she gathered from the people's eyes:
  This too the women who attired her head,
  To please her, dwelling on his boundless love,
  Told Enid, and they saddened her the more:
  And day by day she thought to tell Geraint,
  But could not out of bashful delicacy;
  While he that watched her sadden, was the more
  Suspicious that her nature had a taint.

     At last, it chanced that on a summer morn
  (They sleeping each by either) the new sun
  Beat through the blindless casement of the room,
  And heated the strong warrior in his dreams;
  Who, moving, cast the coverlet aside,
  And bared the knotted column of his throat,
  The massive square of his heroic breast,
  And arms on which the standing muscle sloped,
  As slopes a wild brook o'er a little stone,
  Running too vehemently to break upon it.
  And Enid woke and sat beside the couch,
  Admiring him, and thought within herself,
  Was ever man so grandly made as he?
  Then, like a shadow, past the people's talk
  And accusation of uxoriousness
  Across her mind, and bowing over him,
  Low to her own heart piteously she said:

     'O noble breast and all-puissant arms,
  Am I the cause, I the poor cause that men
  Reproach you, saying all your force is gone?
  I am the cause, because I dare not speak
  And tell him what I think and what they say.
  And yet I hate that he should linger here;
  I cannot love my lord and not his name.
  Far liefer had I gird his harness on him,
  And ride with him to battle and stand by,
  And watch his mightful hand striking great blows
  At caitiffs and at wrongers of the world.
  Far better were I laid in the dark earth,
  Not hearing any more his noble voice,
  Not to be folded more in these dear arms,
  And darkened from the high light in his eyes,
  Than that my lord through me should suffer shame.
  Am I so bold, and could I so stand by,
  And see my dear lord wounded in the strife,
  And maybe pierced to death before mine eyes,
  And yet not dare to tell him what I think,
  And how men slur him, saying all his force
  Is melted into mere effeminacy?
  O me, I fear that I am no true wife.'

     Half inwardly, half audibly she spoke,
  And the strong passion in her made her weep
  True tears upon his broad and naked breast,
  And these awoke him, and by great mischance
  He heard but fragments of her later words,
  And that she feared she was not a true wife.
  And then he thought, 'In spite of all my care,
  For all my pains, poor man, for all my pains,
  She is not faithful to me, and I see her
  Weeping for some gay knight in Arthur's hall.'
  Then though he loved and reverenced her too much
  To dream she could be guilty of foul act,
  Right through his manful breast darted the pang
  That makes a man, in the sweet face of her
  Whom he loves most, lonely and miserable.
  At this he hurled his huge limbs out of bed,
  And shook his drowsy squire awake and cried,
  'My charger and her palfrey;' then to her,
  'I will ride forth into the wilderness;
  For though it seems my spurs are yet to win,
  I have not fallen so low as some would wish.
  And thou, put on thy worst and meanest dress
  And ride with me.'  And Enid asked, amazed,
  'If Enid errs, let Enid learn her fault.'
  But he, 'I charge thee, ask not, but obey.'
  Then she bethought her of a faded silk,
  A faded mantle and a faded veil,
  And moving toward a cedarn cabinet,
  Wherein she kept them folded reverently
  With sprigs of summer laid between the folds,
  She took them, and arrayed herself therein,
  Remembering when first he came on her
  Drest in that dress, and how he loved her in it,
  And all her foolish fears about the dress,
  And all his journey to her, as himself
  Had told her, and their coming to the court.

     For Arthur on the Whitsuntide before
  Held court at old Caerleon upon Usk.
  There on a day, he sitting high in hall,
  Before him came a forester of Dean,
  Wet from the woods, with notice of a hart
  Taller than all his fellows, milky-white,
  First seen that day:  these things he told the King.
  Then the good King gave order to let blow
  His horns for hunting on the morrow morn.
  And when the King petitioned for his leave
  To see the hunt, allowed it easily.
  So with the morning all the court were gone.
  But Guinevere lay late into the morn,
  Lost in sweet dreams, and dreaming of her love
  For Lancelot, and forgetful of the hunt;
  But rose at last, a single maiden with her,
  Took horse, and forded Usk, and gained the wood;
  There, on a little knoll beside it, stayed
  Waiting to hear the hounds; but heard instead
  A sudden sound of hoofs, for Prince Geraint,
  Late also, wearing neither hunting-dress
  Nor weapon, save a golden-hilted brand,
  Came quickly flashing through the shallow ford
  Behind them, and so galloped up the knoll.
  A purple scarf, at either end whereof
  There swung an apple of the purest gold,
  Swayed round about him, as he galloped up
  To join them, glancing like a dragon-fly
  In summer suit and silks of holiday.
  Low bowed the tributary Prince, and she,
  Sweet and statelily, and with all grace
  Of womanhood and queenhood, answered him:
  'Late, late, Sir Prince,' she said, 'later than we!'
  'Yea, noble Queen,' he answered, 'and so late
  That I but come like you to see the hunt,
  Not join it.'  'Therefore wait with me,' she said;
  'For on this little knoll, if anywhere,
  There is good chance that we shall hear the hounds:
  Here often they break covert at our feet.'

     And while they listened for the distant hunt,
  And chiefly for the baying of Cavall,
  King Arthur's hound of deepest mouth, there rode
  Full slowly by a knight, lady, and dwarf;
  Whereof the dwarf lagged latest, and the knight
  Had vizor up, and showed a youthful face,
  Imperious, and of haughtiest lineaments.
  And Guinevere, not mindful of his face
  In the King's hall, desired his name, and sent
  Her maiden to demand it of the dwarf;
  Who being vicious, old and irritable,
  And doubling all his master's vice of pride,
  Made answer sharply that she should not know.
  'Then will I ask it of himself,' she said.
  'Nay, by my faith, thou shalt not,' cried the dwarf;
  'Thou art not worthy even to speak of him;'
  And when she put her horse toward the knight,
  Struck at her with his whip, and she returned
  Indignant to the Queen; whereat Geraint
  Exclaiming, 'Surely I will learn the name,'
  Made sharply to the dwarf, and asked it of him,
  Who answered as before; and when the Prince
  Had put his horse in motion toward the knight,
  Struck at him with his whip, and cut his cheek.
  The Prince's blood spirted upon the scarf,
  Dyeing it; and his quick, instinctive hand
  Caught at the hilt, as to abolish him:
  But he, from his exceeding manfulness
  And pure nobility of temperament,
  Wroth to be wroth at such a worm, refrained
  From even a word, and so returning said:

     'I will avenge this insult, noble Queen,
  Done in your maiden's person to yourself:
  And I will track this vermin to their earths:
  For though I ride unarmed, I do not doubt
  To find, at some place I shall come at, arms
  On loan, or else for pledge; and, being found,
  Then will I fight him, and will break his pride,
  And on the third day will again be here,
  So that I be not fallen in fight.  Farewell.'

     'Farewell, fair Prince,' answered the stately Queen.
  'Be prosperous in this journey, as in all;
  And may you light on all things that you love,
  And live to wed with her whom first you love:
  But ere you wed with any, bring your bride,
  And I, were she the daughter of a king,
  Yea, though she were a beggar from the hedge,
  Will clothe her for her bridals like the sun.'

     And Prince Geraint, now thinking that he heard
  The noble hart at bay, now the far horn,
  A little vext at losing of the hunt,
  A little at the vile occasion, rode,
  By ups and downs, through many a grassy glade
  And valley, with fixt eye following the three.
  At last they issued from the world of wood,
  And climbed upon a fair and even ridge,
  And showed themselves against the sky, and sank.
  And thither there came Geraint, and underneath
  Beheld the long street of a little town
  In a long valley, on one side whereof,
  White from the mason's hand, a fortress rose;
  And on one side a castle in decay,
  Beyond a bridge that spanned a dry ravine:
  And out of town and valley came a noise
  As of a broad brook o'er a shingly bed
  Brawling, or like a clamour of the rooks
  At distance, ere they settle for the night.

     And onward to the fortress rode the three,
  And entered, and were lost behind the walls.
  'So,' thought Geraint, 'I have tracked him to his earth.'
  And down the long street riding wearily,
  Found every hostel full, and everywhere
  Was hammer laid to hoof, and the hot hiss
  And bustling whistle of the youth who scoured
  His master's armour; and of such a one
  He asked, 'What means the tumult in the town?'
  Who told him, scouring still, 'The sparrow-hawk!'
  Then riding close behind an ancient churl,
  Who, smitten by the dusty sloping beam,
  Went sweating underneath a sack of corn,
  Asked yet once more what meant the hubbub here?
  Who answered gruffly, 'Ugh! the sparrow-hawk.'
  Then riding further past an armourer's,
  Who, with back turned, and bowed above his work,
  Sat riveting a helmet on his knee,
  He put the self-same query, but the man
  Not turning round, nor looking at him, said:
  'Friend, he that labours for the sparrow-hawk
  Has little time for idle questioners.'
  Whereat Geraint flashed into sudden spleen:
  'A thousand pips eat up your sparrow-hawk!
  Tits, wrens, and all winged nothings peck him dead!
  Ye think the rustic cackle of your bourg
  The murmur of the world!  What is it to me?
  O wretched set of sparrows, one and all,
  Who pipe of nothing but of sparrow-hawks!
  Speak, if ye be not like the rest, hawk-mad,
  Where can I get me harbourage for the night?
  And arms, arms, arms to fight my enemy?  Speak!'
  Whereat the armourer turning all amazed
  And seeing one so gay in purple silks,
  Came forward with the helmet yet in hand
  And answered, 'Pardon me, O stranger knight;
  We hold a tourney here tomorrow morn,
  And there is scantly time for half the work.
  Arms? truth! I know not:  all are wanted here.
  Harbourage? truth, good truth, I know not, save,
  It may be, at Earl Yniol's, o'er the bridge
  Yonder.'  He spoke and fell to work again.

     Then rode Geraint, a little spleenful yet,
  Across the bridge that spanned the dry ravine.
  There musing sat the hoary-headed Earl,
  (His dress a suit of frayed magnificence,
  Once fit for feasts of ceremony) and said:
  'Whither, fair son?' to whom Geraint replied,
  'O friend, I seek a harbourage for the night.'
  Then Yniol, 'Enter therefore and partake
  The slender entertainment of a house
  Once rich, now poor, but ever open-doored.'
  'Thanks, venerable friend,' replied Geraint;
  'So that ye do not serve me sparrow-hawks
  For supper, I will enter, I will eat
  With all the passion of a twelve hours' fast.'
  Then sighed and smiled the hoary-headed Earl,
  And answered, 'Graver cause than yours is mine
  To curse this hedgerow thief, the sparrow-hawk:
  But in, go in; for save yourself desire it,
  We will not touch upon him even in jest.'

     Then rode Geraint into the castle court,
  His charger trampling many a prickly star
  Of sprouted thistle on the broken stones.
  He looked and saw that all was ruinous.
  Here stood a shattered archway plumed with fern;
  And here had fallen a great part of a tower,
  Whole, like a crag that tumbles from the cliff,
  And like a crag was gay with wilding flowers:
  And high above a piece of turret stair,
  Worn by the feet that now were silent, wound
  Bare to the sun, and monstrous ivy-stems
  Claspt the gray walls with hairy-fibred arms,
  And sucked the joining of the stones, and looked
  A knot, beneath, of snakes, aloft, a grove.

     And while he waited in the castle court,
  The voice of Enid, Yniol's daughter, rang
  Clear through the open casement of the hall,
  Singing; and as the sweet voice of a bird,
  Heard by the lander in a lonely isle,
  Moves him to think what kind of bird it is
  That sings so delicately clear, and make
  Conjecture of the plumage and the form;
  So the sweet voice of Enid moved Geraint;
  And made him like a man abroad at morn
  When first the liquid note beloved of men
  Comes flying over many a windy wave
  To Britain, and in April suddenly
  Breaks from a coppice gemmed with green and red,
  And he suspends his converse with a friend,
  Or it may be the labour of his hands,
  To think or say, 'There is the nightingale;'
  So fared it with Geraint, who thought and said,
  'Here, by God's grace, is the one voice for me.'

     It chanced the song that Enid sang was one
  Of Fortune and her wheel, and Enid sang:

     'Turn, Fortune, turn thy wheel and lower the proud;
  Turn thy wild wheel through sunshine, storm, and cloud;
  Thy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate.

     'Turn, Fortune, turn thy wheel with smile or frown;
  With that wild wheel we go not up or down;
  Our hoard is little, but our hearts are great.

     'Smile and we smile, the lords of many lands;
  Frown and we smile, the lords of our own hands;
  For man is man and master of his fate.

     'Turn, turn thy wheel above the staring crowd;
  Thy wheel and thou are shadows in the cloud;
  Thy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate.'

     'Hark, by the bird's song ye may learn the nest,'
  Said Yniol; 'enter quickly.'  Entering then,
  Right o'er a mount of newly-fallen stones,
  The dusky-raftered many-cobwebbed hall,
  He found an ancient dame in dim brocade;
  And near her, like a blossom vermeil-white,
  That lightly breaks a faded flower-sheath,
  Moved the fair Enid, all in faded silk,
  Her daughter.  In a moment thought Geraint,
  'Here by God's rood is the one maid for me.'
  But none spake word except the hoary Earl:
  'Enid, the good knight's horse stands in the court;
  Take him to stall, and give him corn, and then
  Go to the town and buy us flesh and wine;
  And we will make us merry as we may.
  Our hoard is little, but our hearts are great.'

     He spake:  the Prince, as Enid past him, fain
  To follow, strode a stride, but Yniol caught
  His purple scarf, and held, and said, 'Forbear!
  Rest! the good house, though ruined, O my son,
  Endures not that her guest should serve himself.'
  And reverencing the custom of the house
  Geraint, from utter courtesy, forbore.

     So Enid took his charger to the stall;
  And after went her way across the bridge,
  And reached the town, and while the Prince and Earl
  Yet spoke together, came again with one,
  A youth, that following with a costrel bore
  The means of goodly welcome, flesh and wine.
  And Enid brought sweet cakes to make them cheer,
  And in her veil enfolded, manchet bread.
  And then, because their hall must also serve
  For kitchen, boiled the flesh, and spread the board,
  And stood behind, and waited on the three.
  And seeing her so sweet and serviceable,
  Geraint had longing in him evermore
  To stoop and kiss the tender little thumb,
  That crost the trencher as she laid it down:
  But after all had eaten, then Geraint,
  For now the wine made summer in his veins,
  Let his eye rove in following, or rest
  On Enid at her lowly handmaid-work,
  Now here, now there, about the dusky hall;
  Then suddenly addrest the hoary Earl:

     'Fair Host and Earl, I pray your courtesy;
  This sparrow-hawk, what is he? tell me of him.
  His name? but no, good faith, I will not have it:
  For if he be the knight whom late I saw
  Ride into that new fortress by your town,
  White from the mason's hand, then have I sworn
  From his own lips to have it--I am Geraint
  Of Devon--for this morning when the Queen
  Sent her own maiden to demand the name,
  His dwarf, a vicious under-shapen thing,
  Struck at her with his whip, and she returned
  Indignant to the Queen; and then I swore
  That I would track this caitiff to his hold,
  And fight and break his pride, and have it of him.
  And all unarmed I rode, and thought to find
  Arms in your town, where all the men are mad;
  They take the rustic murmur of their bourg
  For the great wave that echoes round the world;
  They would not hear me speak:  but if ye know
  Where I can light on arms, or if yourself
  Should have them, tell me, seeing I have sworn
  That I will break his pride and learn his name,
  Avenging this great insult done the Queen.'

     Then cried Earl Yniol, 'Art thou he indeed,
  Geraint, a name far-sounded among men
  For noble deeds? and truly I, when first
  I saw you moving by me on the bridge,
  Felt ye were somewhat, yea, and by your state
  And presence might have guessed you one of those
  That eat in Arthur's hall in Camelot.
  Nor speak I now from foolish flattery;
  For this dear child hath often heard me praise
  Your feats of arms, and often when I paused
  Hath asked again, and ever loved to hear;
  So grateful is the noise of noble deeds
  To noble hearts who see but acts of wrong:
  O never yet had woman such a pair
  Of suitors as this maiden:  first Limours,
  A creature wholly given to brawls and wine,
  Drunk even when he wooed; and be he dead
  I know not, but he past to the wild land.
  The second was your foe, the sparrow-hawk,
  My curse, my nephew--I will not let his name
  Slip from my lips if I can help it--he,
  When that I knew him fierce and turbulent
  Refused her to him, then his pride awoke;
  And since the proud man often is the mean,
  He sowed a slander in the common ear,
  Affirming that his father left him gold,
  And in my charge, which was not rendered to him;
  Bribed with large promises the men who served
  About my person, the more easily
  Because my means were somewhat broken into
  Through open doors and hospitality;
  Raised my own town against me in the night
  Before my Enid's birthday, sacked my house;
  From mine own earldom foully ousted me;
  Built that new fort to overawe my friends,
  For truly there are those who love me yet;
  And keeps me in this ruinous castle here,
  Where doubtless he would put me soon to death,
  But that his pride too much despises me:
  And I myself sometimes despise myself;
  For I have let men be, and have their way;
  Am much too gentle, have not used my power:
  Nor know I whether I be very base
  Or very manful, whether very wise
  Or very foolish; only this I know,
  That whatsoever evil happen to me,
  I seem to suffer nothing heart or limb,
  But can endure it all most patiently.'

     'Well said, true heart,' replied Geraint, 'but arms,
  That if the sparrow-hawk, this nephew, fight
  In next day's tourney I may break his pride.'

     And Yniol answered, 'Arms, indeed, but old
  And rusty, old and rusty, Prince Geraint,
  Are mine, and therefore at thy asking, thine.
  But in this tournament can no man tilt,
  Except the lady he loves best be there.
  Two forks are fixt into the meadow ground,
  And over these is placed a silver wand,
  And over that a golden sparrow-hawk,
  The prize of beauty for the fairest there.
  And this, what knight soever be in field
  Lays claim to for the lady at his side,
  And tilts with my good nephew thereupon,
  Who being apt at arms and big of bone
  Has ever won it for the lady with him,
  And toppling over all antagonism
  Has earned himself the name of sparrow-hawk.'
  But thou, that hast no lady, canst not fight.'

     To whom Geraint with eyes all bright replied,
  Leaning a little toward him, 'Thy leave!
  Let me lay lance in rest, O noble host,
  For this dear child, because I never saw,
  Though having seen all beauties of our time,
  Nor can see elsewhere, anything so fair.
  And if I fall her name will yet remain
  Untarnished as before; but if I live,
  So aid me Heaven when at mine uttermost,
  As I will make her truly my true wife.'

     Then, howsoever patient, Yniol's heart
  Danced in his bosom, seeing better days,
  And looking round he saw not Enid there,
  (Who hearing her own name had stolen away)
  But that old dame, to whom full tenderly
  And folding all her hand in his he said,
  'Mother, a maiden is a tender thing,
  And best by her that bore her understood.
  Go thou to rest, but ere thou go to rest
  Tell her, and prove her heart toward the Prince.'

     So spake the kindly-hearted Earl, and she
  With frequent smile and nod departing found,
  Half disarrayed as to her rest, the girl;
  Whom first she kissed on either cheek, and then
  On either shining shoulder laid a hand,
  And kept her off and gazed upon her face,
  And told them all their converse in the hall,
  Proving her heart:  but never light and shade
  Coursed one another more on open ground
  Beneath a troubled heaven, than red and pale
  Across the face of Enid hearing her;
  While slowly falling as a scale that falls,
  When weight is added only grain by grain,
  Sank her sweet head upon her gentle breast;
  Nor did she lift an eye nor speak a word,
  Rapt in the fear and in the wonder of it;
  So moving without answer to her rest
  She found no rest, and ever failed to draw
  The quiet night into her blood, but lay
  Contemplating her own unworthiness;
  And when the pale and bloodless east began
  To quicken to the sun, arose, and raised
  Her mother too, and hand in hand they moved
  Down to the meadow where the jousts were held,
  And waited there for Yniol and Geraint.

     And thither came the twain, and when Geraint
  Beheld her first in field, awaiting him,
  He felt, were she the prize of bodily force,
  Himself beyond the rest pushing could move
  The chair of Idris.  Yniol's rusted arms
  Were on his princely person, but through these
  Princelike his bearing shone; and errant knights
  And ladies came, and by and by the town
  Flowed in, and settling circled all the lists.
  And there they fixt the forks into the ground,
  And over these they placed the silver wand,
  And over that the golden sparrow-hawk.
  Then Yniol's nephew, after trumpet blown,
  Spake to the lady with him and proclaimed,
  'Advance and take, as fairest of the fair,
  What I these two years past have won for thee,
  The prize of beauty.'  Loudly spake the Prince,
  'Forbear:  there is a worthier,' and the knight
  With some surprise and thrice as much disdain
  Turned, and beheld the four, and all his face
  Glowed like the heart of a great fire at Yule,
  So burnt he was with passion, crying out,
  'Do battle for it then,' no more; and thrice
  They clashed together, and thrice they brake their spears.
  Then each, dishorsed and drawing, lashed at each
  So often and with such blows, that all the crowd
  Wondered, and now and then from distant walls
  There came a clapping as of phantom hands.
  So twice they fought, and twice they breathed, and still
  The dew of their great labour, and the blood
  Of their strong bodies, flowing, drained their force.
  But either's force was matched till Yniol's cry,
  'Remember that great insult done the Queen,'
  Increased Geraint's, who heaved his blade aloft,
  And cracked the helmet through, and bit the bone,
  And felled him, and set foot upon his breast,
  And said, 'Thy name?'  To whom the fallen man
  Made answer, groaning, 'Edyrn, son of Nudd!
  Ashamed am I that I should tell it thee.
  My pride is broken:  men have seen my fall.'
  'Then, Edyrn, son of Nudd,' replied Geraint,
  'These two things shalt thou do, or else thou diest.
  First, thou thyself, with damsel and with dwarf,
  Shalt ride to Arthur's court, and coming there,
  Crave pardon for that insult done the Queen,
  And shalt abide her judgment on it; next,
  Thou shalt give back their earldom to thy kin.
  These two things shalt thou do, or thou shalt die.'
  And Edyrn answered, 'These things will I do,
  For I have never yet been overthrown,
  And thou hast overthrown me, and my pride
  Is broken down, for Enid sees my fall!'
  And rising up, he rode to Arthur's court,
  And there the Queen forgave him easily.
  And being young, he changed and came to loathe
  His crime of traitor, slowly drew himself
  Bright from his old dark life, and fell at last
  In the great battle fighting for the King.

     But when the third day from the hunting-morn
  Made a low splendour in the world, and wings
  Moved in her ivy, Enid, for she lay
  With her fair head in the dim-yellow light,
  Among the dancing shadows of the birds,
  Woke and bethought her of her promise given
  No later than last eve to Prince Geraint--
  So bent he seemed on going the third day,
  He would not leave her, till her promise given--
  To ride with him this morning to the court,
  And there be made known to the stately Queen,
  And there be wedded with all ceremony.
  At this she cast her eyes upon her dress,
  And thought it never yet had looked so mean.
  For as a leaf in mid-November is
  To what it is in mid-October, seemed
  The dress that now she looked on to the dress
  She looked on ere the coming of Geraint.
  And still she looked, and still the terror grew
  Of that strange bright and dreadful thing, a court,
  All staring at her in her faded silk:
  And softly to her own sweet heart she said:

     'This noble prince who won our earldom back,
  So splendid in his acts and his attire,
  Sweet heaven, how much I shall discredit him!
  Would he could tarry with us here awhile,
  But being so beholden to the Prince,
  It were but little grace in any of us,
  Bent as he seemed on going this third day,
  To seek a second favour at his hands.
  Yet if he could but tarry a day or two,
  Myself would work eye dim, and finger lame,
  Far liefer than so much discredit him.'

     And Enid fell in longing for a dress
  All branched and flowered with gold, a costly gift
  Of her good mother, given her on the night
  Before her birthday, three sad years ago,
  That night of fire, when Edyrn sacked their house,
  And scattered all they had to all the winds:
  For while the mother showed it, and the two
  Were turning and admiring it, the work
  To both appeared so costly, rose a cry
  That Edyrn's men were on them, and they fled
  With little save the jewels they had on,
  Which being sold and sold had bought them bread:
  And Edyrn's men had caught them in their flight,
  And placed them in this ruin; and she wished
  The Prince had found her in her ancient home;
  Then let her fancy flit across the past,
  And roam the goodly places that she knew;
  And last bethought her how she used to watch,
  Near that old home, a pool of golden carp;
  And one was patched and blurred and lustreless
  Among his burnished brethren of the pool;
  And half asleep she made comparison
  Of that and these to her own faded self
  And the gay court, and fell asleep again;
  And dreamt herself was such a faded form
  Among her burnished sisters of the pool;
  But this was in the garden of a king;
  And though she lay dark in the pool, she knew
  That all was bright; that all about were birds
  Of sunny plume in gilded trellis-work;
  That all the turf was rich in plots that looked
  Each like a garnet or a turkis in it;
  And lords and ladies of the high court went
  In silver tissue talking things of state;
  And children of the King in cloth of gold
  Glanced at the doors or gamboled down the walks;
  And while she thought 'They will not see me,' came
  A stately queen whose name was Guinevere,
  And all the children in their cloth of gold
  Ran to her, crying, 'If we have fish at all
  Let them be gold; and charge the gardeners now
  To pick the faded creature from the pool,
  And cast it on the mixen that it die.'
  And therewithal one came and seized on her,
  And Enid started waking, with her heart
  All overshadowed by the foolish dream,
  And lo! it was her mother grasping her
  To get her well awake; and in her hand
  A suit of bright apparel, which she laid
  Flat on the couch, and spoke exultingly:

     'See here, my child, how fresh the colours look,
  How fast they hold like colours of a shell
  That keeps the wear and polish of the wave.
  Why not?  It never yet was worn, I trow:
  Look on it, child, and tell me if ye know it.'

     And Enid looked, but all confused at first,
  Could scarce divide it from her foolish dream:
  Then suddenly she knew it and rejoiced,
  And answered, 'Yea, I know it; your good gift,
  So sadly lost on that unhappy night;
  Your own good gift!'  'Yea, surely,' said the dame,
  'And gladly given again this happy morn.
  For when the jousts were ended yesterday,
  Went Yniol through the town, and everywhere
  He found the sack and plunder of our house
  All scattered through the houses of the town;
  And gave command that all which once was ours
  Should now be ours again:  and yester-eve,
  While ye were talking sweetly with your Prince,
  Came one with this and laid it in my hand,
  For love or fear, or seeking favour of us,
  Because we have our earldom back again.
  And yester-eve I would not tell you of it,
  But kept it for a sweet surprise at morn.
  Yea, truly is it not a sweet surprise?
  For I myself unwillingly have worn
  My faded suit, as you, my child, have yours,
  And howsoever patient, Yniol his.
  Ah, dear, he took me from a goodly house,
  With store of rich apparel, sumptuous fare,
  And page, and maid, and squire, and seneschal,
  And pastime both of hawk and hound, and all
  That appertains to noble maintenance.
  Yea, and he brought me to a goodly house;
  But since our fortune swerved from sun to shade,
  And all through that young traitor, cruel need
  Constrained us, but a better time has come;
  So clothe yourself in this, that better fits
  Our mended fortunes and a Prince's bride:
  For though ye won the prize of fairest fair,
  And though I heard him call you fairest fair,
  Let never maiden think, however fair,
  She is not fairer in new clothes than old.
  And should some great court-lady say, the Prince
  Hath picked a ragged-robin from the hedge,
  And like a madman brought her to the court,
  Then were ye shamed, and, worse, might shame the Prince
  To whom we are beholden; but I know,
  That when my dear child is set forth at her best,
  That neither court nor country, though they sought
  Through all the provinces like those of old
  That lighted on Queen Esther, has her match.'

     Here ceased the kindly mother out of breath;
  And Enid listened brightening as she lay;
  Then, as the white and glittering star of morn
  Parts from a bank of snow, and by and by
  Slips into golden cloud, the maiden rose,
  And left her maiden couch, and robed herself,
  Helped by the mother's careful hand and eye,
  Without a mirror, in the gorgeous gown;
  Who, after, turned her daughter round, and said,
  She never yet had seen her half so fair;
  And called her like that maiden in the tale,
  Whom Gwydion made by glamour out of flowers
  And sweeter than the bride of Cassivelaun,
  Flur, for whose love the Roman Caesar first
  Invaded Britain, 'But we beat him back,
  As this great Prince invaded us, and we,
  Not beat him back, but welcomed him with joy
  And I can scarcely ride with you to court,
  For old am I, and rough the ways and wild;
  But Yniol goes, and I full oft shall dream
  I see my princess as I see her now,
  Clothed with my gift, and gay among the gay.'

     But while the women thus rejoiced, Geraint
  Woke where he slept in the high hall, and called
  For Enid, and when Yniol made report
  Of that good mother making Enid gay
  In such apparel as might well beseem
  His princess, or indeed the stately Queen,
  He answered:  'Earl, entreat her by my love,
  Albeit I give no reason but my wish,
  That she ride with me in her faded silk.'
  Yniol with that hard message went; it fell
  Like flaws in summer laying lusty corn:
  For Enid, all abashed she knew not why,
  Dared not to glance at her good mother's face,
  But silently, in all obedience,
  Her mother silent too, nor helping her,
  Laid from her limbs the costly-broidered gift,
  And robed them in her ancient suit again,
  And so descended.  Never man rejoiced
  More than Geraint to greet her thus attired;
  And glancing all at once as keenly at her
  As careful robins eye the delver's toil,
  Made her cheek burn and either eyelid fall,
  But rested with her sweet face satisfied;
  Then seeing cloud upon the mother's brow,
  Her by both hands she caught, and sweetly said,

     'O my new mother, be not wroth or grieved
  At thy new son, for my petition to her.
  When late I left Caerleon, our great Queen,
  In words whose echo lasts, they were so sweet,
  Made promise, that whatever bride I brought,
  Herself would clothe her like the sun in Heaven.
  Thereafter, when I reached this ruined hall,
  Beholding one so bright in dark estate,
  I vowed that could I gain her, our fair Queen,
  No hand but hers, should make your Enid burst
  Sunlike from cloud--and likewise thought perhaps,
  That service done so graciously would bind
  The two together; fain I would the two
  Should love each other:  how can Enid find
  A nobler friend?  Another thought was mine;
  I came among you here so suddenly,
  That though her gentle presence at the lists
  Might well have served for proof that I was loved,
  I doubted whether daughter's tenderness,
  Or easy nature, might not let itself
  Be moulded by your wishes for her weal;
  Or whether some false sense in her own self
  Of my contrasting brightness, overbore
  Her fancy dwelling in this dusky hall;
  And such a sense might make her long for court
  And all its perilous glories:  and I thought,
  That could I someway prove such force in her
  Linked with such love for me, that at a word
  (No reason given her) she could cast aside
  A splendour dear to women, new to her,
  And therefore dearer; or if not so new,
  Yet therefore tenfold dearer by the power
  Of intermitted usage; then I felt
  That I could rest, a rock in ebbs and flows,
  Fixt on her faith.  Now, therefore, I do rest,
  A prophet certain of my prophecy,
  That never shadow of mistrust can cross
  Between us.  Grant me pardon for my thoughts:
  And for my strange petition I will make
  Amends hereafter by some gaudy-day,
  When your fair child shall wear your costly gift
  Beside your own warm hearth, with, on her knees,
  Who knows? another gift of the high God,
  Which, maybe, shall have learned to lisp you thanks.'

     He spoke:  the mother smiled, but half in tears,
  Then brought a mantle down and wrapt her in it,
  And claspt and kissed her, and they rode away.

     Now thrice that morning Guinevere had climbed
  The giant tower, from whose high crest, they say,
  Men saw the goodly hills of Somerset,
  And white sails flying on the yellow sea;
  But not to goodly hill or yellow sea
  Looked the fair Queen, but up the vale of Usk,
  By the flat meadow, till she saw them come;
  And then descending met them at the gates,
  Embraced her with all welcome as a friend,
  And did her honour as the Prince's bride,
  And clothed her for her bridals like the sun;
  And all that week was old Caerleon gay,
  For by the hands of Dubric, the high saint,
  They twain were wedded with all ceremony.

     And this was on the last year's Whitsuntide.
  But Enid ever kept the faded silk,
  Remembering how first he came on her,
  Drest in that dress, and how he loved her in it,
  And all her foolish fears about the dress,
  And all his journey toward her, as himself
  Had told her, and their coming to the court.

     And now this morning when he said to her,
  'Put on your worst and meanest dress,' she found
  And took it, and arrayed herself therein.



  Geraint and Enid

  O purblind race of miserable men,
  How many among us at this very hour
  Do forge a life-long trouble for ourselves,
  By taking true for false, or false for true;
  Here, through the feeble twilight of this world
  Groping, how many, until we pass and reach
  That other, where we see as we are seen!

     So fared it with Geraint, who issuing forth
  That morning, when they both had got to horse,
  Perhaps because he loved her passionately,
  And felt that tempest brooding round his heart,
  Which, if he spoke at all, would break perforce
  Upon a head so dear in thunder, said:
  'Not at my side.  I charge thee ride before,
  Ever a good way on before; and this
  I charge thee, on thy duty as a wife,
  Whatever happens, not to speak to me,
  No, not a word!' and Enid was aghast;
  And forth they rode, but scarce three paces on,
  When crying out, 'Effeminate as I am,
  I will not fight my way with gilded arms,
  All shall be iron;' he loosed a mighty purse,
  Hung at his belt, and hurled it toward the squire.
  So the last sight that Enid had of home
  Was all the marble threshold flashing, strown
  With gold and scattered coinage, and the squire
  Chafing his shoulder:  then he cried again,
  'To the wilds!' and Enid leading down the tracks
  Through which he bad her lead him on, they past
  The marches, and by bandit-haunted holds,
  Gray swamps and pools, waste places of the hern,
  And wildernesses, perilous paths, they rode:
  Round was their pace at first, but slackened soon:
  A stranger meeting them had surely thought
  They rode so slowly and they looked so pale,
  That each had suffered some exceeding wrong.
  For he was ever saying to himself,
  'O I that wasted time to tend upon her,
  To compass her with sweet observances,
  To dress her beautifully and keep her true'--
  And there he broke the sentence in his heart
  Abruptly, as a man upon his tongue
  May break it, when his passion masters him.
  And she was ever praying the sweet heavens
  To save her dear lord whole from any wound.
  And ever in her mind she cast about
  For that unnoticed failing in herself,
  Which made him look so cloudy and so cold;
  Till the great plover's human whistle amazed
  Her heart, and glancing round the waste she feared
  In every wavering brake an ambuscade.
  Then thought again, 'If there be such in me,
  I might amend it by the grace of Heaven,
  If he would only speak and tell me of it.'

     But when the fourth part of the day was gone,
  Then Enid was aware of three tall knights
  On horseback, wholly armed, behind a rock
  In shadow, waiting for them, caitiffs all;
  And heard one crying to his fellow, 'Look,
  Here comes a laggard hanging down his head,
  Who seems no bolder than a beaten hound;
  Come, we will slay him and will have his horse
  And armour, and his damsel shall be ours.'

     Then Enid pondered in her heart, and said:
  'I will go back a little to my lord,
  And I will tell him all their caitiff talk;
  For, be he wroth even to slaying me,
  Far liefer by his dear hand had I die,
  Than that my lord should suffer loss or shame.'

     Then she went back some paces of return,
  Met his full frown timidly firm, and said;
  'My lord, I saw three bandits by the rock
  Waiting to fall on you, and heard them boast
  That they would slay you, and possess your horse
  And armour, and your damsel should be theirs.'

     He made a wrathful answer:  'Did I wish
  Your warning or your silence? one command
  I laid upon you, not to speak to me,
  And thus ye keep it!  Well then, look--for now,
  Whether ye wish me victory or defeat,
  Long for my life, or hunger for my death,
  Yourself shall see my vigour is not lost.'

     Then Enid waited pale and sorrowful,
  And down upon him bare the bandit three.
  And at the midmost charging, Prince Geraint
  Drave the long spear a cubit through his breast
  And out beyond; and then against his brace
  Of comrades, each of whom had broken on him
  A lance that splintered like an icicle,
  Swung from his brand a windy buffet out
  Once, twice, to right, to left, and stunned the twain
  Or slew them, and dismounting like a man
  That skins the wild beast after slaying him,
  Stript from the three dead wolves of woman born
  The three gay suits of armour which they wore,
  And let the bodies lie, but bound the suits
  Of armour on their horses, each on each,
  And tied the bridle-reins of all the three
  Together, and said to her, 'Drive them on
  Before you;' and she drove them through the waste.

     He followed nearer; ruth began to work
  Against his anger in him, while he watched
  The being he loved best in all the world,
  With difficulty in mild obedience
  Driving them on:  he fain had spoken to her,
  And loosed in words of sudden fire the wrath
  And smouldered wrong that burnt him all within;
  But evermore it seemed an easier thing
  At once without remorse to strike her dead,
  Than to cry 'Halt,' and to her own bright face
  Accuse her of the least immodesty:
  And thus tongue-tied, it made him wroth the more
  That she could speak whom his own ear had heard
  Call herself false:  and suffering thus he made
  Minutes an age:  but in scarce longer time
  Than at Caerleon the full-tided Usk,
  Before he turn to fall seaward again,
  Pauses, did Enid, keeping watch, behold
  In the first shallow shade of a deep wood,
  Before a gloom of stubborn-shafted oaks,
  Three other horsemen waiting, wholly armed,
  Whereof one seemed far larger than her lord,
  And shook her pulses, crying, 'Look, a prize!
  Three horses and three goodly suits of arms,
  And all in charge of whom? a girl:  set on.'
  'Nay,' said the second, 'yonder comes a knight.'
  The third, 'A craven; how he hangs his head.'
  The giant answered merrily, 'Yea, but one?
  Wait here, and when he passes fall upon him.'

     And Enid pondered in her heart and said,
  'I will abide the coming of my lord,
  And I will tell him all their villainy.
  My lord is weary with the fight before,
  And they will fall upon him unawares.
  I needs must disobey him for his good;
  How should I dare obey him to his harm?
  Needs must I speak, and though he kill me for it,
  I save a life dearer to me than mine.'

     And she abode his coming, and said to him
  With timid firmness, 'Have I leave to speak?'
  He said, 'Ye take it, speaking,' and she spoke.

     'There lurk three villains yonder in the wood,
  And each of them is wholly armed, and one
  Is larger-limbed than you are, and they say
  That they will fall upon you while ye pass.'

     To which he flung a wrathful answer back:
  'And if there were an hundred in the wood,
  And every man were larger-limbed than I,
  And all at once should sally out upon me,
  I swear it would not ruffle me so much
  As you that not obey me.  Stand aside,
  And if I fall, cleave to the better man.'

     And Enid stood aside to wait the event,
  Not dare to watch the combat, only breathe
  Short fits of prayer, at every stroke a breath.
  And he, she dreaded most, bare down upon him.
  Aimed at the helm, his lance erred; but Geraint's,
  A little in the late encounter strained,
  Struck through the bulky bandit's corselet home,
  And then brake short, and down his enemy rolled,
  And there lay still; as he that tells the tale
  Saw once a great piece of a promontory,
  That had a sapling growing on it, slide
  From the long shore-cliff's windy walls to the beach,
  And there lie still, and yet the sapling grew:
  So lay the man transfixt.  His craven pair
  Of comrades making slowlier at the Prince,
  When now they saw their bulwark fallen, stood;
  On whom the victor, to confound them more,
  Spurred with his terrible war-cry; for as one,
  That listens near a torrent mountain-brook,
  All through the crash of the near cataract hears
  The drumming thunder of the huger fall
  At distance, were the soldiers wont to hear
  His voice in battle, and be kindled by it,
  And foemen scared, like that false pair who turned
  Flying, but, overtaken, died the death
  Themselves had wrought on many an innocent.

     Thereon Geraint, dismounting, picked the lance
  That pleased him best, and drew from those dead wolves
  Their three gay suits of armour, each from each,
  And bound them on their horses, each on each,
  And tied the bridle-reins of all the three
  Together, and said to her, 'Drive them on
  Before you,' and she drove them through the wood.

     He followed nearer still:  the pain she had
  To keep them in the wild ways of the wood,
  Two sets of three laden with jingling arms,
  Together, served a little to disedge
  The sharpness of that pain about her heart:
  And they themselves, like creatures gently born
  But into bad hands fallen, and now so long
  By bandits groomed, pricked their light ears, and felt
  Her low firm voice and tender government.

     So through the green gloom of the wood they past,
  And issuing under open heavens beheld
  A little town with towers, upon a rock,
  And close beneath, a meadow gemlike chased
  In the brown wild, and mowers mowing in it:
  And down a rocky pathway from the place
  There came a fair-haired youth, that in his hand
  Bare victual for the mowers:  and Geraint
  Had ruth again on Enid looking pale:
  Then, moving downward to the meadow ground,
  He, when the fair-haired youth came by him, said,
  'Friend, let her eat; the damsel is so faint.'
  'Yea, willingly,' replied the youth; 'and thou,
  My lord, eat also, though the fare is coarse,
  And only meet for mowers;' then set down
  His basket, and dismounting on the sward
  They let the horses graze, and ate themselves.
  And Enid took a little delicately,
  Less having stomach for it than desire
  To close with her lord's pleasure; but Geraint
  Ate all the mowers' victual unawares,
  And when he found all empty, was amazed;
  And 'Boy,' said he, 'I have eaten all, but take
  A horse and arms for guerdon; choose the best.'
  He, reddening in extremity of delight,
  'My lord, you overpay me fifty-fold.'
  'Ye will be all the wealthier,' cried the Prince.
  'I take it as free gift, then,' said the boy,
  'Not guerdon; for myself can easily,
  While your good damsel rests, return, and fetch
  Fresh victual for these mowers of our Earl;
  For these are his, and all the field is his,
  And I myself am his; and I will tell him
  How great a man thou art:  he loves to know
  When men of mark are in his territory:
  And he will have thee to his palace here,
  And serve thee costlier than with mowers' fare.'

     Then said Geraint, 'I wish no better fare:
  I never ate with angrier appetite
  Than when I left your mowers dinnerless.
  And into no Earl's palace will I go.
  I know, God knows, too much of palaces!
  And if he want me, let him come to me.
  But hire us some fair chamber for the night,
  And stalling for the horses, and return
  With victual for these men, and let us know.'

     'Yea, my kind lord,' said the glad youth, and went,
  Held his head high, and thought himself a knight,
  And up the rocky pathway disappeared,
  Leading the horse, and they were left alone.

     But when the Prince had brought his errant eyes
  Home from the rock, sideways he let them glance
  At Enid, where she droopt:  his own false doom,
  That shadow of mistrust should never cross
  Betwixt them, came upon him, and he sighed;
  Then with another humorous ruth remarked
  The lusty mowers labouring dinnerless,
  And watched the sun blaze on the turning scythe,
  And after nodded sleepily in the heat.
  But she, remembering her old ruined hall,
  And all the windy clamour of the daws
  About her hollow turret, plucked the grass
  There growing longest by the meadow's edge,
  And into many a listless annulet,
  Now over, now beneath her marriage ring,
  Wove and unwove it, till the boy returned
  And told them of a chamber, and they went;
  Where, after saying to her, 'If ye will,
  Call for the woman of the house,' to which
  She answered, 'Thanks, my lord;' the two remained
  Apart by all the chamber's width, and mute
  As two creatures voiceless through the fault of birth,
  Or two wild men supporters of a shield,
  Painted, who stare at open space, nor glance
  The one at other, parted by the shield.

     On a sudden, many a voice along the street,
  And heel against the pavement echoing, burst
  Their drowse; and either started while the door,
  Pushed from without, drave backward to the wall,
  And midmost of a rout of roisterers,
  Femininely fair and dissolutely pale,
  Her suitor in old years before Geraint,
  Entered, the wild lord of the place, Limours.
  He moving up with pliant courtliness,
  Greeted Geraint full face, but stealthily,
  In the mid-warmth of welcome and graspt hand,
  Found Enid with the corner of his eye,
  And knew her sitting sad and solitary.
  Then cried Geraint for wine and goodly cheer
  To feed the sudden guest, and sumptuously
  According to his fashion, bad the host
  Call in what men soever were his friends,
  And feast with these in honour of their Earl;
  'And care not for the cost; the cost is mine.'

     And wine and food were brought, and Earl Limours
  Drank till he jested with all ease, and told
  Free tales, and took the word and played upon it,
  And made it of two colours; for his talk,
  When wine and free companions kindled him,
  Was wont to glance and sparkle like a gem
  Of fifty facets; thus he moved the Prince
  To laughter and his comrades to applause.
  Then, when the Prince was merry, asked Limours,
  'Your leave, my lord, to cross the room, and speak
  To your good damsel there who sits apart,
  And seems so lonely?'  'My free leave,' he said;
  'Get her to speak:  she doth not speak to me.'
  Then rose Limours, and looking at his feet,
  Like him who tries the bridge he fears may fail,
  Crost and came near, lifted adoring eyes,
  Bowed at her side and uttered whisperingly:

     'Enid, the pilot star of my lone life,
  Enid, my early and my only love,
  Enid, the loss of whom hath turned me wild--
  What chance is this? how is it I see you here?
  Ye are in my power at last, are in my power.
  Yet fear me not:  I call mine own self wild,
  But keep a touch of sweet civility
  Here in the heart of waste and wilderness.
  I thought, but that your father came between,
  In former days you saw me favourably.
  And if it were so do not keep it back:
  Make me a little happier:  let me know it:
  Owe you me nothing for a life half-lost?
  Yea, yea, the whole dear debt of all you are.
  And, Enid, you and he, I see with joy,
  Ye sit apart, you do not speak to him,
  You come with no attendance, page or maid,
  To serve you--doth he love you as of old?
  For, call it lovers' quarrels, yet I know
  Though men may bicker with the things they love,
  They would not make them laughable in all eyes,
  Not while they loved them; and your wretched dress,
  A wretched insult on you, dumbly speaks
  Your story, that this man loves you no more.
  Your beauty is no beauty to him now:
  A common chance--right well I know it--palled--
  For I know men:  nor will ye win him back,
  For the man's love once gone never returns.
  But here is one who loves you as of old;
  With more exceeding passion than of old:
  Good, speak the word:  my followers ring him round:
  He sits unarmed; I hold a finger up;
  They understand:  nay; I do not mean blood:
  Nor need ye look so scared at what I say:
  My malice is no deeper than a moat,
  No stronger than a wall:  there is the keep;
  He shall not cross us more; speak but the word:
  Or speak it not; but then by Him that made me
  The one true lover whom you ever owned,
  I will make use of all the power I have.
  O pardon me! the madness of that hour,
  When first I parted from thee, moves me yet.'

     At this the tender sound of his own voice
  And sweet self-pity, or the fancy of it,
  Made his eye moist; but Enid feared his eyes,
  Moist as they were, wine-heated from the feast;
  And answered with such craft as women use,
  Guilty or guiltless, to stave off a chance
  That breaks upon them perilously, and said:

     'Earl, if you love me as in former years,
  And do not practise on me, come with morn,
  And snatch me from him as by violence;
  Leave me tonight:  I am weary to the death.'

     Low at leave-taking, with his brandished plume
  Brushing his instep, bowed the all-amorous Earl,
  And the stout Prince bad him a loud good-night.
  He moving homeward babbled to his men,
  How Enid never loved a man but him,
  Nor cared a broken egg-shell for her lord.

     But Enid left alone with Prince Geraint,
  Debating his command of silence given,
  And that she now perforce must violate it,
  Held commune with herself, and while she held
  He fell asleep, and Enid had no heart
  To wake him, but hung o'er him, wholly pleased
  To find him yet unwounded after fight,
  And hear him breathing low and equally.
  Anon she rose, and stepping lightly, heaped
  The pieces of his armour in one place,
  All to be there against a sudden need;
  Then dozed awhile herself, but overtoiled
  By that day's grief and travel, evermore
  Seemed catching at a rootless thorn, and then
  Went slipping down horrible precipices,
  And strongly striking out her limbs awoke;
  Then thought she heard the wild Earl at the door,
  With all his rout of random followers,
  Sound on a dreadful trumpet, summoning her;
  Which was the red cock shouting to the light,
  As the gray dawn stole o'er the dewy world,
  And glimmered on his armour in the room.
  And once again she rose to look at it,
  But touched it unawares:  jangling, the casque
  Fell, and he started up and stared at her.
  Then breaking his command of silence given,
  She told him all that Earl Limours had said,
  Except the passage that he loved her not;
  Nor left untold the craft herself had used;
  But ended with apology so sweet,
  Low-spoken, and of so few words, and seemed
  So justified by that necessity,
  That though he thought 'was it for him she wept
  In Devon?' he but gave a wrathful groan,
  Saying, 'Your sweet faces make good fellows fools
  And traitors.  Call the host and bid him bring
  Charger and palfrey.'  So she glided out
  Among the heavy breathings of the house,
  And like a household Spirit at the walls
  Beat, till she woke the sleepers, and returned:
  Then tending her rough lord, though all unasked,
  In silence, did him service as a squire;
  Till issuing armed he found the host and cried,
  'Thy reckoning, friend?' and ere he learnt it, 'Take
  Five horses and their armours;' and the host
  Suddenly honest, answered in amaze,
  'My lord, I scarce have spent the worth of one!'
  'Ye will be all the wealthier,' said the Prince,
  And then to Enid, 'Forward! and today
  I charge you, Enid, more especially,
  What thing soever ye may hear, or see,
  Or fancy (though I count it of small use
  To charge you) that ye speak not but obey.'

     And Enid answered, 'Yea, my lord, I know
  Your wish, and would obey; but riding first,
  I hear the violent threats you do not hear,
  I see the danger which you cannot see:
  Then not to give you warning, that seems hard;
  Almost beyond me:  yet I would obey.'

     'Yea so,' said he, 'do it:  be not too wise;
  Seeing that ye are wedded to a man,
  Not all mismated with a yawning clown,
  But one with arms to guard his head and yours,
  With eyes to find you out however far,
  And ears to hear you even in his dreams.'

     With that he turned and looked as keenly at her
  As careful robins eye the delver's toil;
  And that within her, which a wanton fool,
  Or hasty judger would have called her guilt,
  Made her cheek burn and either eyelid fall.
  And Geraint looked and was not satisfied.

     Then forward by a way which, beaten broad,
  Led from the territory of false Limours
  To the waste earldom of another earl,
  Doorm, whom his shaking vassals called the Bull,
  Went Enid with her sullen follower on.
  Once she looked back, and when she saw him ride
  More near by many a rood than yestermorn,
  It wellnigh made her cheerful; till Geraint
  Waving an angry hand as who should say
  'Ye watch me,' saddened all her heart again.
  But while the sun yet beat a dewy blade,
  The sound of many a heavily-galloping hoof
  Smote on her ear, and turning round she saw
  Dust, and the points of lances bicker in it.
  Then not to disobey her lord's behest,
  And yet to give him warning, for he rode
  As if he heard not, moving back she held
  Her finger up, and pointed to the dust.
  At which the warrior in his obstinacy,
  Because she kept the letter of his word,
  Was in a manner pleased, and turning, stood.
  And in the moment after, wild Limours,
  Borne on a black horse, like a thunder-cloud
  Whose skirts are loosened by the breaking storm,
  Half ridden off with by the thing he rode,
  And all in passion uttering a dry shriek,
  Dashed down on Geraint, who closed with him, and bore
  Down by the length of lance and arm beyond
  The crupper, and so left him stunned or dead,
  And overthrew the next that followed him,
  And blindly rushed on all the rout behind.
  But at the flash and motion of the man
  They vanished panic-stricken, like a shoal
  Of darting fish, that on a summer morn
  Adown the crystal dykes at Camelot
  Come slipping o'er their shadows on the sand,
  But if a man who stands upon the brink
  But lift a shining hand against the sun,
  There is not left the twinkle of a fin
  Betwixt the cressy islets white in flower;
  So, scared but at the motion of the man,
  Fled all the boon companions of the Earl,
  And left him lying in the public way;
  So vanish friendships only made in wine.

     Then like a stormy sunlight smiled Geraint,
  Who saw the chargers of the two that fell
  Start from their fallen lords, and wildly fly,
  Mixt with the flyers.  'Horse and man,' he said,
  'All of one mind and all right-honest friends!
  Not a hoof left:  and I methinks till now
  Was honest--paid with horses and with arms;
  I cannot steal or plunder, no nor beg:
  And so what say ye, shall we strip him there
  Your lover? has your palfrey heart enough
  To bear his armour? shall we fast, or dine?
  No?--then do thou, being right honest, pray
  That we may meet the horsemen of Earl Doorm,
  I too would still be honest.'  Thus he said:
  And sadly gazing on her bridle-reins,
  And answering not one word, she led the way.

     But as a man to whom a dreadful loss
  Falls in a far land and he knows it not,
  But coming back he learns it, and the loss
  So pains him that he sickens nigh to death;
  So fared it with Geraint, who being pricked
  In combat with the follower of Limours,
  Bled underneath his armour secretly,
  And so rode on, nor told his gentle wife
  What ailed him, hardly knowing it himself,
  Till his eye darkened and his helmet wagged;
  And at a sudden swerving of the road,
  Though happily down on a bank of grass,
  The Prince, without a word, from his horse fell.

     And Enid heard the clashing of his fall,
  Suddenly came, and at his side all pale
  Dismounting, loosed the fastenings of his arms,
  Nor let her true hand falter, nor blue eye
  Moisten, till she had lighted on his wound,
  And tearing off her veil of faded silk
  Had bared her forehead to the blistering sun,
  And swathed the hurt that drained her dear lord's life.
  Then after all was done that hand could do,
  She rested, and her desolation came
  Upon her, and she wept beside the way.

     And many past, but none regarded her,
  For in that realm of lawless turbulence,
  A woman weeping for her murdered mate
  Was cared as much for as a summer shower:
  One took him for a victim of Earl Doorm,
  Nor dared to waste a perilous pity on him:
  Another hurrying past, a man-at-arms,
  Rode on a mission to the bandit Earl;
  Half whistling and half singing a coarse song,
  He drove the dust against her veilless eyes:
  Another, flying from the wrath of Doorm
  Before an ever-fancied arrow, made
  The long way smoke beneath him in his fear;
  At which her palfrey whinnying lifted heel,
  And scoured into the coppices and was lost,
  While the great charger stood, grieved like a man.

     But at the point of noon the huge Earl Doorm,
  Broad-faced with under-fringe of russet beard,
  Bound on a foray, rolling eyes of prey,
  Came riding with a hundred lances up;
  But ere he came, like one that hails a ship,
  Cried out with a big voice, 'What, is he dead?'
  'No, no, not dead!' she answered in all haste.
  'Would some of your people take him up,
  And bear him hence out of this cruel sun?
  Most sure am I, quite sure, he is not dead.'

     Then said Earl Doorm:  'Well, if he be not dead,
  Why wail ye for him thus? ye seem a child.
  And be he dead, I count you for a fool;
  Your wailing will not quicken him:  dead or not,
  Ye mar a comely face with idiot tears.
  Yet, since the face is comely--some of you,
  Here, take him up, and bear him to our hall:
  An if he live, we will have him of our band;
  And if he die, why earth has earth enough
  To hide him.  See ye take the charger too,
  A noble one.'
               He spake, and past away,
  But left two brawny spearmen, who advanced,
  Each growling like a dog, when his good bone
  Seems to be plucked at by the village boys
  Who love to vex him eating, and he fears
  To lose his bone, and lays his foot upon it,
  Gnawing and growling:  so the ruffians growled,
  Fearing to lose, and all for a dead man,
  Their chance of booty from the morning's raid,
  Yet raised and laid him on a litter-bier,
  Such as they brought upon their forays out
  For those that might be wounded; laid him on it
  All in the hollow of his shield, and took
  And bore him to the naked hall of Doorm,
  (His gentle charger following him unled)
  And cast him and the bier in which he lay
  Down on an oaken settle in the hall,
  And then departed, hot in haste to join
  Their luckier mates, but growling as before,
  And cursing their lost time, and the dead man,
  And their own Earl, and their own souls, and her.
  They might as well have blest her:  she was deaf
  To blessing or to cursing save from one.

     So for long hours sat Enid by her lord,
  There in the naked hall, propping his head,
  And chafing his pale hands, and calling to him.
  Till at the last he wakened from his swoon,
  And found his own dear bride propping his head,
  And chafing his faint hands, and calling to him;
  And felt the warm tears falling on his face;
  And said to his own heart, 'She weeps for me:'
  And yet lay still, and feigned himself as dead,
  That he might prove her to the uttermost,
  And say to his own heart, 'She weeps for me.'

     But in the falling afternoon returned
  The huge Earl Doorm with plunder to the hall.
  His lusty spearmen followed him with noise:
  Each hurling down a heap of things that rang
  Against his pavement, cast his lance aside,
  And doffed his helm:  and then there fluttered in,
  Half-bold, half-frighted, with dilated eyes,
  A tribe of women, dressed in many hues,
  And mingled with the spearmen:  and Earl Doorm
  Struck with a knife's haft hard against the board,
  And called for flesh and wine to feed his spears.
  And men brought in whole hogs and quarter beeves,
  And all the hall was dim with steam of flesh:
  And none spake word, but all sat down at once,
  And ate with tumult in the naked hall,
  Feeding like horses when you hear them feed;
  Till Enid shrank far back into herself,
  To shun the wild ways of the lawless tribe.
  But when Earl Doorm had eaten all he would,
  He rolled his eyes about the hall, and found
  A damsel drooping in a corner of it.
  Then he remembered her, and how she wept;
  And out of her there came a power upon him;
  And rising on the sudden he said, 'Eat!
  I never yet beheld a thing so pale.
  God's curse, it makes me mad to see you weep.
  Eat!  Look yourself.  Good luck had your good man,
  For were I dead who is it would weep for me?
  Sweet lady, never since I first drew breath
  Have I beheld a lily like yourself.
  And so there lived some colour in your cheek,
  There is not one among my gentlewomen
  Were fit to wear your slipper for a glove.
  But listen to me, and by me be ruled,
  And I will do the thing I have not done,
  For ye shall share my earldom with me, girl,
  And we will live like two birds in one nest,
  And I will fetch you forage from all fields,
  For I compel all creatures to my will.'

     He spoke:  the brawny spearman let his cheek
  Bulge with the unswallowed piece, and turning stared;
  While some, whose souls the old serpent long had drawn
  Down, as the worm draws in the withered leaf
  And makes it earth, hissed each at other's ear
  What shall not be recorded--women they,
  Women, or what had been those gracious things,
  But now desired the humbling of their best,
  Yea, would have helped him to it:  and all at once
  They hated her, who took no thought of them,
  But answered in low voice, her meek head yet
  Drooping, 'I pray you of your courtesy,
  He being as he is, to let me be.'

     She spake so low he hardly heard her speak,
  But like a mighty patron, satisfied
  With what himself had done so graciously,
  Assumed that she had thanked him, adding, 'Yea,
  Eat and be glad, for I account you mine.'

     She answered meekly, 'How should I be glad
  Henceforth in all the world at anything,
  Until my lord arise and look upon me?'

     Here the huge Earl cried out upon her talk,
  As all but empty heart and weariness
  And sickly nothing; suddenly seized on her,
  And bare her by main violence to the board,
  And thrust the dish before her, crying, 'Eat.'

     'No, no,' said Enid, vext, 'I will not eat
  Till yonder man upon the bier arise,
  And eat with me.'  'Drink, then,' he answered.  'Here!'
  (And filled a horn with wine and held it to her,)
  'Lo! I, myself, when flushed with fight, or hot,
  God's curse, with anger--often I myself,
  Before I well have drunken, scarce can eat:
  Drink therefore and the wine will change thy will.'

     'Not so,' she cried, 'by Heaven, I will not drink
  Till my dear lord arise and bid me do it,
  And drink with me; and if he rise no more,
  I will not look at wine until I die.'

     At this he turned all red and paced his hall,
  Now gnawed his under, now his upper lip,
  And coming up close to her, said at last:
  'Girl, for I see ye scorn my courtesies,
  Take warning:  yonder man is surely dead;
  And I compel all creatures to my will.
  Not eat nor drink?  And wherefore wail for one,
  Who put your beauty to this flout and scorn
  By dressing it in rags?  Amazed am I,
  Beholding how ye butt against my wish,
  That I forbear you thus:  cross me no more.
  At least put off to please me this poor gown,
  This silken rag, this beggar-woman's weed:
  I love that beauty should go beautifully:
  For see ye not my gentlewomen here,
  How gay, how suited to the house of one
  Who loves that beauty should go beautifully?
  Rise therefore; robe yourself in this:  obey.'

     He spoke, and one among his gentlewomen
  Displayed a splendid silk of foreign loom,
  Where like a shoaling sea the lovely blue
  Played into green, and thicker down the front
  With jewels than the sward with drops of dew,
  When all night long a cloud clings to the hill,
  And with the dawn ascending lets the day
  Strike where it clung:  so thickly shone the gems.

     But Enid answered, harder to be moved
  Than hardest tyrants in their day of power,
  With life-long injuries burning unavenged,
  And now their hour has come; and Enid said:

     'In this poor gown my dear lord found me first,
  And loved me serving in my father's hall:
  In this poor gown I rode with him to court,
  And there the Queen arrayed me like the sun:
  In this poor gown he bad me clothe myself,
  When now we rode upon this fatal quest
  Of honour, where no honour can be gained:
  And this poor gown I will not cast aside
  Until himself arise a living man,
  And bid me cast it.  I have griefs enough:
  Pray you be gentle, pray you let me be:
  I never loved, can never love but him:
  Yea, God, I pray you of your gentleness,
  He being as he is, to let me be.'

     Then strode the brute Earl up and down his hall,
  And took his russet beard between his teeth;
  Last, coming up quite close, and in his mood
  Crying, 'I count it of no more avail,
  Dame, to be gentle than ungentle with you;
  Take my salute,' unknightly with flat hand,
  However lightly, smote her on the cheek.

     Then Enid, in her utter helplessness,
  And since she thought, 'He had not dared to do it,
  Except he surely knew my lord was dead,'
  Sent forth a sudden sharp and bitter cry,
  As of a wild thing taken in the trap,
  Which sees the trapper coming through the wood.

     This heard Geraint, and grasping at his sword,
  (It lay beside him in the hollow shield),
  Made but a single bound, and with a sweep of it
  Shore through the swarthy neck, and like a ball
  The russet-bearded head rolled on the floor.
  So died Earl Doorm by him he counted dead.
  And all the men and women in the hall
  Rose when they saw the dead man rise, and fled
  Yelling as from a spectre, and the two
  Were left alone together, and he said:

     'Enid, I have used you worse than that dead man;
  Done you more wrong:  we both have undergone
  That trouble which has left me thrice your own:
  Henceforward I will rather die than doubt.
  And here I lay this penance on myself,
  Not, though mine own ears heard you yestermorn--
  You thought me sleeping, but I heard you say,
  I heard you say, that you were no true wife:
  I swear I will not ask your meaning in it:
  I do believe yourself against yourself,
  And will henceforward rather die than doubt.'

     And Enid could not say one tender word,
  She felt so blunt and stupid at the heart:
  She only prayed him, 'Fly, they will return
  And slay you; fly, your charger is without,
  My palfrey lost.'  'Then, Enid, shall you ride
  Behind me.'  'Yea,' said Enid, 'let us go.'
  And moving out they found the stately horse,
  Who now no more a vassal to the thief,
  But free to stretch his limbs in lawful fight,
  Neighed with all gladness as they came, and stooped
  With a low whinny toward the pair:  and she
  Kissed the white star upon his noble front,
  Glad also; then Geraint upon the horse
  Mounted, and reached a hand, and on his foot
  She set her own and climbed; he turned his face
  And kissed her climbing, and she cast her arms
  About him, and at once they rode away.

     And never yet, since high in Paradise
  O'er the four rivers the first roses blew,
  Came purer pleasure unto mortal kind
  Than lived through her, who in that perilous hour
  Put hand to hand beneath her husband's heart,
  And felt him hers again:  she did not weep,
  But o'er her meek eyes came a happy mist
  Like that which kept the heart of Eden green
  Before the useful trouble of the rain:
  Yet not so misty were her meek blue eyes
  As not to see before them on the path,
  Right in the gateway of the bandit hold,
  A knight of Arthur's court, who laid his lance
  In rest, and made as if to fall upon him.
  Then, fearing for his hurt and loss of blood,
  She, with her mind all full of what had chanced,
  Shrieked to the stranger 'Slay not a dead man!'
  'The voice of Enid,' said the knight; but she,
  Beholding it was Edyrn son of Nudd,
  Was moved so much the more, and shrieked again,
  'O cousin, slay not him who gave you life.'
  And Edyrn moving frankly forward spake:
  'My lord Geraint, I greet you with all love;
  I took you for a bandit knight of Doorm;
  And fear not, Enid, I should fall upon him,
  Who love you, Prince, with something of the love
  Wherewith we love the Heaven that chastens us.
  For once, when I was up so high in pride
  That I was halfway down the slope to Hell,
  By overthrowing me you threw me higher.
  Now, made a knight of Arthur's Table Round,
  And since I knew this Earl, when I myself
  Was half a bandit in my lawless hour,
  I come the mouthpiece of our King to Doorm
  (The King is close behind me) bidding him
  Disband himself, and scatter all his powers,
  Submit, and hear the judgment of the King.'

     'He hears the judgment of the King of kings,'
  Cried the wan Prince; 'and lo, the powers of Doorm
  Are scattered,' and he pointed to the field,
  Where, huddled here and there on mound and knoll,
  Were men and women staring and aghast,
  While some yet fled; and then he plainlier told
  How the huge Earl lay slain within his hall.
  But when the knight besought him, 'Follow me,
  Prince, to the camp, and in the King's own ear
  Speak what has chanced; ye surely have endured
  Strange chances here alone;' that other flushed,
  And hung his head, and halted in reply,
  Fearing the mild face of the blameless King,
  And after madness acted question asked:
  Till Edyrn crying, 'If ye will not go
  To Arthur, then will Arthur come to you,'
  'Enough,' he said, 'I follow,' and they went.
  But Enid in their going had two fears,
  One from the bandit scattered in the field,
  And one from Edyrn.  Every now and then,
  When Edyrn reined his charger at her side,
  She shrank a little.  In a hollow land,
  From which old fires have broken, men may fear
  Fresh fire and ruin.  He, perceiving, said:

     'Fair and dear cousin, you that most had cause
  To fear me, fear no longer, I am changed.
  Yourself were first the blameless cause to make
  My nature's prideful sparkle in the blood
  Break into furious flame; being repulsed
  By Yniol and yourself, I schemed and wrought
  Until I overturned him; then set up
  (With one main purpose ever at my heart)
  My haughty jousts, and took a paramour;
  Did her mock-honour as the fairest fair,
  And, toppling over all antagonism,
  So waxed in pride, that I believed myself
  Unconquerable, for I was wellnigh mad:
  And, but for my main purpose in these jousts,
  I should have slain your father, seized yourself.
  I lived in hope that sometime you would come
  To these my lists with him whom best you loved;
  And there, poor cousin, with your meek blue eyes
  The truest eyes that ever answered Heaven,
  Behold me overturn and trample on him.
  Then, had you cried, or knelt, or prayed to me,
  I should not less have killed him.  And so you came,--
  But once you came,--and with your own true eyes
  Beheld the man you loved (I speak as one
  Speaks of a service done him) overthrow
  My proud self, and my purpose three years old,
  And set his foot upon me, and give me life.
  There was I broken down; there was I saved:
  Though thence I rode all-shamed, hating the life
  He gave me, meaning to be rid of it.
  And all the penance the Queen laid upon me
  Was but to rest awhile within her court;
  Where first as sullen as a beast new-caged,
  And waiting to be treated like a wolf,
  Because I knew my deeds were known, I found,
  Instead of scornful pity or pure scorn,
  Such fine reserve and noble reticence,
  Manners so kind, yet stately, such a grace
  Of tenderest courtesy, that I began
  To glance behind me at my former life,
  And find that it had been the wolf's indeed:
  And oft I talked with Dubric, the high saint,
  Who, with mild heat of holy oratory,
  Subdued me somewhat to that gentleness,
  Which, when it weds with manhood, makes a man.
  And you were often there about the Queen,
  But saw me not, or marked not if you saw;
  Nor did I care or dare to speak with you,
  But kept myself aloof till I was changed;
  And fear not, cousin; I am changed indeed.'

     He spoke, and Enid easily believed,
  Like simple noble natures, credulous
  Of what they long for, good in friend or foe,
  There most in those who most have done them ill.
  And when they reached the camp the King himself
  Advanced to greet them, and beholding her
  Though pale, yet happy, asked her not a word,
  But went apart with Edyrn, whom he held
  In converse for a little, and returned,
  And, gravely smiling, lifted her from horse,
  And kissed her with all pureness, brother-like,
  And showed an empty tent allotted her,
  And glancing for a minute, till he saw her
  Pass into it, turned to the Prince, and said:

     'Prince, when of late ye prayed me for my leave
  To move to your own land, and there defend
  Your marches, I was pricked with some reproof,
  As one that let foul wrong stagnate and be,
  By having looked too much through alien eyes,
  And wrought too long with delegated hands,
  Not used mine own:  but now behold me come
  To cleanse this common sewer of all my realm,
  With Edyrn and with others:  have ye looked
  At Edyrn? have ye seen how nobly changed?
  This work of his is great and wonderful.
  His very face with change of heart is changed.
  The world will not believe a man repents:
  And this wise world of ours is mainly right.
  Full seldom doth a man repent, or use
  Both grace and will to pick the vicious quitch
  Of blood and custom wholly out of him,
  And make all clean, and plant himself afresh.
  Edyrn has done it, weeding all his heart
  As I will weed this land before I go.
  I, therefore, made him of our Table Round,
  Not rashly, but have proved him everyway
  One of our noblest, our most valorous,
  Sanest and most obedient:  and indeed
  This work of Edyrn wrought upon himself
  After a life of violence, seems to me
  A thousand-fold more great and wonderful
  Than if some knight of mine, risking his life,
  My subject with my subjects under him,
  Should make an onslaught single on a realm
  Of robbers, though he slew them one by one,
  And were himself nigh wounded to the death.'

     So spake the King; low bowed the Prince, and felt
  His work was neither great nor wonderful,
  And past to Enid's tent; and thither came
  The King's own leech to look into his hurt;
  And Enid tended on him there; and there
  Her constant motion round him, and the breath
  Of her sweet tendance hovering over him,
  Filled all the genial courses of his blood
  With deeper and with ever deeper love,
  As the south-west that blowing Bala lake
  Fills all the sacred Dee.  So past the days.

     But while Geraint lay healing of his hurt,
  The blameless King went forth and cast his eyes
  On each of all whom Uther left in charge
  Long since, to guard the justice of the King:
  He looked and found them wanting; and as now
  Men weed the white horse on the Berkshire hills
  To keep him bright and clean as heretofore,
  He rooted out the slothful officer
  Or guilty, which for bribe had winked at wrong,
  And in their chairs set up a stronger race
  With hearts and hands, and sent a thousand men
  To till the wastes, and moving everywhere
  Cleared the dark places and let in the law,
  And broke the bandit holds and cleansed the land.

     Then, when Geraint was whole again, they past
  With Arthur to Caerleon upon Usk.
  There the great Queen once more embraced her friend,
  And clothed her in apparel like the day.
  And though Geraint could never take again
  That comfort from their converse which he took
  Before the Queen's fair name was breathed upon,
  He rested well content that all was well.
  Thence after tarrying for a space they rode,
  And fifty knights rode with them to the shores
  Of Severn, and they past to their own land.
  And there he kept the justice of the King
  So vigorously yet mildly, that all hearts
  Applauded, and the spiteful whisper died:
  And being ever foremost in the chase,
  And victor at the tilt and tournament,
  They called him the great Prince and man of men.
  But Enid, whom her ladies loved to call
  Enid the Fair, a grateful people named
  Enid the Good; and in their halls arose
  The cry of children, Enids and Geraints
  Of times to be; nor did he doubt her more,
  But rested in her fealty, till he crowned
  A happy life with a fair death, and fell
  Against the heathen of the Northern Sea
  In battle, fighting for the blameless King.



  Balin and Balan

  Pellam the King, who held and lost with Lot
  In that first war, and had his realm restored
  But rendered tributary, failed of late
  To send his tribute; wherefore Arthur called
  His treasurer, one of many years, and spake,
  'Go thou with him and him and bring it to us,
  Lest we should set one truer on his throne.
  Man's word is God in man.'
                            His Baron said
  'We go but harken:  there be two strange knights
  Who sit near Camelot at a fountain-side,
  A mile beneath the forest, challenging
  And overthrowing every knight who comes.
  Wilt thou I undertake them as we pass,
  And send them to thee?'
                         Arthur laughed upon him.
  'Old friend, too old to be so young, depart,
  Delay not thou for aught, but let them sit,
  Until they find a lustier than themselves.'

     So these departed.  Early, one fair dawn,
  The light-winged spirit of his youth returned
  On Arthur's heart; he armed himself and went,
  So coming to the fountain-side beheld
  Balin and Balan sitting statuelike,
  Brethren, to right and left the spring, that down,
  From underneath a plume of lady-fern,
  Sang, and the sand danced at the bottom of it.
  And on the right of Balin Balin's horse
  Was fast beside an alder, on the left
  Of Balan Balan's near a poplartree.
  'Fair Sirs,' said Arthur, 'wherefore sit ye here?'
  Balin and Balan answered 'For the sake
  Of glory; we be mightier men than all
  In Arthur's court; that also have we proved;
  For whatsoever knight against us came
  Or I or he have easily overthrown.'
  'I too,' said Arthur, 'am of Arthur's hall,
  But rather proven in his Paynim wars
  Than famous jousts; but see, or proven or not,
  Whether me likewise ye can overthrow.'
  And Arthur lightly smote the brethren down,
  And lightly so returned, and no man knew.

     Then Balin rose, and Balan, and beside
  The carolling water set themselves again,
  And spake no word until the shadow turned;
  When from the fringe of coppice round them burst
  A spangled pursuivant, and crying 'Sirs,
  Rise, follow! ye be sent for by the King,'
  They followed; whom when Arthur seeing asked
  'Tell me your names; why sat ye by the well?'
  Balin the stillness of a minute broke
  Saying 'An unmelodious name to thee,
  Balin, "the Savage"--that addition thine--
  My brother and my better, this man here,
  Balan.  I smote upon the naked skull
  A thrall of thine in open hall, my hand
  Was gauntleted, half slew him; for I heard
  He had spoken evil of me; thy just wrath
  Sent me a three-years' exile from thine eyes.
  I have not lived my life delightsomely:
  For I that did that violence to thy thrall,
  Had often wrought some fury on myself,
  Saving for Balan:  those three kingless years
  Have past--were wormwood-bitter to me.  King,
  Methought that if we sat beside the well,
  And hurled to ground what knight soever spurred
  Against us, thou would'st take me gladlier back,
  And make, as ten-times worthier to be thine
  Than twenty Balins, Balan knight.  I have said.
  Not so--not all.  A man of thine today
  Abashed us both, and brake my boast.  Thy will?'
  Said Arthur 'Thou hast ever spoken truth;
  Thy too fierce manhood would not let thee lie.
  Rise, my true knight.  As children learn, be thou
  Wiser for falling! walk with me, and move
  To music with thine Order and the King.
  Thy chair, a grief to all the brethren, stands
  Vacant, but thou retake it, mine again!'

     Thereafter, when Sir Balin entered hall,
  The Lost one Found was greeted as in Heaven
  With joy that blazed itself in woodland wealth
  Of leaf, and gayest garlandage of flowers,
  Along the walls and down the board; they sat,
  And cup clashed cup; they drank and some one sang,
  Sweet-voiced, a song of welcome, whereupon
  Their common shout in chorus, mounting, made
  Those banners of twelve battles overhead
  Stir, as they stirred of old, when Arthur's host
  Proclaimed him Victor, and the day was won.

     Then Balan added to their Order lived
  A wealthier life than heretofore with these
  And Balin, till their embassage returned.

     'Sir King' they brought report 'we hardly found,
  So bushed about it is with gloom, the hall
  Of him to whom ye sent us, Pellam, once
  A Christless foe of thine as ever dashed
  Horse against horse; but seeing that thy realm
  Hath prospered in the name of Christ, the King
  Took, as in rival heat, to holy things;
  And finds himself descended from the Saint
  Arimathaean Joseph; him who first
  Brought the great faith to Britain over seas;
  He boasts his life as purer than thine own;
  Eats scarce enow to keep his pulse abeat;
  Hath pushed aside his faithful wife, nor lets
  Or dame or damsel enter at his gates
  Lest he should be polluted.  This gray King
  Showed us a shrine wherein were wonders--yea--
  Rich arks with priceless bones of martyrdom,
  Thorns of the crown and shivers of the cross,
  And therewithal (for thus he told us) brought
  By holy Joseph thither, that same spear
  Wherewith the Roman pierced the side of Christ.
  He much amazed us; after, when we sought
  The tribute, answered "I have quite foregone
  All matters of this world:  Garlon, mine heir,
  Of him demand it," which this Garlon gave
  With much ado, railing at thine and thee.

     'But when we left, in those deep woods we found
  A knight of thine spear-stricken from behind,
  Dead, whom we buried; more than one of us
  Cried out on Garlon, but a woodman there
  Reported of some demon in the woods
  Was once a man, who driven by evil tongues
  From all his fellows, lived alone, and came
  To learn black magic, and to hate his kind
  With such a hate, that when he died, his soul
  Became a Fiend, which, as the man in life
  Was wounded by blind tongues he saw not whence,
  Strikes from behind.  This woodman showed the cave
  From which he sallies, and wherein he dwelt.
  We saw the hoof-print of a horse, no more.'

     Then Arthur, 'Let who goes before me, see
  He do not fall behind me:  foully slain
  And villainously! who will hunt for me
  This demon of the woods?'  Said Balan, 'I'!
  So claimed the quest and rode away, but first,
  Embracing Balin, 'Good my brother, hear!
  Let not thy moods prevail, when I am gone
  Who used to lay them! hold them outer fiends,
  Who leap at thee to tear thee; shake them aside,
  Dreams ruling when wit sleeps! yea, but to dream
  That any of these would wrong thee, wrongs thyself.
  Witness their flowery welcome.  Bound are they
  To speak no evil.  Truly save for fears,
  My fears for thee, so rich a fellowship
  Would make me wholly blest:  thou one of them,
  Be one indeed:  consider them, and all
  Their bearing in their common bond of love,
  No more of hatred than in Heaven itself,
  No more of jealousy than in Paradise.'

     So Balan warned, and went; Balin remained:
  Who--for but three brief moons had glanced away
  From being knighted till he smote the thrall,
  And faded from the presence into years
  Of exile--now would strictlier set himself
  To learn what Arthur meant by courtesy,
  Manhood, and knighthood; wherefore hovered round
  Lancelot, but when he marked his high sweet smile
  In passing, and a transitory word
  Make knight or churl or child or damsel seem
  From being smiled at happier in themselves--
  Sighed, as a boy lame-born beneath a height,
  That glooms his valley, sighs to see the peak
  Sun-flushed, or touch at night the northern star;
  For one from out his village lately climed
  And brought report of azure lands and fair,
  Far seen to left and right; and he himself
  Hath hardly scaled with help a hundred feet
  Up from the base:  so Balin marvelling oft
  How far beyond him Lancelot seemed to move,
  Groaned, and at times would mutter, 'These be gifts,
  Born with the blood, not learnable, divine,
  Beyond my reach.  Well had I foughten--well--
  In those fierce wars, struck hard--and had I crowned
  With my slain self the heaps of whom I slew--
  So--better!--But this worship of the Queen,
  That honour too wherein she holds him--this,
  This was the sunshine that hath given the man
  A growth, a name that branches o'er the rest,
  And strength against all odds, and what the King
  So prizes--overprizes--gentleness.
  Her likewise would I worship an I might.
  I never can be close with her, as he
  That brought her hither.  Shall I pray the King
  To let me bear some token of his Queen
  Whereon to gaze, remembering her--forget
  My heats and violences? live afresh?
  What, if the Queen disdained to grant it! nay
  Being so stately-gentle, would she make
  My darkness blackness? and with how sweet grace
  She greeted my return!  Bold will I be--
  Some goodly cognizance of Guinevere,
  In lieu of this rough beast upon my shield,
  Langued gules, and toothed with grinning savagery.'

     And Arthur, when Sir Balin sought him, said
  'What wilt thou bear?' Balin was bold, and asked
  To bear her own crown-royal upon shield,
  Whereat she smiled and turned her to the King,
  Who answered 'Thou shalt put the crown to use.
  The crown is but the shadow of the King,
  And this a shadow's shadow, let him have it,
  So this will help him of his violences!'
  'No shadow' said Sir Balin 'O my Queen,
  But light to me! no shadow, O my King,
  But golden earnest of a gentler life!'

     So Balin bare the crown, and all the knights
  Approved him, and the Queen, and all the world
  Made music, and he felt his being move
  In music with his Order, and the King.

     The nightingale, full-toned in middle May,
  Hath ever and anon a note so thin
  It seems another voice in other groves;
  Thus, after some quick burst of sudden wrath,
  The music in him seemed to change, and grow
  Faint and far-off.
                    And once he saw the thrall
  His passion half had gauntleted to death,
  That causer of his banishment and shame,
  Smile at him, as he deemed, presumptuously:
  His arm half rose to strike again, but fell:
  The memory of that cognizance on shield
  Weighted it down, but in himself he moaned:

     'Too high this mount of Camelot for me:
  These high-set courtesies are not for me.
  Shall I not rather prove the worse for these?
  Fierier and stormier from restraining, break
  Into some madness even before the Queen?'

     Thus, as a hearth lit in a mountain home,
  And glancing on the window, when the gloom
  Of twilight deepens round it, seems a flame
  That rages in the woodland far below,
  So when his moods were darkened, court and King
  And all the kindly warmth of Arthur's hall
  Shadowed an angry distance:  yet he strove
  To learn the graces of their Table, fought
  Hard with himself, and seemed at length in peace.

     Then chanced, one morning, that Sir Balin sat
  Close-bowered in that garden nigh the hall.
  A walk of roses ran from door to door;
  A walk of lilies crost it to the bower:
  And down that range of roses the great Queen
  Came with slow steps, the morning on her face;
  And all in shadow from the counter door
  Sir Lancelot as to meet her, then at once,
  As if he saw not, glanced aside, and paced
  The long white walk of lilies toward the bower.
  Followed the Queen; Sir Balin heard her 'Prince,
  Art thou so little loyal to thy Queen,
  As pass without good morrow to thy Queen?'
  To whom Sir Lancelot with his eyes on earth,
  'Fain would I still be loyal to the Queen.'
  'Yea so' she said 'but so to pass me by--
  So loyal scarce is loyal to thyself,
  Whom all men rate the king of courtesy.
  Let be:  ye stand, fair lord, as in a dream.'

     Then Lancelot with his hand among the flowers
  'Yea--for a dream.  Last night methought I saw
  That maiden Saint who stands with lily in hand
  In yonder shrine.  All round her prest the dark,
  And all the light upon her silver face
  Flowed from the spiritual lily that she held.
  Lo! these her emblems drew mine eyes--away:
  For see, how perfect-pure!  As light a flush
  As hardly tints the blossom of the quince
  Would mar their charm of stainless maidenhood.'

     'Sweeter to me' she said 'this garden rose
  Deep-hued and many-folded! sweeter still
  The wild-wood hyacinth and the bloom of May.
  Prince, we have ridden before among the flowers
  In those fair days--not all as cool as these,
  Though season-earlier.  Art thou sad? or sick?
  Our noble King will send thee his own leech--
  Sick? or for any matter angered at me?'

     Then Lancelot lifted his large eyes; they dwelt
  Deep-tranced on hers, and could not fall:  her hue
  Changed at his gaze:  so turning side by side
  They past, and Balin started from his bower.

     'Queen? subject? but I see not what I see.
  Damsel and lover? hear not what I hear.
  My father hath begotten me in his wrath.
  I suffer from the things before me, know,
  Learn nothing; am not worthy to be knight;
  A churl, a clown!' and in him gloom on gloom
  Deepened:  he sharply caught his lance and shield,
  Nor stayed to crave permission of the King,
  But, mad for strange adventure, dashed away.

     He took the selfsame track as Balan, saw
  The fountain where they sat together, sighed
  'Was I not better there with him?' and rode
  The skyless woods, but under open blue
  Came on the hoarhead woodman at a bough
  Wearily hewing.  'Churl, thine axe!' he cried,
  Descended, and disjointed it at a blow:
  To whom the woodman uttered wonderingly
  'Lord, thou couldst lay the Devil of these woods
  If arm of flesh could lay him.'  Balin cried
  'Him, or the viler devil who plays his part,
  To lay that devil would lay the Devil in me.'
  'Nay' said the churl, 'our devil is a truth,
  I saw the flash of him but yestereven.
  And some do say that our Sir Garlon too
  Hath learned black magic, and to ride unseen.
  Look to the cave.'  But Balin answered him
  'Old fabler, these be fancies of the churl,
  Look to thy woodcraft,' and so leaving him,
  Now with slack rein and careless of himself,
  Now with dug spur and raving at himself,
  Now with droopt brow down the long glades he rode;
  So marked not on his right a cavern-chasm
  Yawn over darkness, where, nor far within,
  The whole day died, but, dying, gleamed on rocks
  Roof-pendent, sharp; and others from the floor,
  Tusklike, arising, made that mouth of night
  Whereout the Demon issued up from Hell.
  He marked not this, but blind and deaf to all
  Save that chained rage, which ever yelpt within,
  Past eastward from the falling sun.  At once
  He felt the hollow-beaten mosses thud
  And tremble, and then the shadow of a spear,
  Shot from behind him, ran along the ground.
  Sideways he started from the path, and saw,
  With pointed lance as if to pierce, a shape,
  A light of armour by him flash, and pass
  And vanish in the woods; and followed this,
  But all so blind in rage that unawares
  He burst his lance against a forest bough,
  Dishorsed himself, and rose again, and fled
  Far, till the castle of a King, the hall
  Of Pellam, lichen-bearded, grayly draped
  With streaming grass, appeared, low-built but strong;
  The ruinous donjon as a knoll of moss,
  The battlement overtopt with ivytods,
  A home of bats, in every tower an owl.
     Then spake the men of Pellam crying 'Lord,
  Why wear ye this crown-royal upon shield?'
  Said Balin 'For the fairest and the best
  Of ladies living gave me this to bear.'
  So stalled his horse, and strode across the court,
  But found the greetings both of knight and King
  Faint in the low dark hall of banquet:  leaves
  Laid their green faces flat against the panes,
  Sprays grated, and the cankered boughs without
  Whined in the wood; for all was hushed within,
  Till when at feast Sir Garlon likewise asked
  'Why wear ye that crown-royal?' Balin said
  'The Queen we worship, Lancelot, I, and all,
  As fairest, best and purest, granted me
  To bear it!'  Such a sound (for Arthur's knights
  Were hated strangers in the hall) as makes
  The white swan-mother, sitting, when she hears
  A strange knee rustle through her secret reeds,
  Made Garlon, hissing; then he sourly smiled.
  'Fairest I grant her:  I have seen; but best,
  Best, purest? thou from Arthur's hall, and yet
  So simple! hast thou eyes, or if, are these
  So far besotted that they fail to see
  This fair wife-worship cloaks a secret shame?
  Truly, ye men of Arthur be but babes.'

     A goblet on the board by Balin, bossed
  With holy Joseph's legend, on his right
  Stood, all of massiest bronze:  one side had sea
  And ship and sail and angels blowing on it:
  And one was rough with wattling, and the walls
  Of that low church he built at Glastonbury.
  This Balin graspt, but while in act to hurl,
  Through memory of that token on the shield
  Relaxed his hold:  'I will be gentle' he thought
  'And passing gentle' caught his hand away,
  Then fiercely to Sir Garlon 'Eyes have I
  That saw today the shadow of a spear,
  Shot from behind me, run along the ground;
  Eyes too that long have watched how Lancelot draws
  From homage to the best and purest, might,
  Name, manhood, and a grace, but scantly thine,
  Who, sitting in thine own hall, canst endure
  To mouth so huge a foulness--to thy guest,
  Me, me of Arthur's Table.  Felon talk!
  Let be! no more!'
                   But not the less by night
  The scorn of Garlon, poisoning all his rest,
  Stung him in dreams.  At length, and dim through leaves
  Blinkt the white morn, sprays grated, and old boughs
  Whined in the wood.  He rose, descended, met
  The scorner in the castle court, and fain,
  For hate and loathing, would have past him by;
  But when Sir Garlon uttered mocking-wise;
  'What, wear ye still that same crown-scandalous?'
  His countenance blackened, and his forehead veins
  Bloated, and branched; and tearing out of sheath
  The brand, Sir Balin with a fiery 'Ha!
  So thou be shadow, here I make thee ghost,'
  Hard upon helm smote him, and the blade flew
  Splintering in six, and clinkt upon the stones.
  Then Garlon, reeling slowly backward, fell,
  And Balin by the banneret of his helm
  Dragged him, and struck, but from the castle a cry
  Sounded across the court, and--men-at-arms,
  A score with pointed lances, making at him--
  He dashed the pummel at the foremost face,
  Beneath a low door dipt, and made his feet
  Wings through a glimmering gallery, till he marked
  The portal of King Pellam's chapel wide
  And inward to the wall; he stept behind;
  Thence in a moment heard them pass like wolves
  Howling; but while he stared about the shrine,
  In which he scarce could spy the Christ for Saints,
  Beheld before a golden altar lie
  The longest lance his eyes had ever seen,
  Point-painted red; and seizing thereupon
  Pushed through an open casement down, leaned on it,
  Leapt in a semicircle, and lit on earth;
  Then hand at ear, and harkening from what side
  The blindfold rummage buried in the walls
  Might echo, ran the counter path, and found
  His charger, mounted on him and away.
  An arrow whizzed to the right, one to the left,
  One overhead; and Pellam's feeble cry
  'Stay, stay him! he defileth heavenly things
  With earthly uses'--made him quickly dive
  Beneath the boughs, and race through many a mile
  Of dense and open, till his goodly horse,
  Arising wearily at a fallen oak,
  Stumbled headlong, and cast him face to ground.

     Half-wroth he had not ended, but all glad,
  Knightlike, to find his charger yet unlamed,
  Sir Balin drew the shield from off his neck,
  Stared at the priceless cognizance, and thought
  'I have shamed thee so that now thou shamest me,
  Thee will I bear no more,' high on a branch
  Hung it, and turned aside into the woods,
  And there in gloom cast himself all along,
  Moaning 'My violences, my violences!'

     But now the wholesome music of the wood
  Was dumbed by one from out the hall of Mark,
  A damsel-errant, warbling, as she rode
  The woodland alleys, Vivien, with her Squire.

     'The fire of Heaven has killed the barren cold,
  And kindled all the plain and all the wold.
  The new leaf ever pushes off the old.
  The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell.

     'Old priest, who mumble worship in your quire--
  Old monk and nun, ye scorn the world's desire,
  Yet in your frosty cells ye feel the fire!
  The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell.

     'The fire of Heaven is on the dusty ways.
  The wayside blossoms open to the blaze.
  The whole wood-world is one full peal of praise.
  The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell.

     'The fire of Heaven is lord of all things good,
  And starve not thou this fire within thy blood,
  But follow Vivien through the fiery flood!
  The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell!'

     Then turning to her Squire 'This fire of Heaven,
  This old sun-worship, boy, will rise again,
  And beat the cross to earth, and break the King
  And all his Table.'
                     Then they reached a glade,
  Where under one long lane of cloudless air
  Before another wood, the royal crown
  Sparkled, and swaying upon a restless elm
  Drew the vague glance of Vivien, and her Squire;
  Amazed were these; 'Lo there' she cried--'a crown--
  Borne by some high lord-prince of Arthur's hall,
  And there a horse! the rider? where is he?
  See, yonder lies one dead within the wood.
  Not dead; he stirs!--but sleeping.  I will speak.
  Hail, royal knight, we break on thy sweet rest,
  Not, doubtless, all unearned by noble deeds.
  But bounden art thou, if from Arthur's hall,
  To help the weak.  Behold, I fly from shame,
  A lustful King, who sought to win my love
  Through evil ways:  the knight, with whom I rode,
  Hath suffered misadventure, and my squire
  Hath in him small defence; but thou, Sir Prince,
  Wilt surely guide me to the warrior King,
  Arthur the blameless, pure as any maid,
  To get me shelter for my maidenhood.
  I charge thee by that crown upon thy shield,
  And by the great Queen's name, arise and hence.'

     And Balin rose, 'Thither no more! nor Prince
  Nor knight am I, but one that hath defamed
  The cognizance she gave me:  here I dwell
  Savage among the savage woods, here die--
  Die:  let the wolves' black maws ensepulchre
  Their brother beast, whose anger was his lord.
  O me, that such a name as Guinevere's,
  Which our high Lancelot hath so lifted up,
  And been thereby uplifted, should through me,
  My violence, and my villainy, come to shame.'

     Thereat she suddenly laughed and shrill, anon
  Sighed all as suddenly.  Said Balin to her
  'Is this thy courtesy--to mock me, ha?
  Hence, for I will not with thee.'  Again she sighed
  'Pardon, sweet lord! we maidens often laugh
  When sick at heart, when rather we should weep.
  I knew thee wronged.  I brake upon thy rest,
  And now full loth am I to break thy dream,
  But thou art man, and canst abide a truth,
  Though bitter.  Hither, boy--and mark me well.
  Dost thou remember at Caerleon once--
  A year ago--nay, then I love thee not--
  Ay, thou rememberest well--one summer dawn--
  By the great tower--Caerleon upon Usk--
  Nay, truly we were hidden:  this fair lord,
  The flower of all their vestal knighthood, knelt
  In amorous homage--knelt--what else?--O ay
  Knelt, and drew down from out his night-black hair
  And mumbled that white hand whose ringed caress
  Had wandered from her own King's golden head,
  And lost itself in darkness, till she cried--
  I thought the great tower would crash down on both--
  "Rise, my sweet King, and kiss me on the lips,
  Thou art my King."  This lad, whose lightest word
  Is mere white truth in simple nakedness,
  Saw them embrace:  he reddens, cannot speak,
  So bashful, he! but all the maiden Saints,
  The deathless mother-maidenhood of Heaven,
  Cry out upon her.  Up then, ride with me!
  Talk not of shame! thou canst not, an thou would'st,
  Do these more shame than these have done themselves.'

     She lied with ease; but horror-stricken he,
  Remembering that dark bower at Camelot,
  Breathed in a dismal whisper 'It is truth.'

     Sunnily she smiled 'And even in this lone wood,
  Sweet lord, ye do right well to whisper this.
  Fools prate, and perish traitors.  Woods have tongues,
  As walls have ears:  but thou shalt go with me,
  And we will speak at first exceeding low.
  Meet is it the good King be not deceived.
  See now, I set thee high on vantage ground,
  From whence to watch the time, and eagle-like
  Stoop at thy will on Lancelot and the Queen.'

     She ceased; his evil spirit upon him leapt,
  He ground his teeth together, sprang with a yell,
  Tore from the branch, and cast on earth, the shield,
  Drove his mailed heel athwart the royal crown,
  Stampt all into defacement, hurled it from him
  Among the forest weeds, and cursed the tale,
  The told-of, and the teller.
                              That weird yell,
  Unearthlier than all shriek of bird or beast,
  Thrilled through the woods; and Balan lurking there
  (His quest was unaccomplished) heard and thought
  'The scream of that Wood-devil I came to quell!'
  Then nearing 'Lo! he hath slain some brother-knight,
  And tramples on the goodly shield to show
  His loathing of our Order and the Queen.
  My quest, meseems, is here.  Or devil or man
  Guard thou thine head.'  Sir Balin spake not word,
  But snatched a sudden buckler from the Squire,
  And vaulted on his horse, and so they crashed
  In onset, and King Pellam's holy spear,
  Reputed to be red with sinless blood,
  Redded at once with sinful, for the point
  Across the maiden shield of Balan pricked
  The hauberk to the flesh; and Balin's horse
  Was wearied to the death, and, when they clashed,
  Rolling back upon Balin, crushed the man
  Inward, and either fell, and swooned away.

     Then to her Squire muttered the damsel 'Fools!
  This fellow hath wrought some foulness with his Queen:
  Else never had he borne her crown, nor raved
  And thus foamed over at a rival name:
  But thou, Sir Chick, that scarce hast broken shell,
  Art yet half-yolk, not even come to down--
  Who never sawest Caerleon upon Usk--
  And yet hast often pleaded for my love--
  See what I see, be thou where I have been,
  Or else Sir Chick--dismount and loose their casques
  I fain would know what manner of men they be.'
  And when the Squire had loosed them, 'Goodly!--look!
  They might have cropt the myriad flower of May,
  And butt each other here, like brainless bulls,
  Dead for one heifer!
                      Then the gentle Squire
  'I hold them happy, so they died for love:
  And, Vivien, though ye beat me like your dog,
  I too could die, as now I live, for thee.'

     'Live on, Sir Boy,' she cried.  'I better prize
  The living dog than the dead lion:  away!
  I cannot brook to gaze upon the dead.'
  Then leapt her palfrey o'er the fallen oak,
  And bounding forward 'Leave them to the wolves.'

     But when their foreheads felt the cooling air,
  Balin first woke, and seeing that true face,
  Familiar up from cradle-time, so wan,
  Crawled slowly with low moans to where he lay,
  And on his dying brother cast himself
  Dying; and he lifted faint eyes; he felt
  One near him; all at once they found the world,
  Staring wild-wide; then with a childlike wail
  And drawing down the dim disastrous brow
  That o'er him hung, he kissed it, moaned and spake;

     'O Balin, Balin, I that fain had died
  To save thy life, have brought thee to thy death.
  Why had ye not the shield I knew? and why
  Trampled ye thus on that which bare the Crown?'

     Then Balin told him brokenly, and in gasps,
  All that had chanced, and Balan moaned again.

     'Brother, I dwelt a day in Pellam's hall:
  This Garlon mocked me, but I heeded not.
  And one said "Eat in peace! a liar is he,
  And hates thee for the tribute!" this good knight
  Told me, that twice a wanton damsel came,
  And sought for Garlon at the castle-gates,
  Whom Pellam drove away with holy heat.
  I well believe this damsel, and the one
  Who stood beside thee even now, the same.
  "She dwells among the woods" he said "and meets
  And dallies with him in the Mouth of Hell."
  Foul are their lives; foul are their lips; they lied.
  Pure as our own true Mother is our Queen."

     'O brother' answered Balin 'woe is me!
  My madness all thy life has been thy doom,
  Thy curse, and darkened all thy day; and now
  The night has come.  I scarce can see thee now.

  Goodnight! for we shall never bid again
  Goodmorrow--Dark my doom was here, and dark
  It will be there.  I see thee now no more.
  I would not mine again should darken thine,
  Goodnight, true brother.
                          Balan answered low
  'Goodnight, true brother here! goodmorrow there!
  We two were born together, and we die
  Together by one doom:' and while he spoke
  Closed his death-drowsing eyes, and slept the sleep
  With Balin, either locked in either's arm.



  Merlin and Vivien

  A storm was coming, but the winds were still,
  And in the wild woods of Broceliande,
  Before an oak, so hollow, huge and old
  It looked a tower of ivied masonwork,
  At Merlin's feet the wily Vivien lay.

     For he that always bare in bitter grudge
  The slights of Arthur and his Table, Mark
  The Cornish King, had heard a wandering voice,
  A minstrel of Caerleon by strong storm
  Blown into shelter at Tintagil, say
  That out of naked knightlike purity
  Sir Lancelot worshipt no unmarried girl
  But the great Queen herself, fought in her name,
  Sware by her--vows like theirs, that high in heaven
  Love most, but neither marry, nor are given
  In marriage, angels of our Lord's report.

     He ceased, and then--for Vivien sweetly said
  (She sat beside the banquet nearest Mark),
  'And is the fair example followed, Sir,
  In Arthur's household?'--answered innocently:

     'Ay, by some few--ay, truly--youths that hold
  It more beseems the perfect virgin knight
  To worship woman as true wife beyond
  All hopes of gaining, than as maiden girl.
  They place their pride in Lancelot and the Queen.
  So passionate for an utter purity
  Beyond the limit of their bond, are these,
  For Arthur bound them not to singleness.
  Brave hearts and clean! and yet--God guide them--young.'

     Then Mark was half in heart to hurl his cup
  Straight at the speaker, but forbore:  he rose
  To leave the hall, and, Vivien following him,
  Turned to her:  'Here are snakes within the grass;
  And you methinks, O Vivien, save ye fear
  The monkish manhood, and the mask of pure
  Worn by this court, can stir them till they sting.'

     And Vivien answered, smiling scornfully,
  'Why fear? because that fostered at thy court
  I savour of thy--virtues? fear them? no.
  As Love, if Love is perfect, casts out fear,
  So Hate, if Hate is perfect, casts out fear.
  My father died in battle against the King,
  My mother on his corpse in open field;
  She bore me there, for born from death was I
  Among the dead and sown upon the wind--
  And then on thee! and shown the truth betimes,
  That old true filth, and bottom of the well
  Where Truth is hidden.  Gracious lessons thine
  And maxims of the mud!  "This Arthur pure!
  Great Nature through the flesh herself hath made
  Gives him the lie!  There is no being pure,
  My cherub; saith not Holy Writ the same?"--
  If I were Arthur, I would have thy blood.
  Thy blessing, stainless King!  I bring thee back,
  When I have ferreted out their burrowings,
  The hearts of all this Order in mine hand--
  Ay--so that fate and craft and folly close,
  Perchance, one curl of Arthur's golden beard.
  To me this narrow grizzled fork of thine
  Is cleaner-fashioned--Well, I loved thee first,
  That warps the wit.'

                      Loud laughed the graceless Mark,
  But Vivien, into Camelot stealing, lodged
  Low in the city, and on a festal day
  When Guinevere was crossing the great hall
  Cast herself down, knelt to the Queen, and wailed.

     'Why kneel ye there?  What evil hath ye wrought?
  Rise!' and the damsel bidden rise arose
  And stood with folded hands and downward eyes
  Of glancing corner, and all meekly said,
  'None wrought, but suffered much, an orphan maid!
  My father died in battle for thy King,
  My mother on his corpse--in open field,
  The sad sea-sounding wastes of Lyonnesse--
  Poor wretch--no friend!--and now by Mark the King
  For that small charm of feature mine, pursued--
  If any such be mine--I fly to thee.
  Save, save me thou--Woman of women--thine
  The wreath of beauty, thine the crown of power,
  Be thine the balm of pity, O Heaven's own white
  Earth-angel, stainless bride of stainless King--
  Help, for he follows! take me to thyself!
  O yield me shelter for mine innocency
  Among thy maidens!

                    Here her slow sweet eyes
  Fear-tremulous, but humbly hopeful, rose
  Fixt on her hearer's, while the Queen who stood
  All glittering like May sunshine on May leaves
  In green and gold, and plumed with green replied,
  'Peace, child! of overpraise and overblame
  We choose the last.  Our noble Arthur, him
  Ye scarce can overpraise, will hear and know.
  Nay--we believe all evil of thy Mark--
  Well, we shall test thee farther; but this hour
  We ride a-hawking with Sir Lancelot.
  He hath given us a fair falcon which he trained;
  We go to prove it.  Bide ye here the while.'

     She past; and Vivien murmured after 'Go!
  I bide the while.'  Then through the portal-arch
  Peering askance, and muttering broken-wise,
  As one that labours with an evil dream,
  Beheld the Queen and Lancelot get to horse.

     'Is that the Lancelot? goodly--ay, but gaunt:
  Courteous--amends for gauntness--takes her hand--
  That glance of theirs, but for the street, had been
  A clinging kiss--how hand lingers in hand!
  Let go at last!--they ride away--to hawk
  For waterfowl.  Royaller game is mine.
  For such a supersensual sensual bond
  As that gray cricket chirpt of at our hearth--
  Touch flax with flame--a glance will serve--the liars!
  Ah little rat that borest in the dyke
  Thy hole by night to let the boundless deep
  Down upon far-off cities while they dance--
  Or dream--of thee they dreamed not--nor of me
  These--ay, but each of either:  ride, and dream
  The mortal dream that never yet was mine--
  Ride, ride and dream until ye wake--to me!
  Then, narrow court and lubber King, farewell!
  For Lancelot will be gracious to the rat,
  And our wise Queen, if knowing that I know,
  Will hate, loathe, fear--but honour me the more.'

     Yet while they rode together down the plain,
  Their talk was all of training, terms of art,
  Diet and seeling, jesses, leash and lure.
  'She is too noble' he said 'to check at pies,
  Nor will she rake:  there is no baseness in her.'
  Here when the Queen demanded as by chance
  'Know ye the stranger woman?'  'Let her be,'
  Said Lancelot and unhooded casting off
  The goodly falcon free; she towered; her bells,
  Tone under tone, shrilled; and they lifted up
  Their eager faces, wondering at the strength,
  Boldness and royal knighthood of the bird
  Who pounced her quarry and slew it.  Many a time
  As once--of old--among the flowers--they rode.

     But Vivien half-forgotten of the Queen
  Among her damsels broidering sat, heard, watched
  And whispered:  through the peaceful court she crept
  And whispered:  then as Arthur in the highest
  Leavened the world, so Vivien in the lowest,
  Arriving at a time of golden rest,
  And sowing one ill hint from ear to ear,
  While all the heathen lay at Arthur's feet,
  And no quest came, but all was joust and play,
  Leavened his hall.  They heard and let her be.

     Thereafter as an enemy that has left
  Death in the living waters, and withdrawn,
  The wily Vivien stole from Arthur's court.

     She hated all the knights, and heard in thought
  Their lavish comment when her name was named.
  For once, when Arthur walking all alone,
  Vext at a rumour issued from herself
  Of some corruption crept among his knights,
  Had met her, Vivien, being greeted fair,
  Would fain have wrought upon his cloudy mood
  With reverent eyes mock-loyal, shaken voice,
  And fluttered adoration, and at last
  With dark sweet hints of some who prized him more
  Than who should prize him most; at which the King
  Had gazed upon her blankly and gone by:
  But one had watched, and had not held his peace:
  It made the laughter of an afternoon
  That Vivien should attempt the blameless King.
  And after that, she set herself to gain
  Him, the most famous man of all those times,
  Merlin, who knew the range of all their arts,
  Had built the King his havens, ships, and halls,
  Was also Bard, and knew the starry heavens;
  The people called him Wizard; whom at first
  She played about with slight and sprightly talk,
  And vivid smiles, and faintly-venomed points
  Of slander, glancing here and grazing there;
  And yielding to his kindlier moods, the Seer
  Would watch her at her petulance, and play,
  Even when they seemed unloveable, and laugh
  As those that watch a kitten; thus he grew
  Tolerant of what he half disdained, and she,
  Perceiving that she was but half disdained,
  Began to break her sports with graver fits,
  Turn red or pale, would often when they met
  Sigh fully, or all-silent gaze upon him
  With such a fixt devotion, that the old man,
  Though doubtful, felt the flattery, and at times
  Would flatter his own wish in age for love,
  And half believe her true:  for thus at times
  He wavered; but that other clung to him,
  Fixt in her will, and so the seasons went.

     Then fell on Merlin a great melancholy;
  He walked with dreams and darkness, and he found
  A doom that ever poised itself to fall,
  An ever-moaning battle in the mist,
  World-war of dying flesh against the life,
  Death in all life and lying in all love,
  The meanest having power upon the highest,
  And the high purpose broken by the worm.

     So leaving Arthur's court he gained the beach;
  There found a little boat, and stept into it;
  And Vivien followed, but he marked her not.
  She took the helm and he the sail; the boat
  Drave with a sudden wind across the deeps,
  And touching Breton sands, they disembarked.
  And then she followed Merlin all the way,
  Even to the wild woods of Broceliande.
  For Merlin once had told her of a charm,
  The which if any wrought on anyone
  With woven paces and with waving arms,
  The man so wrought on ever seemed to lie
  Closed in the four walls of a hollow tower,
  From which was no escape for evermore;
  And none could find that man for evermore,
  Nor could he see but him who wrought the charm
  Coming and going, and he lay as dead
  And lost to life and use and name and fame.
  And Vivien ever sought to work the charm
  Upon the great Enchanter of the Time,
  As fancying that her glory would be great
  According to his greatness whom she quenched.

     There lay she all her length and kissed his feet,
  As if in deepest reverence and in love.
  A twist of gold was round her hair; a robe
  Of samite without price, that more exprest
  Than hid her, clung about her lissome limbs,
  In colour like the satin-shining palm
  On sallows in the windy gleams of March:
  And while she kissed them, crying, 'Trample me,
  Dear feet, that I have followed through the world,
  And I will pay you worship; tread me down
  And I will kiss you for it;' he was mute:
  So dark a forethought rolled about his brain,
  As on a dull day in an Ocean cave
  The blind wave feeling round his long sea-hall
  In silence:  wherefore, when she lifted up
  A face of sad appeal, and spake and said,
  'O Merlin, do ye love me?' and again,
  'O Merlin, do ye love me?' and once more,
  'Great Master, do ye love me?' he was mute.
  And lissome Vivien, holding by his heel,
  Writhed toward him, slided up his knee and sat,
  Behind his ankle twined her hollow feet
  Together, curved an arm about his neck,
  Clung like a snake; and letting her left hand
  Droop from his mighty shoulder, as a leaf,
  Made with her right a comb of pearl to part
  The lists of such a board as youth gone out
  Had left in ashes:  then he spoke and said,
  Not looking at her, 'Who are wise in love
  Love most, say least,' and Vivien answered quick,
  'I saw the little elf-god eyeless once
  In Arthur's arras hall at Camelot:
  But neither eyes nor tongue--O stupid child!
  Yet you are wise who say it; let me think
  Silence is wisdom:  I am silent then,
  And ask no kiss;' then adding all at once,
  'And lo, I clothe myself with wisdom,' drew
  The vast and shaggy mantle of his beard
  Across her neck and bosom to her knee,
  And called herself a gilded summer fly
  Caught in a great old tyrant spider's web,
  Who meant to eat her up in that wild wood
  Without one word.  So Vivien called herself,
  But rather seemed a lovely baleful star
  Veiled in gray vapour; till he sadly smiled:
  'To what request for what strange boon,' he said,
  'Are these your pretty tricks and fooleries,
  O Vivien, the preamble? yet my thanks,
  For these have broken up my melancholy.'

     And Vivien answered smiling saucily,
  'What, O my Master, have ye found your voice?
  I bid the stranger welcome.  Thanks at last!
  But yesterday you never opened lip,
  Except indeed to drink:  no cup had we:
  In mine own lady palms I culled the spring
  That gathered trickling dropwise from the cleft,
  And made a pretty cup of both my hands
  And offered you it kneeling:  then you drank
  And knew no more, nor gave me one poor word;
  O no more thanks than might a goat have given
  With no more sign of reverence than a beard.
  And when we halted at that other well,
  And I was faint to swooning, and you lay
  Foot-gilt with all the blossom-dust of those
  Deep meadows we had traversed, did you know
  That Vivien bathed your feet before her own?
  And yet no thanks:  and all through this wild wood
  And all this morning when I fondled you:
  Boon, ay, there was a boon, one not so strange--
  How had I wronged you? surely ye are wise,
  But such a silence is more wise than kind.'

     And Merlin locked his hand in hers and said:
  'O did ye never lie upon the shore,
  And watch the curled white of the coming wave
  Glassed in the slippery sand before it breaks?
  Even such a wave, but not so pleasurable,
  Dark in the glass of some presageful mood,
  Had I for three days seen, ready to fall.
  And then I rose and fled from Arthur's court
  To break the mood.  You followed me unasked;
  And when I looked, and saw you following me still,
  My mind involved yourself the nearest thing
  In that mind-mist:  for shall I tell you truth?
  You seemed that wave about to break upon me
  And sweep me from my hold upon the world,
  My use and name and fame.  Your pardon, child.
  Your pretty sports have brightened all again.
  And ask your boon, for boon I owe you thrice,
  Once for wrong done you by confusion, next
  For thanks it seems till now neglected, last
  For these your dainty gambols:  wherefore ask;
  And take this boon so strange and not so strange.'

     And Vivien answered smiling mournfully:
  'O not so strange as my long asking it,
  Not yet so strange as you yourself are strange,
  Nor half so strange as that dark mood of yours.
  I ever feared ye were not wholly mine;
  And see, yourself have owned ye did me wrong.
  The people call you prophet:  let it be:
  But not of those that can expound themselves.
  Take Vivien for expounder; she will call
  That three-days-long presageful gloom of yours
  No presage, but the same mistrustful mood
  That makes you seem less noble than yourself,
  Whenever I have asked this very boon,
  Now asked again:  for see you not, dear love,
  That such a mood as that, which lately gloomed
  Your fancy when ye saw me following you,
  Must make me fear still more you are not mine,
  Must make me yearn still more to prove you mine,
  And make me wish still more to learn this charm
  Of woven paces and of waving hands,
  As proof of trust.  O Merlin, teach it me.
  The charm so taught will charm us both to rest.
  For, grant me some slight power upon your fate,
  I, feeling that you felt me worthy trust,
  Should rest and let you rest, knowing you mine.
  And therefore be as great as ye are named,
  Not muffled round with selfish reticence.
  How hard you look and how denyingly!
  O, if you think this wickedness in me,
  That I should prove it on you unawares,
  That makes me passing wrathful; then our bond
  Had best be loosed for ever:  but think or not,
  By Heaven that hears I tell you the clean truth,
  As clean as blood of babes, as white as milk:
  O Merlin, may this earth, if ever I,
  If these unwitty wandering wits of mine,
  Even in the jumbled rubbish of a dream,
  Have tript on such conjectural treachery--
  May this hard earth cleave to the Nadir hell
  Down, down, and close again, and nip me flat,
  If I be such a traitress.  Yield my boon,
  Till which I scarce can yield you all I am;
  And grant my re-reiterated wish,
  The great proof of your love:  because I think,
  However wise, ye hardly know me yet.'

     And Merlin loosed his hand from hers and said,
  'I never was less wise, however wise,
  Too curious Vivien, though you talk of trust,
  Than when I told you first of such a charm.
  Yea, if ye talk of trust I tell you this,
  Too much I trusted when I told you that,
  And stirred this vice in you which ruined man
  Through woman the first hour; for howsoe'er
  In children a great curiousness be well,
  Who have to learn themselves and all the world,
  In you, that are no child, for still I find
  Your face is practised when I spell the lines,
  I call it,--well, I will not call it vice:
  But since you name yourself the summer fly,
  I well could wish a cobweb for the gnat,
  That settles, beaten back, and beaten back
  Settles, till one could yield for weariness:
  But since I will not yield to give you power
  Upon my life and use and name and fame,
  Why will ye never ask some other boon?
  Yea, by God's rood, I trusted you too much.'

     And Vivien, like the tenderest-hearted maid
  That ever bided tryst at village stile,
  Made answer, either eyelid wet with tears:
  'Nay, Master, be not wrathful with your maid;
  Caress her:  let her feel herself forgiven
  Who feels no heart to ask another boon.
  I think ye hardly know the tender rhyme
  Of "trust me not at all or all in all."
  I heard the great Sir Lancelot sing it once,
  And it shall answer for me.  Listen to it.

     "In Love, if Love be Love, if Love be ours,
  Faith and unfaith can ne'er be equal powers:
  Unfaith in aught is want of faith in all.

     "It is the little rift within the lute,
  That by and by will make the music mute,
  And ever widening slowly silence all.

     "The little rift within the lover's lute
  Or little pitted speck in garnered fruit,
  That rotting inward slowly moulders all.

     "It is not worth the keeping:  let it go:
  But shall it? answer, darling, answer, no.
  And trust me not at all or all in all."

  O Master, do ye love my tender rhyme?'

     And Merlin looked and half believed her true,
  So tender was her voice, so fair her face,
  So sweetly gleamed her eyes behind her tears
  Like sunlight on the plain behind a shower:
  And yet he answered half indignantly:

     'Far other was the song that once I heard
  By this huge oak, sung nearly where we sit:
  For here we met, some ten or twelve of us,
  To chase a creature that was current then
  In these wild woods, the hart with golden horns.
  It was the time when first the question rose
  About the founding of a Table Round,
  That was to be, for love of God and men
  And noble deeds, the flower of all the world.
  And each incited each to noble deeds.
  And while we waited, one, the youngest of us,
  We could not keep him silent, out he flashed,
  And into such a song, such fire for fame,
  Such trumpet-glowings in it, coming down
  To such a stern and iron-clashing close,
  That when he stopt we longed to hurl together,
  And should have done it; but the beauteous beast
  Scared by the noise upstarted at our feet,
  And like a silver shadow slipt away
  Through the dim land; and all day long we rode
  Through the dim land against a rushing wind,
  That glorious roundel echoing in our ears,
  And chased the flashes of his golden horns
  Till they vanished by the fairy well
  That laughs at iron--as our warriors did--
  Where children cast their pins and nails, and cry,
  "Laugh, little well!" but touch it with a sword,
  It buzzes fiercely round the point; and there
  We lost him:  such a noble song was that.
  But, Vivien, when you sang me that sweet rhyme,
  I felt as though you knew this cursed charm,
  Were proving it on me, and that I lay
  And felt them slowly ebbing, name and fame.'

     And Vivien answered smiling mournfully:
  'O mine have ebbed away for evermore,
  And all through following you to this wild wood,
  Because I saw you sad, to comfort you.
  Lo now, what hearts have men! they never mount
  As high as woman in her selfless mood.
  And touching fame, howe'er ye scorn my song,
  Take one verse more--the lady speaks it--this:

     '"My name, once mine, now thine, is closelier mine,
  For fame, could fame be mine, that fame were thine,
  And shame, could shame be thine, that shame were mine.
  So trust me not at all or all in all."

     'Says she not well? and there is more--this rhyme
  Is like the fair pearl-necklace of the Queen,
  That burst in dancing, and the pearls were spilt;
  Some lost, some stolen, some as relics kept.
  But nevermore the same two sister pearls
  Ran down the silken thread to kiss each other
  On her white neck--so is it with this rhyme:
  It lives dispersedly in many hands,
  And every minstrel sings it differently;
  Yet is there one true line, the pearl of pearls:
  "Man dreams of Fame while woman wakes to love."
  Yea!  Love, though Love were of the grossest, carves
  A portion from the solid present, eats
  And uses, careless of the rest; but Fame,
  The Fame that follows death is nothing to us;
  And what is Fame in life but half-disfame,
  And counterchanged with darkness? ye yourself
  Know well that Envy calls you Devil's son,
  And since ye seem the Master of all Art,
  They fain would make you Master of all vice.'

     And Merlin locked his hand in hers and said,
  'I once was looking for a magic weed,
  And found a fair young squire who sat alone,
  Had carved himself a knightly shield of wood,
  And then was painting on it fancied arms,
  Azure, an Eagle rising or, the Sun
  In dexter chief; the scroll "I follow fame."
  And speaking not, but leaning over him
  I took his brush and blotted out the bird,
  And made a Gardener putting in a graff,
  With this for motto, "Rather use than fame."
  You should have seen him blush; but afterwards
  He made a stalwart knight.  O Vivien,
  For you, methinks you think you love me well;
  For me, I love you somewhat; rest:  and Love
  Should have some rest and pleasure in himself,
  Not ever be too curious for a boon,
  Too prurient for a proof against the grain
  Of him ye say ye love:  but Fame with men,
  Being but ampler means to serve mankind,
  Should have small rest or pleasure in herself,
  But work as vassal to the larger love,
  That dwarfs the petty love of one to one.
  Use gave me Fame at first, and Fame again
  Increasing gave me use.  Lo, there my boon!
  What other? for men sought to prove me vile,
  Because I fain had given them greater wits:
  And then did Envy call me Devil's son:
  The sick weak beast seeking to help herself
  By striking at her better, missed, and brought
  Her own claw back, and wounded her own heart.
  Sweet were the days when I was all unknown,
  But when my name was lifted up, the storm
  Brake on the mountain and I cared not for it.
  Right well know I that Fame is half-disfame,
  Yet needs must work my work.  That other fame,
  To one at least, who hath not children, vague,
  The cackle of the unborn about the grave,
  I cared not for it:  a single misty star,
  Which is the second in a line of stars
  That seem a sword beneath a belt of three,
  I never gazed upon it but I dreamt
  Of some vast charm concluded in that star
  To make fame nothing.  Wherefore, if I fear,
  Giving you power upon me through this charm,
  That you might play me falsely, having power,
  However well ye think ye love me now
  (As sons of kings loving in pupilage
  Have turned to tyrants when they came to power)
  I rather dread the loss of use than fame;
  If you--and not so much from wickedness,
  As some wild turn of anger, or a mood
  Of overstrained affection, it may be,
  To keep me all to your own self,--or else
  A sudden spurt of woman's jealousy,--
  Should try this charm on whom ye say ye love.'

     And Vivien answered smiling as in wrath:
  'Have I not sworn?  I am not trusted.  Good!
  Well, hide it, hide it; I shall find it out;
  And being found take heed of Vivien.
  A woman and not trusted, doubtless I
  Might feel some sudden turn of anger born
  Of your misfaith; and your fine epithet
  Is accurate too, for this full love of mine
  Without the full heart back may merit well
  Your term of overstrained.  So used as I,
  My daily wonder is, I love at all.
  And as to woman's jealousy, O why not?
  O to what end, except a jealous one,
  And one to make me jealous if I love,
  Was this fair charm invented by yourself?
  I well believe that all about this world
  Ye cage a buxom captive here and there,
  Closed in the four walls of a hollow tower
  From which is no escape for evermore.'

     Then the great Master merrily answered her:
  'Full many a love in loving youth was mine;
  I needed then no charm to keep them mine
  But youth and love; and that full heart of yours
  Whereof ye prattle, may now assure you mine;
  So live uncharmed.  For those who wrought it first,
  The wrist is parted from the hand that waved,
  The feet unmortised from their ankle-bones
  Who paced it, ages back:  but will ye hear
  The legend as in guerdon for your rhyme?

     'There lived a king in the most Eastern East,
  Less old than I, yet older, for my blood
  Hath earnest in it of far springs to be.
  A tawny pirate anchored in his port,
  Whose bark had plundered twenty nameless isles;
  And passing one, at the high peep of dawn,
  He saw two cities in a thousand boats
  All fighting for a woman on the sea.
  And pushing his black craft among them all,
  He lightly scattered theirs and brought her off,
  With loss of half his people arrow-slain;
  A maid so smooth, so white, so wonderful,
  They said a light came from her when she moved:
  And since the pirate would not yield her up,
  The King impaled him for his piracy;
  Then made her Queen:  but those isle-nurtured eyes
  Waged such unwilling though successful war
  On all the youth, they sickened; councils thinned,
  And armies waned, for magnet-like she drew
  The rustiest iron of old fighters' hearts;
  And beasts themselves would worship; camels knelt
  Unbidden, and the brutes of mountain back
  That carry kings in castles, bowed black knees
  Of homage, ringing with their serpent hands,
  To make her smile, her golden ankle-bells.
  What wonder, being jealous, that he sent
  His horns of proclamation out through all
  The hundred under-kingdoms that he swayed
  To find a wizard who might teach the King
  Some charm, which being wrought upon the Queen
  Might keep her all his own:  to such a one
  He promised more than ever king has given,
  A league of mountain full of golden mines,
  A province with a hundred miles of coast,
  A palace and a princess, all for him:
  But on all those who tried and failed, the King
  Pronounced a dismal sentence, meaning by it
  To keep the list low and pretenders back,
  Or like a king, not to be trifled with--
  Their heads should moulder on the city gates.
  And many tried and failed, because the charm
  Of nature in her overbore their own:
  And many a wizard brow bleached on the walls:
  And many weeks a troop of carrion crows
  Hung like a cloud above the gateway towers.'

     And Vivien breaking in upon him, said:
  'I sit and gather honey; yet, methinks,
  Thy tongue has tript a little:  ask thyself.
  The lady never made unwilling war
  With those fine eyes:  she had her pleasure in it,
  And made her good man jealous with good cause.
  And lived there neither dame nor damsel then
  Wroth at a lover's loss? were all as tame,
  I mean, as noble, as the Queen was fair?
  Not one to flirt a venom at her eyes,
  Or pinch a murderous dust into her drink,
  Or make her paler with a poisoned rose?
  Well, those were not our days:  but did they find
  A wizard?  Tell me, was he like to thee?

     She ceased, and made her lithe arm round his neck
  Tighten, and then drew back, and let her eyes
  Speak for her, glowing on him, like a bride's
  On her new lord, her own, the first of men.

     He answered laughing, 'Nay, not like to me.
  At last they found--his foragers for charms--
  A little glassy-headed hairless man,
  Who lived alone in a great wild on grass;
  Read but one book, and ever reading grew
  So grated down and filed away with thought,
  So lean his eyes were monstrous; while the skin
  Clung but to crate and basket, ribs and spine.
  And since he kept his mind on one sole aim,
  Nor ever touched fierce wine, nor tasted flesh,
  Nor owned a sensual wish, to him the wall
  That sunders ghosts and shadow-casting men
  Became a crystal, and he saw them through it,
  And heard their voices talk behind the wall,
  And learnt their elemental secrets, powers
  And forces; often o'er the sun's bright eye
  Drew the vast eyelid of an inky cloud,
  And lashed it at the base with slanting storm;
  Or in the noon of mist and driving rain,
  When the lake whitened and the pinewood roared,
  And the cairned mountain was a shadow, sunned
  The world to peace again:  here was the man.
  And so by force they dragged him to the King.
  And then he taught the King to charm the Queen
  In such-wise, that no man could see her more,
  Nor saw she save the King, who wrought the charm,
  Coming and going, and she lay as dead,
  And lost all use of life:  but when the King
  Made proffer of the league of golden mines,
  The province with a hundred miles of coast,
  The palace and the princess, that old man
  Went back to his old wild, and lived on grass,
  And vanished, and his book came down to me.'

     And Vivien answered smiling saucily:
  'Ye have the book:  the charm is written in it:
  Good:  take my counsel:  let me know it at once:
  For keep it like a puzzle chest in chest,
  With each chest locked and padlocked thirty-fold,
  And whelm all this beneath as vast a mound
  As after furious battle turfs the slain
  On some wild down above the windy deep,
  I yet should strike upon a sudden means
  To dig, pick, open, find and read the charm:
  Then, if I tried it, who should blame me then?'

     And smiling as a master smiles at one
  That is not of his school, nor any school
  But that where blind and naked Ignorance
  Delivers brawling judgments, unashamed,
  On all things all day long, he answered her:

     'Thou read the book, my pretty Vivien!
  O ay, it is but twenty pages long,
  But every page having an ample marge,
  And every marge enclosing in the midst
  A square of text that looks a little blot,
  The text no larger than the limbs of fleas;
  And every square of text an awful charm,
  Writ in a language that has long gone by.
  So long, that mountains have arisen since
  With cities on their flanks--thou read the book!
  And ever margin scribbled, crost, and crammed
  With comment, densest condensation, hard
  To mind and eye; but the long sleepless nights
  Of my long life have made it easy to me.
  And none can read the text, not even I;
  And none can read the comment but myself;
  And in the comment did I find the charm.
  O, the results are simple; a mere child
  Might use it to the harm of anyone,
  And never could undo it:  ask no more:
  For though you should not prove it upon me,
  But keep that oath ye sware, ye might, perchance,
  Assay it on some one of the Table Round,
  And all because ye dream they babble of you.'

     And Vivien, frowning in true anger, said:
  'What dare the full-fed liars say of me?
  They ride abroad redressing human wrongs!
  They sit with knife in meat and wine in horn!
  They bound to holy vows of chastity!
  Were I not woman, I could tell a tale.
  But you are man, you well can understand
  The shame that cannot be explained for shame.
  Not one of all the drove should touch me:  swine!'

     Then answered Merlin careless of her words:
  'You breathe but accusation vast and vague,
  Spleen-born, I think, and proofless.  If ye know,
  Set up the charge ye know, to stand or fall!'

     And Vivien answered frowning wrathfully:
  'O ay, what say ye to Sir Valence, him
  Whose kinsman left him watcher o'er his wife
  And two fair babes, and went to distant lands;
  Was one year gone, and on returning found
  Not two but three? there lay the reckling, one
  But one hour old!  What said the happy sire?'
  A seven-months' babe had been a truer gift.
  Those twelve sweet moons confused his fatherhood.'

     Then answered Merlin, 'Nay, I know the tale.
  Sir Valence wedded with an outland dame:
  Some cause had kept him sundered from his wife:
  One child they had:  it lived with her:  she died:
  His kinsman travelling on his own affair
  Was charged by Valence to bring home the child.
  He brought, not found it therefore:  take the truth.'

     'O ay,' said Vivien, 'overtrue a tale.
  What say ye then to sweet Sir Sagramore,
  That ardent man? "to pluck the flower in season,"
  So says the song, "I trow it is no treason."
  O Master, shall we call him overquick
  To crop his own sweet rose before the hour?'

     And Merlin answered, 'Overquick art thou
  To catch a loathly plume fallen from the wing
  Of that foul bird of rapine whose whole prey
  Is man's good name:  he never wronged his bride.
  I know the tale.  An angry gust of wind
  Puffed out his torch among the myriad-roomed
  And many-corridored complexities
  Of Arthur's palace:  then he found a door,
  And darkling felt the sculptured ornament
  That wreathen round it made it seem his own;
  And wearied out made for the couch and slept,
  A stainless man beside a stainless maid;
  And either slept, nor knew of other there;
  Till the high dawn piercing the royal rose
  In Arthur's casement glimmered chastely down,
  Blushing upon them blushing, and at once
  He rose without a word and parted from her:
  But when the thing was blazed about the court,
  The brute world howling forced them into bonds,
  And as it chanced they are happy, being pure.'

     'O ay,' said Vivien, 'that were likely too.
  What say ye then to fair Sir Percivale
  And of the horrid foulness that he wrought,
  The saintly youth, the spotless lamb of Christ,
  Or some black wether of St Satan's fold.
  What, in the precincts of the chapel-yard,
  Among the knightly brasses of the graves,
  And by the cold Hic Jacets of the dead!'

     And Merlin answered careless of her charge,
  'A sober man is Percivale and pure;
  But once in life was flustered with new wine,
  Then paced for coolness in the chapel-yard;
  Where one of Satan's shepherdesses caught
  And meant to stamp him with her master's mark;
  And that he sinned is not believable;
  For, look upon his face!--but if he sinned,
  The sin that practice burns into the blood,
  And not the one dark hour which brings remorse,
  Will brand us, after, of whose fold we be:
  Or else were he, the holy king, whose hymns
  Are chanted in the minster, worse than all.
  But is your spleen frothed out, or have ye more?'

     And Vivien answered frowning yet in wrath:
  'O ay; what say ye to Sir Lancelot, friend
  Traitor or true? that commerce with the Queen,
  I ask you, is it clamoured by the child,
  Or whispered in the corner? do ye know it?'

     To which he answered sadly, 'Yea, I know it.
  Sir Lancelot went ambassador, at first,
  To fetch her, and she watched him from her walls.
  A rumour runs, she took him for the King,
  So fixt her fancy on him:  let them be.
  But have ye no one word of loyal praise
  For Arthur, blameless King and stainless man?'

     She answered with a low and chuckling laugh:
  'Man! is he man at all, who knows and winks?
  Sees what his fair bride is and does, and winks?
  By which the good King means to blind himself,
  And blinds himself and all the Table Round
  To all the foulness that they work.  Myself
  Could call him (were it not for womanhood)
  The pretty, popular cause such manhood earns,
  Could call him the main cause of all their crime;
  Yea, were he not crowned King, coward, and fool.'

     Then Merlin to his own heart, loathing, said:
  'O true and tender!  O my liege and King!
  O selfless man and stainless gentleman,
  Who wouldst against thine own eye-witness fain
  Have all men true and leal, all women pure;
  How, in the mouths of base interpreters,
  From over-fineness not intelligible
  To things with every sense as false and foul
  As the poached filth that floods the middle street,
  Is thy white blamelessness accounted blame!'

     But Vivien, deeming Merlin overborne
  By instance, recommenced, and let her tongue
  Rage like a fire among the noblest names,
  Polluting, and imputing her whole self,
  Defaming and defacing, till she left
  Not even Lancelot brave, nor Galahad clean.

     Her words had issue other than she willed.
  He dragged his eyebrow bushes down, and made
  A snowy penthouse for his hollow eyes,
  And muttered in himself, 'Tell her the charm!
  So, if she had it, would she rail on me
  To snare the next, and if she have it not
  So will she rail.  What did the wanton say?
  "Not mount as high;" we scarce can sink as low:
  For men at most differ as Heaven and earth,
  But women, worst and best, as Heaven and Hell.
  I know the Table Round, my friends of old;
  All brave, and many generous, and some chaste.
  She cloaks the scar of some repulse with lies;
  I well believe she tempted them and failed,
  Being so bitter:  for fine plots may fail,
  Though harlots paint their talk as well as face
  With colours of the heart that are not theirs.
  I will not let her know:  nine tithes of times
  Face-flatterer and backbiter are the same.
  And they, sweet soul, that most impute a crime
  Are pronest to it, and impute themselves,
  Wanting the mental range; or low desire
  Not to feel lowest makes them level all;
  Yea, they would pare the mountain to the plain,
  To leave an equal baseness; and in this
  Are harlots like the crowd, that if they find
  Some stain or blemish in a name of note,
  Not grieving that their greatest are so small,
  Inflate themselves with some insane delight,
  And judge all nature from her feet of clay,
  Without the will to lift their eyes, and see
  Her godlike head crowned with spiritual fire,
  And touching other worlds.  I am weary of her.'

     He spoke in words part heard, in whispers part,
  Half-suffocated in the hoary fell
  And many-wintered fleece of throat and chin.
  But Vivien, gathering somewhat of his mood,
  And hearing 'harlot' muttered twice or thrice,
  Leapt from her session on his lap, and stood
  Stiff as a viper frozen; loathsome sight,
  How from the rosy lips of life and love,
  Flashed the bare-grinning skeleton of death!
  White was her cheek; sharp breaths of anger puffed
  Her fairy nostril out; her hand half-clenched
  Went faltering sideways downward to her belt,
  And feeling; had she found a dagger there
  (For in a wink the false love turns to hate)
  She would have stabbed him; but she found it not:
  His eye was calm, and suddenly she took
  To bitter weeping like a beaten child,
  A long, long weeping, not consolable.
  Then her false voice made way, broken with sobs:

     'O crueller than was ever told in tale,
  Or sung in song!  O vainly lavished love!
  O cruel, there was nothing wild or strange,
  Or seeming shameful--for what shame in love,
  So love be true, and not as yours is--nothing
  Poor Vivien had not done to win his trust
  Who called her what he called her--all her crime,
  All--all--the wish to prove him wholly hers.'

     She mused a little, and then clapt her hands
  Together with a wailing shriek, and said:
  'Stabbed through the heart's affections to the heart!
  Seethed like the kid in its own mother's milk!
  Killed with a word worse than a life of blows!
  I thought that he was gentle, being great:
  O God, that I had loved a smaller man!
  I should have found in him a greater heart.
  O, I, that flattering my true passion, saw
  The knights, the court, the King, dark in your light,
  Who loved to make men darker than they are,
  Because of that high pleasure which I had
  To seat you sole upon my pedestal
  Of worship--I am answered, and henceforth
  The course of life that seemed so flowery to me
  With you for guide and master, only you,
  Becomes the sea-cliff pathway broken short,
  And ending in a ruin--nothing left,
  But into some low cave to crawl, and there,
  If the wolf spare me, weep my life away,
  Killed with inutterable unkindliness.'

     She paused, she turned away, she hung her head,
  The snake of gold slid from her hair, the braid
  Slipt and uncoiled itself, she wept afresh,
  And the dark wood grew darker toward the storm
  In silence, while his anger slowly died
  Within him, till he let his wisdom go
  For ease of heart, and half believed her true:
  Called her to shelter in the hollow oak,
  'Come from the storm,' and having no reply,
  Gazed at the heaving shoulder, and the face
  Hand-hidden, as for utmost grief or shame;
  Then thrice essayed, by tenderest-touching terms,
  To sleek her ruffled peace of mind, in vain.
  At last she let herself be conquered by him,
  And as the cageling newly flown returns,
  The seeming-injured simple-hearted thing
  Came to her old perch back, and settled there.
  There while she sat, half-falling from his knees,
  Half-nestled at his heart, and since he saw
  The slow tear creep from her closed eyelid yet,
  About her, more in kindness than in love,
  The gentle wizard cast a shielding arm.
  But she dislinked herself at once and rose,
  Her arms upon her breast across, and stood,
  A virtuous gentlewoman deeply wronged,
  Upright and flushed before him:  then she said:

     'There must now be no passages of love
  Betwixt us twain henceforward evermore;
  Since, if I be what I am grossly called,
  What should be granted which your own gross heart
  Would reckon worth the taking?  I will go.
  In truth, but one thing now--better have died
  Thrice than have asked it once--could make me stay--
  That proof of trust--so often asked in vain!
  How justly, after that vile term of yours,
  I find with grief!  I might believe you then,
  Who knows? once more.  Lo! what was once to me
  Mere matter of the fancy, now hath grown
  The vast necessity of heart and life.
  Farewell; think gently of me, for I fear
  My fate or folly, passing gayer youth
  For one so old, must be to love thee still.
  But ere I leave thee let me swear once more
  That if I schemed against thy peace in this,
  May yon just heaven, that darkens o'er me, send
  One flash, that, missing all things else, may make
  My scheming brain a cinder, if I lie.'

     Scarce had she ceased, when out of heaven a bolt
  (For now the storm was close above them) struck,
  Furrowing a giant oak, and javelining
  With darted spikes and splinters of the wood
  The dark earth round.  He raised his eyes and saw
  The tree that shone white-listed through the gloom.
  But Vivien, fearing heaven had heard her oath,
  And dazzled by the livid-flickering fork,
  And deafened with the stammering cracks and claps
  That followed, flying back and crying out,
  'O Merlin, though you do not love me, save,
  Yet save me!' clung to him and hugged him close;
  And called him dear protector in her fright,
  Nor yet forgot her practice in her fright,
  But wrought upon his mood and hugged him close.
  The pale blood of the wizard at her touch
  Took gayer colours, like an opal warmed.
  She blamed herself for telling hearsay tales:
  She shook from fear, and for her fault she wept
  Of petulancy; she called him lord and liege,
  Her seer, her bard, her silver star of eve,
  Her God, her Merlin, the one passionate love
  Of her whole life; and ever overhead
  Bellowed the tempest, and the rotten branch
  Snapt in the rushing of the river-rain
  Above them; and in change of glare and gloom
  Her eyes and neck glittering went and came;
  Till now the storm, its burst of passion spent,
  Moaning and calling out of other lands,
  Had left the ravaged woodland yet once more
  To peace; and what should not have been had been,
  For Merlin, overtalked and overworn,
  Had yielded, told her all the charm, and slept.

     Then, in one moment, she put forth the charm
  Of woven paces and of waving hands,
  And in the hollow oak he lay as dead,
  And lost to life and use and name and fame.

     Then crying 'I have made his glory mine,'
  And shrieking out 'O fool!' the harlot leapt
  Adown the forest, and the thicket closed
  Behind her, and the forest echoed 'fool.'



  Lancelot and Elaine

  Elaine the fair, Elaine the loveable,
  Elaine, the lily maid of Astolat,
  High in her chamber up a tower to the east
  Guarded the sacred shield of Lancelot;
  Which first she placed where the morning's earliest ray
  Might strike it, and awake her with the gleam;
  Then fearing rust or soilure fashioned for it
  A case of silk, and braided thereupon
  All the devices blazoned on the shield
  In their own tinct, and added, of her wit,
  A border fantasy of branch and flower,
  And yellow-throated nestling in the nest.
  Nor rested thus content, but day by day,
  Leaving her household and good father, climbed
  That eastern tower, and entering barred her door,
  Stript off the case, and read the naked shield,
  Now guessed a hidden meaning in his arms,
  Now made a pretty history to herself
  Of every dint a sword had beaten in it,
  And every scratch a lance had made upon it,
  Conjecturing when and where:  this cut is fresh;
  That ten years back; this dealt him at Caerlyle;
  That at Caerleon; this at Camelot:
  And ah God's mercy, what a stroke was there!
  And here a thrust that might have killed, but God
  Broke the strong lance, and rolled his enemy down,
  And saved him:  so she lived in fantasy.

     How came the lily maid by that good shield
  Of Lancelot, she that knew not even his name?
  He left it with her, when he rode to tilt
  For the great diamond in the diamond jousts,
  Which Arthur had ordained, and by that name
  Had named them, since a diamond was the prize.

     For Arthur, long before they crowned him King,
  Roving the trackless realms of Lyonnesse,
  Had found a glen, gray boulder and black tarn.
  A horror lived about the tarn, and clave
  Like its own mists to all the mountain side:
  For here two brothers, one a king, had met
  And fought together; but their names were lost;
  And each had slain his brother at a blow;
  And down they fell and made the glen abhorred:
  And there they lay till all their bones were bleached,
  And lichened into colour with the crags:
  And he, that once was king, had on a crown
  Of diamonds, one in front, and four aside.
  And Arthur came, and labouring up the pass,
  All in a misty moonshine, unawares
  Had trodden that crowned skeleton, and the skull
  Brake from the nape, and from the skull the crown
  Rolled into light, and turning on its rims
  Fled like a glittering rivulet to the tarn:
  And down the shingly scaur he plunged, and caught,
  And set it on his head, and in his heart
  Heard murmurs, 'Lo, thou likewise shalt be King.'

     Thereafter, when a King, he had the gems
  Plucked from the crown, and showed them to his knights,
  Saying, 'These jewels, whereupon I chanced
  Divinely, are the kingdom's, not the King's--
  For public use:  henceforward let there be,
  Once every year, a joust for one of these:
  For so by nine years' proof we needs must learn
  Which is our mightiest, and ourselves shall grow
  In use of arms and manhood, till we drive
  The heathen, who, some say, shall rule the land
  Hereafter, which God hinder.'  Thus he spoke:
  And eight years past, eight jousts had been, and still
  Had Lancelot won the diamond of the year,
  With purpose to present them to the Queen,
  When all were won; but meaning all at once
  To snare her royal fancy with a boon
  Worth half her realm, had never spoken word.

     Now for the central diamond and the last
  And largest, Arthur, holding then his court
  Hard on the river nigh the place which now
  Is this world's hugest, let proclaim a joust
  At Camelot, and when the time drew nigh
  Spake (for she had been sick) to Guinevere,
  'Are you so sick, my Queen, you cannot move
  To these fair jousts?'  'Yea, lord,' she said, 'ye know it.'
  'Then will ye miss,' he answered, 'the great deeds
  Of Lancelot, and his prowess in the lists,
  A sight ye love to look on.'  And the Queen
  Lifted her eyes, and they dwelt languidly
  On Lancelot, where he stood beside the King.
  He thinking that he read her meaning there,
  'Stay with me, I am sick; my love is more
  Than many diamonds,' yielded; and a heart
  Love-loyal to the least wish of the Queen
  (However much he yearned to make complete
  The tale of diamonds for his destined boon)
  Urged him to speak against the truth, and say,
  'Sir King, mine ancient wound is hardly whole,
  And lets me from the saddle;' and the King
  Glanced first at him, then her, and went his way.
  No sooner gone than suddenly she began:

     'To blame, my lord Sir Lancelot, much to blame!
  Why go ye not to these fair jousts? the knights
  Are half of them our enemies, and the crowd
  Will murmur, "Lo the shameless ones, who take
  Their pastime now the trustful King is gone!"'
  Then Lancelot vext at having lied in vain:
  'Are ye so wise? ye were not once so wise,
  My Queen, that summer, when ye loved me first.
  Then of the crowd ye took no more account
  Than of the myriad cricket of the mead,
  When its own voice clings to each blade of grass,
  And every voice is nothing.  As to knights,
  Them surely can I silence with all ease.
  But now my loyal worship is allowed
  Of all men:  many a bard, without offence,
  Has linked our names together in his lay,
  Lancelot, the flower of bravery, Guinevere,
  The pearl of beauty:  and our knights at feast
  Have pledged us in this union, while the King
  Would listen smiling.  How then? is there more?
  Has Arthur spoken aught? or would yourself,
  Now weary of my service and devoir,
  Henceforth be truer to your faultless lord?'

     She broke into a little scornful laugh:
  'Arthur, my lord, Arthur, the faultless King,
  That passionate perfection, my good lord--
  But who can gaze upon the Sun in heaven?
  He never spake word of reproach to me,
  He never had a glimpse of mine untruth,
  He cares not for me:  only here today
  There gleamed a vague suspicion in his eyes:
  Some meddling rogue has tampered with him--else
  Rapt in this fancy of his Table Round,
  And swearing men to vows impossible,
  To make them like himself:  but, friend, to me
  He is all fault who hath no fault at all:
  For who loves me must have a touch of earth;
  The low sun makes the colour:  I am yours,
  Not Arthur's, as ye know, save by the bond.
  And therefore hear my words:  go to the jousts:
  The tiny-trumpeting gnat can break our dream
  When sweetest; and the vermin voices here
  May buzz so loud--we scorn them, but they sting.'

     Then answered Lancelot, the chief of knights:
  'And with what face, after my pretext made,
  Shall I appear, O Queen, at Camelot, I
  Before a King who honours his own word,
  As if it were his God's?'

                           'Yea,' said the Queen,
  'A moral child without the craft to rule,
  Else had he not lost me:  but listen to me,
  If I must find you wit:  we hear it said
  That men go down before your spear at a touch,
  But knowing you are Lancelot; your great name,
  This conquers:  hide it therefore; go unknown:
  Win! by this kiss you will:  and our true King
  Will then allow your pretext, O my knight,
  As all for glory; for to speak him true,
  Ye know right well, how meek soe'er he seem,
  No keener hunter after glory breathes.
  He loves it in his knights more than himself:
  They prove to him his work:  win and return.'

     Then got Sir Lancelot suddenly to horse,
  Wroth at himself.  Not willing to be known,
  He left the barren-beaten thoroughfare,
  Chose the green path that showed the rarer foot,
  And there among the solitary downs,
  Full often lost in fancy, lost his way;
  Till as he traced a faintly-shadowed track,
  That all in loops and links among the dales
  Ran to the Castle of Astolat, he saw
  Fired from the west, far on a hill, the towers.
  Thither he made, and blew the gateway horn.
  Then came an old, dumb, myriad-wrinkled man,
  Who let him into lodging and disarmed.
  And Lancelot marvelled at the wordless man;
  And issuing found the Lord of Astolat
  With two strong sons, Sir Torre and Sir Lavaine,
  Moving to meet him in the castle court;
  And close behind them stept the lily maid
  Elaine, his daughter:  mother of the house
  There was not:  some light jest among them rose
  With laughter dying down as the great knight
  Approached them:  then the Lord of Astolat:
  'Whence comes thou, my guest, and by what name
  Livest thou between the lips? for by thy state
  And presence I might guess thee chief of those,
  After the King, who eat in Arthur's halls.
  Him have I seen:  the rest, his Table Round,
  Known as they are, to me they are unknown.'

     Then answered Sir Lancelot, the chief of knights:
  'Known am I, and of Arthur's hall, and known,
  What I by mere mischance have brought, my shield.
  But since I go to joust as one unknown
  At Camelot for the diamond, ask me not,
  Hereafter ye shall know me--and the shield--
  I pray you lend me one, if such you have,
  Blank, or at least with some device not mine.'

     Then said the Lord of Astolat, 'Here is Torre's:
  Hurt in his first tilt was my son, Sir Torre.
  And so, God wot, his shield is blank enough.
  His ye can have.'  Then added plain Sir Torre,
  'Yea, since I cannot use it, ye may have it.'
  Here laughed the father saying, 'Fie, Sir Churl,
  Is that answer for a noble knight?
  Allow him! but Lavaine, my younger here,
  He is so full of lustihood, he will ride,
  Joust for it, and win, and bring it in an hour,
  And set it in this damsel's golden hair,
  To make her thrice as wilful as before.'

     'Nay, father, nay good father, shame me not
  Before this noble knight,' said young Lavaine,
  'For nothing.  Surely I but played on Torre:
  He seemed so sullen, vext he could not go:
  A jest, no more! for, knight, the maiden dreamt
  That some one put this diamond in her hand,
  And that it was too slippery to be held,
  And slipt and fell into some pool or stream,
  The castle-well, belike; and then I said
  That if I went and if I fought and won it
  (But all was jest and joke among ourselves)
  Then must she keep it safelier.  All was jest.
  But, father, give me leave, an if he will,
  To ride to Camelot with this noble knight:
  Win shall I not, but do my best to win:
  Young as I am, yet would I do my best.'

     'So will ye grace me,' answered Lancelot,
  Smiling a moment, 'with your fellowship
  O'er these waste downs whereon I lost myself,
  Then were I glad of you as guide and friend:
  And you shall win this diamond,--as I hear
  It is a fair large diamond,--if ye may,
  And yield it to this maiden, if ye will.'
  'A fair large diamond,' added plain Sir Torre,
  'Such be for queens, and not for simple maids.'
  Then she, who held her eyes upon the ground,
  Elaine, and heard her name so tost about,
  Flushed slightly at the slight disparagement
  Before the stranger knight, who, looking at her,
  Full courtly, yet not falsely, thus returned:
  'If what is fair be but for what is fair,
  And only queens are to be counted so,
  Rash were my judgment then, who deem this maid
  Might wear as fair a jewel as is on earth,
  Not violating the bond of like to like.'

     He spoke and ceased:  the lily maid Elaine,
  Won by the mellow voice before she looked,
  Lifted her eyes, and read his lineaments.
  The great and guilty love he bare the Queen,
  In battle with the love he bare his lord,
  Had marred his face, and marked it ere his time.
  Another sinning on such heights with one,
  The flower of all the west and all the world,
  Had been the sleeker for it:  but in him
  His mood was often like a fiend, and rose
  And drove him into wastes and solitudes
  For agony, who was yet a living soul.
  Marred as he was, he seemed the goodliest man
  That ever among ladies ate in hall,
  And noblest, when she lifted up her eyes.
  However marred, of more than twice her years,
  Seamed with an ancient swordcut on the cheek,
  And bruised and bronzed, she lifted up her eyes
  And loved him, with that love which was her doom.

     Then the great knight, the darling of the court,
  Loved of the loveliest, into that rude hall
  Stept with all grace, and not with half disdain
  Hid under grace, as in a smaller time,
  But kindly man moving among his kind:
  Whom they with meats and vintage of their best
  And talk and minstrel melody entertained.
  And much they asked of court and Table Round,
  And ever well and readily answered he:
  But Lancelot, when they glanced at Guinevere,
  Suddenly speaking of the wordless man,
  Heard from the Baron that, ten years before,
  The heathen caught and reft him of his tongue.
  'He learnt and warned me of their fierce design
  Against my house, and him they caught and maimed;
  But I, my sons, and little daughter fled
  From bonds or death, and dwelt among the woods
  By the great river in a boatman's hut.
  Dull days were those, till our good Arthur broke
  The Pagan yet once more on Badon hill.'

     'O there, great lord, doubtless,' Lavaine said, rapt
  By all the sweet and sudden passion of youth
  Toward greatness in its elder, 'you have fought.
  O tell us--for we live apart--you know
  Of Arthur's glorious wars.'  And Lancelot spoke
  And answered him at full, as having been
  With Arthur in the fight which all day long
  Rang by the white mouth of the violent Glem;
  And in the four loud battles by the shore
  Of Duglas; that on Bassa; then the war
  That thundered in and out the gloomy skirts
  Of Celidon the forest; and again
  By castle Gurnion, where the glorious King
  Had on his cuirass worn our Lady's Head,
  Carved of one emerald centered in a sun
  Of silver rays, that lightened as he breathed;
  And at Caerleon had he helped his lord,
  When the strong neighings of the wild white Horse
  Set every gilded parapet shuddering;
  And up in Agned-Cathregonion too,
  And down the waste sand-shores of Trath Treroit,
  Where many a heathen fell; 'and on the mount
  Of Badon I myself beheld the King
  Charge at the head of all his Table Round,
  And all his legions crying Christ and him,
  And break them; and I saw him, after, stand
  High on a heap of slain, from spur to plume
  Red as the rising sun with heathen blood,
  And seeing me, with a great voice he cried,
  "They are broken, they are broken!" for the King,
  However mild he seems at home, nor cares
  For triumph in our mimic wars, the jousts--
  For if his own knight cast him down, he laughs
  Saying, his knights are better men than he--
  Yet in this heathen war the fire of God
  Fills him:  I never saw his like:  there lives
  No greater leader.'

                     While he uttered this,
  Low to her own heart said the lily maid,
  'Save your own great self, fair lord;' and when he fell
  From talk of war to traits of pleasantry--
  Being mirthful he, but in a stately kind--
  She still took note that when the living smile
  Died from his lips, across him came a cloud
  Of melancholy severe, from which again,
  Whenever in her hovering to and fro
  The lily maid had striven to make him cheer,
  There brake a sudden-beaming tenderness
  Of manners and of nature:  and she thought
  That all was nature, all, perchance, for her.
  And all night long his face before her lived,
  As when a painter, poring on a face,
  Divinely through all hindrance finds the man
  Behind it, and so paints him that his face,
  The shape and colour of a mind and life,
  Lives for his children, ever at its best
  And fullest; so the face before her lived,
  Dark-splendid, speaking in the silence, full
  Of noble things, and held her from her sleep.
  Till rathe she rose, half-cheated in the thought
  She needs must bid farewell to sweet Lavaine.
  First in fear, step after step, she stole
  Down the long tower-stairs, hesitating:
  Anon, she heard Sir Lancelot cry in the court,
  'This shield, my friend, where is it?' and Lavaine
  Past inward, as she came from out the tower.
  There to his proud horse Lancelot turned, and smoothed
  The glossy shoulder, humming to himself.
  Half-envious of the flattering hand, she drew
  Nearer and stood.  He looked, and more amazed
  Than if seven men had set upon him, saw
  The maiden standing in the dewy light.
  He had not dreamed she was so beautiful.
  Then came on him a sort of sacred fear,
  For silent, though he greeted her, she stood
  Rapt on his face as if it were a God's.
  Suddenly flashed on her a wild desire,
  That he should wear her favour at the tilt.
  She braved a riotous heart in asking for it.
  'Fair lord, whose name I know not--noble it is,
  I well believe, the noblest--will you wear
  My favour at this tourney?'  'Nay,' said he,
  'Fair lady, since I never yet have worn
  Favour of any lady in the lists.
  Such is my wont, as those, who know me, know.'
  'Yea, so,' she answered; 'then in wearing mine
  Needs must be lesser likelihood, noble lord,
  That those who know should know you.'  And he turned
  Her counsel up and down within his mind,
  And found it true, and answered, 'True, my child.
  Well, I will wear it:  fetch it out to me:
  What is it?' and she told him 'A red sleeve
  Broidered with pearls,' and brought it:  then he bound
  Her token on his helmet, with a smile
  Saying, 'I never yet have done so much
  For any maiden living,' and the blood
  Sprang to her face and filled her with delight;
  But left her all the paler, when Lavaine
  Returning brought the yet-unblazoned shield,
  His brother's; which he gave to Lancelot,
  Who parted with his own to fair Elaine:
  'Do me this grace, my child, to have my shield
  In keeping till I come.'  'A grace to me,'
  She answered, 'twice today.  I am your squire!'
  Whereat Lavaine said, laughing, 'Lily maid,
  For fear our people call you lily maid
  In earnest, let me bring your colour back;
  Once, twice, and thrice:  now get you hence to bed:'
  So kissed her, and Sir Lancelot his own hand,
  And thus they moved away:  she stayed a minute,
  Then made a sudden step to the gate, and there--
  Her bright hair blown about the serious face
  Yet rosy-kindled with her brother's kiss--
  Paused by the gateway, standing near the shield
  In silence, while she watched their arms far-off
  Sparkle, until they dipt below the downs.
  Then to her tower she climbed, and took the shield,
  There kept it, and so lived in fantasy.

     Meanwhile the new companions past away
  Far o'er the long backs of the bushless downs,
  To where Sir Lancelot knew there lived a knight
  Not far from Camelot, now for forty years
  A hermit, who had prayed, laboured and prayed,
  And ever labouring had scooped himself
  In the white rock a chapel and a hall
  On massive columns, like a shorecliff cave,
  And cells and chambers:  all were fair and dry;
  The green light from the meadows underneath
  Struck up and lived along the milky roofs;
  And in the meadows tremulous aspen-trees
  And poplars made a noise of falling showers.
  And thither wending there that night they bode.

     But when the next day broke from underground,
  And shot red fire and shadows through the cave,
  They rose, heard mass, broke fast, and rode away:
  Then Lancelot saying, 'Hear, but hold my name
  Hidden, you ride with Lancelot of the Lake,'
  Abashed young Lavaine, whose instant reverence,
  Dearer to true young hearts than their own praise,
  But left him leave to stammer, 'Is it indeed?'
  And after muttering 'The great Lancelot,
  At last he got his breath and answered, 'One,
  One have I seen--that other, our liege lord,
  The dread Pendragon, Britain's King of kings,
  Of whom the people talk mysteriously,
  He will be there--then were I stricken blind
  That minute, I might say that I had seen.'

     So spake Lavaine, and when they reached the lists
  By Camelot in the meadow, let his eyes
  Run through the peopled gallery which half round
  Lay like a rainbow fallen upon the grass,
  Until they found the clear-faced King, who sat
  Robed in red samite, easily to be known,
  Since to his crown the golden dragon clung,
  And down his robe the dragon writhed in gold,
  And from the carven-work behind him crept
  Two dragons gilded, sloping down to make
  Arms for his chair, while all the rest of them
  Through knots and loops and folds innumerable
  Fled ever through the woodwork, till they found
  The new design wherein they lost themselves,
  Yet with all ease, so tender was the work:
  And, in the costly canopy o'er him set,
  Blazed the last diamond of the nameless king.

     Then Lancelot answered young Lavaine and said,
  'Me you call great:  mine is the firmer seat,
  The truer lance:  but there is many a youth
  Now crescent, who will come to all I am
  And overcome it; and in me there dwells
  No greatness, save it be some far-off touch
  Of greatness to know well I am not great:
  There is the man.'  And Lavaine gaped upon him
  As on a thing miraculous, and anon
  The trumpets blew; and then did either side,
  They that assailed, and they that held the lists,
  Set lance in rest, strike spur, suddenly move,
  Meet in the midst, and there so furiously
  Shock, that a man far-off might well perceive,
  If any man that day were left afield,
  The hard earth shake, and a low thunder of arms.
  And Lancelot bode a little, till he saw
  Which were the weaker; then he hurled into it
  Against the stronger:  little need to speak
  Of Lancelot in his glory!  King, duke, earl,
  Count, baron--whom he smote, he overthrew.

     But in the field were Lancelot's kith and kin,
  Ranged with the Table Round that held the lists,
  Strong men, and wrathful that a stranger knight
  Should do and almost overdo the deeds
  Of Lancelot; and one said to the other, 'Lo!
  What is he?  I do not mean the force alone--
  The grace and versatility of the man!
  Is it not Lancelot?'  'When has Lancelot worn
  Favour of any lady in the lists?
  Not such his wont, as we, that know him, know.'
  'How then? who then?' a fury seized them all,
  A fiery family passion for the name
  Of Lancelot, and a glory one with theirs.
  They couched their spears and pricked their steeds, and thus,
  Their plumes driven backward by the wind they made
  In moving, all together down upon him
  Bare, as a wild wave in the wide North-sea,
  Green-glimmering toward the summit, bears, with all
  Its stormy crests that smoke against the skies,
  Down on a bark, and overbears the bark,
  And him that helms it, so they overbore
  Sir Lancelot and his charger, and a spear
  Down-glancing lamed the charger, and a spear
  Pricked sharply his own cuirass, and the head
  Pierced through his side, and there snapt, and remained.

     Then Sir Lavaine did well and worshipfully;
  He bore a knight of old repute to the earth,
  And brought his horse to Lancelot where he lay.
  He up the side, sweating with agony, got,
  But thought to do while he might yet endure,
  And being lustily holpen by the rest,
  His party,--though it seemed half-miracle
  To those he fought with,--drave his kith and kin,
  And all the Table Round that held the lists,
  Back to the barrier; then the trumpets blew
  Proclaiming his the prize, who wore the sleeve
  Of scarlet, and the pearls; and all the knights,
  His party, cried 'Advance and take thy prize
  The diamond;' but he answered, 'Diamond me
  No diamonds! for God's love, a little air!
  Prize me no prizes, for my prize is death!
  Hence will I, and I charge you, follow me not.'

     He spoke, and vanished suddenly from the field
  With young Lavaine into the poplar grove.
  There from his charger down he slid, and sat,
  Gasping to Sir Lavaine, 'Draw the lance-head:'
  'Ah my sweet lord Sir Lancelot,' said Lavaine,
  'I dread me, if I draw it, you will die.'
  But he, 'I die already with it:  draw--
  Draw,'--and Lavaine drew, and Sir Lancelot gave
  A marvellous great shriek and ghastly groan,
  And half his blood burst forth, and down he sank
  For the pure pain, and wholly swooned away.
  Then came the hermit out and bare him in,
  There stanched his wound; and there, in daily doubt
  Whether to live or die, for many a week
  Hid from the wide world's rumour by the grove
  Of poplars with their noise of falling showers,
  And ever-tremulous aspen-trees, he lay.

     But on that day when Lancelot fled the lists,
  His party, knights of utmost North and West,
  Lords of waste marches, kings of desolate isles,
  Came round their great Pendragon, saying to him,
  'Lo, Sire, our knight, through whom we won the day,
  Hath gone sore wounded, and hath left his prize
  Untaken, crying that his prize is death.'
  'Heaven hinder,' said the King, 'that such an one,
  So great a knight as we have seen today--
  He seemed to me another Lancelot--
  Yea, twenty times I thought him Lancelot--
  He must not pass uncared for.  Wherefore, rise,
  O Gawain, and ride forth and find the knight.
  Wounded and wearied needs must he be near.
  I charge you that you get at once to horse.
  And, knights and kings, there breathes not one of you
  Will deem this prize of ours is rashly given:
  His prowess was too wondrous.  We will do him
  No customary honour:  since the knight
  Came not to us, of us to claim the prize,
  Ourselves will send it after.  Rise and take
  This diamond, and deliver it, and return,
  And bring us where he is, and how he fares,
  And cease not from your quest until ye find.'

     So saying, from the carven flower above,
  To which it made a restless heart, he took,
  And gave, the diamond:  then from where he sat
  At Arthur's right, with smiling face arose,
  With smiling face and frowning heart, a Prince
  In the mid might and flourish of his May,
  Gawain, surnamed The Courteous, fair and strong,
  And after Lancelot, Tristram, and Geraint
  And Gareth, a good knight, but therewithal
  Sir Modred's brother, and the child of Lot,
  Nor often loyal to his word, and now
  Wroth that the King's command to sally forth
  In quest of whom he knew not, made him leave
  The banquet, and concourse of knights and kings.

     So all in wrath he got to horse and went;
  While Arthur to the banquet, dark in mood,
  Past, thinking 'Is it Lancelot who hath come
  Despite the wound he spake of, all for gain
  Of glory, and hath added wound to wound,
  And ridden away to die?'  So feared the King,
  And, after two days' tarriance there, returned.
  Then when he saw the Queen, embracing asked,
  'Love, are you yet so sick?'  'Nay, lord,' she said.
  'And where is Lancelot?'  Then the Queen amazed,
  'Was he not with you? won he not your prize?'
  'Nay, but one like him.'  'Why that like was he.'
  And when the King demanded how she knew,
  Said, 'Lord, no sooner had ye parted from us,
  Than Lancelot told me of a common talk
  That men went down before his spear at a touch,
  But knowing he was Lancelot; his great name
  Conquered; and therefore would he hide his name
  From all men, even the King, and to this end
  Had made a pretext of a hindering wound,
  That he might joust unknown of all, and learn
  If his old prowess were in aught decayed;
  And added, "Our true Arthur, when he learns,
  Will well allow me pretext, as for gain
  Of purer glory."'

                   Then replied the King:
  'Far lovelier in our Lancelot had it been,
  In lieu of idly dallying with the truth,
  To have trusted me as he hath trusted thee.
  Surely his King and most familiar friend
  Might well have kept his secret.  True, indeed,
  Albeit I know my knights fantastical,
  So fine a fear in our large Lancelot
  Must needs have moved my laughter:  now remains
  But little cause for laughter:  his own kin--
  Ill news, my Queen, for all who love him, this!--
  His kith and kin, not knowing, set upon him;
  So that he went sore wounded from the field:
  Yet good news too:  for goodly hopes are mine
  That Lancelot is no more a lonely heart.
  He wore, against his wont, upon his helm
  A sleeve of scarlet, broidered with great pearls,
  Some gentle maiden's gift.'

                             'Yea, lord,' she said,
  'Thy hopes are mine,' and saying that, she choked,
  And sharply turned about to hide her face,
  Past to her chamber, and there flung herself
  Down on the great King's couch, and writhed upon it,
  And clenched her fingers till they bit the palm,
  And shrieked out 'Traitor' to the unhearing wall,
  Then flashed into wild tears, and rose again,
  And moved about her palace, proud and pale.

     Gawain the while through all the region round
  Rode with his diamond, wearied of the quest,
  Touched at all points, except the poplar grove,
  And came at last, though late, to Astolat:
  Whom glittering in enamelled arms the maid
  Glanced at, and cried, 'What news from Camelot, lord?
  What of the knight with the red sleeve?'  'He won.'
  'I knew it,' she said.  'But parted from the jousts
  Hurt in the side,' whereat she caught her breath;
  Through her own side she felt the sharp lance go;
  Thereon she smote her hand:  wellnigh she swooned:
  And, while he gazed wonderingly at her, came
  The Lord of Astolat out, to whom the Prince
  Reported who he was, and on what quest
  Sent, that he bore the prize and could not find
  The victor, but had ridden a random round
  To seek him, and had wearied of the search.
  To whom the Lord of Astolat, 'Bide with us,
  And ride no more at random, noble Prince!
  Here was the knight, and here he left a shield;
  This will he send or come for:  furthermore
  Our son is with him; we shall hear anon,
  Needs must hear.'  To this the courteous Prince
  Accorded with his wonted courtesy,
  Courtesy with a touch of traitor in it,
  And stayed; and cast his eyes on fair Elaine:
  Where could be found face daintier? then her shape
  From forehead down to foot, perfect--again
  From foot to forehead exquisitely turned:
  'Well--if I bide, lo! this wild flower for me!'
  And oft they met among the garden yews,
  And there he set himself to play upon her
  With sallying wit, free flashes from a height
  Above her, graces of the court, and songs,
  Sighs, and slow smiles, and golden eloquence
  And amorous adulation, till the maid
  Rebelled against it, saying to him, 'Prince,
  O loyal nephew of our noble King,
  Why ask you not to see the shield he left,
  Whence you might learn his name?  Why slight your King,
  And lose the quest he sent you on, and prove
  No surer than our falcon yesterday,
  Who lost the hern we slipt her at, and went
  To all the winds?'  'Nay, by mine head,' said he,
  'I lose it, as we lose the lark in heaven,
  O damsel, in the light of your blue eyes;
  But an ye will it let me see the shield.'
  And when the shield was brought, and Gawain saw
  Sir Lancelot's azure lions, crowned with gold,
  Ramp in the field, he smote his thigh, and mocked:
  'Right was the King! our Lancelot! that true man!'
  'And right was I,' she answered merrily, 'I,
  Who dreamed my knight the greatest knight of all.'
  'And if I dreamed,' said Gawain, 'that you love
  This greatest knight, your pardon! lo, ye know it!
  Speak therefore:  shall I waste myself in vain?'
  Full simple was her answer, 'What know I?
  My brethren have been all my fellowship;
  And I, when often they have talked of love,
  Wished it had been my mother, for they talked,
  Meseemed, of what they knew not; so myself--
  I know not if I know what true love is,
  But if I know, then, if I love not him,
  I know there is none other I can love.'
  'Yea, by God's death,' said he, 'ye love him well,
  But would not, knew ye what all others know,
  And whom he loves.'  'So be it,' cried Elaine,
  And lifted her fair face and moved away:
  But he pursued her, calling, 'Stay a little!
  One golden minute's grace! he wore your sleeve:
  Would he break faith with one I may not name?
  Must our true man change like a leaf at last?
  Nay--like enow:  why then, far be it from me
  To cross our mighty Lancelot in his loves!
  And, damsel, for I deem you know full well
  Where your great knight is hidden, let me leave
  My quest with you; the diamond also:  here!
  For if you love, it will be sweet to give it;
  And if he love, it will be sweet to have it
  From your own hand; and whether he love or not,
  A diamond is a diamond.  Fare you well
  A thousand times!--a thousand times farewell!
  Yet, if he love, and his love hold, we two
  May meet at court hereafter:  there, I think,
  So ye will learn the courtesies of the court,
  We two shall know each other.'

                                Then he gave,
  And slightly kissed the hand to which he gave,
  The diamond, and all wearied of the quest
  Leapt on his horse, and carolling as he went
  A true-love ballad, lightly rode away.

     Thence to the court he past; there told the King
  What the King knew, 'Sir Lancelot is the knight.'
  And added, 'Sire, my liege, so much I learnt;
  But failed to find him, though I rode all round
  The region:  but I lighted on the maid
  Whose sleeve he wore; she loves him; and to her,
  Deeming our courtesy is the truest law,
  I gave the diamond:  she will render it;
  For by mine head she knows his hiding-place.'

     The seldom-frowning King frowned, and replied,
  'Too courteous truly! ye shall go no more
  On quest of mine, seeing that ye forget
  Obedience is the courtesy due to kings.'

     He spake and parted.  Wroth, but all in awe,
  For twenty strokes of the blood, without a word,
  Lingered that other, staring after him;
  Then shook his hair, strode off, and buzzed abroad
  About the maid of Astolat, and her love.
  All ears were pricked at once, all tongues were loosed:
  'The maid of Astolat loves Sir Lancelot,
  Sir Lancelot loves the maid of Astolat.'
  Some read the King's face, some the Queen's, and all
  Had marvel what the maid might be, but most
  Predoomed her as unworthy.  One old dame
  Came suddenly on the Queen with the sharp news.
  She, that had heard the noise of it before,
  But sorrowing Lancelot should have stooped so low,
  Marred her friend's aim with pale tranquillity.
  So ran the tale like fire about the court,
  Fire in dry stubble a nine-days' wonder flared:
  Till even the knights at banquet twice or thrice
  Forgot to drink to Lancelot and the Queen,
  And pledging Lancelot and the lily maid
  Smiled at each other, while the Queen, who sat
  With lips severely placid, felt the knot
  Climb in her throat, and with her feet unseen
  Crushed the wild passion out against the floor
  Beneath the banquet, where all the meats became
  As wormwood, and she hated all who pledged.

     But far away the maid in Astolat,
  Her guiltless rival, she that ever kept
  The one-day-seen Sir Lancelot in her heart,
  Crept to her father, while he mused alone,
  Sat on his knee, stroked his gray face and said,
  'Father, you call me wilful, and the fault
  Is yours who let me have my will, and now,
  Sweet father, will you let me lose my wits?'
  'Nay,' said he, 'surely.'  'Wherefore, let me hence,'
  She answered, 'and find out our dear Lavaine.'
  'Ye will not lose your wits for dear Lavaine:
  Bide,' answered he:  'we needs must hear anon
  Of him, and of that other.'  'Ay,' she said,
  'And of that other, for I needs must hence
  And find that other, wheresoe'er he be,
  And with mine own hand give his diamond to him,
  Lest I be found as faithless in the quest
  As yon proud Prince who left the quest to me.
  Sweet father, I behold him in my dreams
  Gaunt as it were the skeleton of himself,
  Death-pale, for lack of gentle maiden's aid.
  The gentler-born the maiden, the more bound,
  My father, to be sweet and serviceable
  To noble knights in sickness, as ye know
  When these have worn their tokens:  let me hence
  I pray you.'  Then her father nodding said,
  'Ay, ay, the diamond:  wit ye well, my child,
  Right fain were I to learn this knight were whole,
  Being our greatest:  yea, and you must give it--
  And sure I think this fruit is hung too high
  For any mouth to gape for save a queen's--
  Nay, I mean nothing:  so then, get you gone,
  Being so very wilful you must go.'

     Lightly, her suit allowed, she slipt away,
  And while she made her ready for her ride,
  Her father's latest word hummed in her ear,
  'Being so very wilful you must go,'
  And changed itself and echoed in her heart,
  'Being so very wilful you must die.'
  But she was happy enough and shook it off,
  As we shake off the bee that buzzes at us;
  And in her heart she answered it and said,
  'What matter, so I help him back to life?'
  Then far away with good Sir Torre for guide
  Rode o'er the long backs of the bushless downs
  To Camelot, and before the city-gates
  Came on her brother with a happy face
  Making a roan horse caper and curvet
  For pleasure all about a field of flowers:
  Whom when she saw, 'Lavaine,' she cried, 'Lavaine,
  How fares my lord Sir Lancelot?'  He amazed,
  'Torre and Elaine! why here? Sir Lancelot!
  How know ye my lord's name is Lancelot?'
  But when the maid had told him all her tale,
  Then turned Sir Torre, and being in his moods
  Left them, and under the strange-statued gate,
  Where Arthur's wars were rendered mystically,
  Past up the still rich city to his kin,
  His own far blood, which dwelt at Camelot;
  And her, Lavaine across the poplar grove
  Led to the caves:  there first she saw the casque
  Of Lancelot on the wall:  her scarlet sleeve,
  Though carved and cut, and half the pearls away,
  Streamed from it still; and in her heart she laughed,
  Because he had not loosed it from his helm,
  But meant once more perchance to tourney in it.
  And when they gained the cell wherein he slept,
  His battle-writhen arms and mighty hands
  Lay naked on the wolfskin, and a dream
  Of dragging down his enemy made them move.
  Then she that saw him lying unsleek, unshorn,
  Gaunt as it were the skeleton of himself,
  Uttered a little tender dolorous cry.
  The sound not wonted in a place so still
  Woke the sick knight, and while he rolled his eyes
  Yet blank from sleep, she started to him, saying,
  'Your prize the diamond sent you by the King:'
  His eyes glistened:  she fancied 'Is it for me?'
  And when the maid had told him all the tale
  Of King and Prince, the diamond sent, the quest
  Assigned to her not worthy of it, she knelt
  Full lowly by the corners of his bed,
  And laid the diamond in his open hand.
  Her face was near, and as we kiss the child
  That does the task assigned, he kissed her face.
  At once she slipt like water to the floor.
  'Alas,' he said, 'your ride hath wearied you.
  Rest must you have.'  'No rest for me,' she said;
  'Nay, for near you, fair lord, I am at rest.'
  What might she mean by that? his large black eyes,
  Yet larger through his leanness, dwelt upon her,
  Till all her heart's sad secret blazed itself
  In the heart's colours on her simple face;
  And Lancelot looked and was perplext in mind,
  And being weak in body said no more;
  But did not love the colour; woman's love,
  Save one, he not regarded, and so turned
  Sighing, and feigned a sleep until he slept.

     Then rose Elaine and glided through the fields,
  And past beneath the weirdly-sculptured gates
  Far up the dim rich city to her kin;
  There bode the night:  but woke with dawn, and past
  Down through the dim rich city to the fields,
  Thence to the cave:  so day by day she past
  In either twilight ghost-like to and fro
  Gliding, and every day she tended him,
  And likewise many a night:  and Lancelot
  Would, though he called his wound a little hurt
  Whereof he should be quickly whole, at times
  Brain-feverous in his heat and agony, seem
  Uncourteous, even he:  but the meek maid
  Sweetly forbore him ever, being to him
  Meeker than any child to a rough nurse,
  Milder than any mother to a sick child,
  And never woman yet, since man's first fall,
  Did kindlier unto man, but her deep love
  Upbore her; till the hermit, skilled in all
  The simples and the science of that time,
  Told him that her fine care had saved his life.
  And the sick man forgot her simple blush,
  Would call her friend and sister, sweet Elaine,
  Would listen for her coming and regret
  Her parting step, and held her tenderly,
  And loved her with all love except the love
  Of man and woman when they love their best,
  Closest and sweetest, and had died the death
  In any knightly fashion for her sake.
  And peradventure had he seen her first
  She might have made this and that other world
  Another world for the sick man; but now
  The shackles of an old love straitened him,
  His honour rooted in dishonour stood,
  And faith unfaithful kept him falsely true.

     Yet the great knight in his mid-sickness made
  Full many a holy vow and pure resolve.
  These, as but born of sickness, could not live:
  For when the blood ran lustier in him again,
  Full often the bright image of one face,
  Making a treacherous quiet in his heart,
  Dispersed his resolution like a cloud.
  Then if the maiden, while that ghostly grace
  Beamed on his fancy, spoke, he answered not,
  Or short and coldly, and she knew right well
  What the rough sickness meant, but what this meant
  She knew not, and the sorrow dimmed her sight,
  And drave her ere her time across the fields
  Far into the rich city, where alone
  She murmured, 'Vain, in vain:  it cannot be.
  He will not love me:  how then? must I die?'
  Then as a little helpless innocent bird,
  That has but one plain passage of few notes,
  Will sing the simple passage o'er and o'er
  For all an April morning, till the ear
  Wearies to hear it, so the simple maid
  Went half the night repeating, 'Must I die?'
  And now to right she turned, and now to left,
  And found no ease in turning or in rest;
  And 'Him or death,' she muttered, 'death or him,'
  Again and like a burthen, 'Him or death.'

     But when Sir Lancelot's deadly hurt was whole,
  To Astolat returning rode the three.
  There morn by morn, arraying her sweet self
  In that wherein she deemed she looked her best,
  She came before Sir Lancelot, for she thought
  'If I be loved, these are my festal robes,
  If not, the victim's flowers before he fall.'
  And Lancelot ever prest upon the maid
  That she should ask some goodly gift of him
  For her own self or hers; 'and do not shun
  To speak the wish most near to your true heart;
  Such service have ye done me, that I make
  My will of yours, and Prince and Lord am I
  In mine own land, and what I will I can.'
  Then like a ghost she lifted up her face,
  But like a ghost without the power to speak.
  And Lancelot saw that she withheld her wish,
  And bode among them yet a little space
  Till he should learn it; and one morn it chanced
  He found her in among the garden yews,
  And said, 'Delay no longer, speak your wish,
  Seeing I go today:' then out she brake:
  'Going? and we shall never see you more.
  And I must die for want of one bold word.'
  'Speak:  that I live to hear,' he said, 'is yours.'
  Then suddenly and passionately she spoke:
  'I have gone mad.  I love you:  let me die.'
  'Ah, sister,' answered Lancelot, 'what is this?'
  And innocently extending her white arms,
  'Your love,' she said, 'your love--to be your wife.'
  And Lancelot answered, 'Had I chosen to wed,
  I had been wedded earlier, sweet Elaine:
  But now there never will be wife of mine.'
  'No, no,' she cried, 'I care not to be wife,
  But to be with you still, to see your face,
  To serve you, and to follow you through the world.'
  And Lancelot answered, 'Nay, the world, the world,
  All ear and eye, with such a stupid heart
  To interpret ear and eye, and such a tongue
  To blare its own interpretation--nay,
  Full ill then should I quit your brother's love,
  And your good father's kindness.'  And she said,
  'Not to be with you, not to see your face--
  Alas for me then, my good days are done.'
  'Nay, noble maid,' he answered, 'ten times nay!
  This is not love:  but love's first flash in youth,
  Most common:  yea, I know it of mine own self:
  And you yourself will smile at your own self
  Hereafter, when you yield your flower of life
  To one more fitly yours, not thrice your age:
  And then will I, for true you are and sweet
  Beyond mine old belief in womanhood,
  More specially should your good knight be poor,
  Endow you with broad land and territory
  Even to the half my realm beyond the seas,
  So that would make you happy:  furthermore,
  Even to the death, as though ye were my blood,
  In all your quarrels will I be your knight.
  This I will do, dear damsel, for your sake,
  And more than this I cannot.'

                               While he spoke
  She neither blushed nor shook, but deathly-pale
  Stood grasping what was nearest, then replied:
  'Of all this will I nothing;' and so fell,
  And thus they bore her swooning to her tower.

     Then spake, to whom through those black walls of yew
  Their talk had pierced, her father:  'Ay, a flash,
  I fear me, that will strike my blossom dead.
  Too courteous are ye, fair Lord Lancelot.
  I pray you, use some rough discourtesy
  To blunt or break her passion.'

                                 Lancelot said,
  'That were against me:  what I can I will;'
  And there that day remained, and toward even
  Sent for his shield:  full meekly rose the maid,
  Stript off the case, and gave the naked shield;
  Then, when she heard his horse upon the stones,
  Unclasping flung the casement back, and looked
  Down on his helm, from which her sleeve had gone.
  And Lancelot knew the little clinking sound;
  And she by tact of love was well aware
  That Lancelot knew that she was looking at him.
  And yet he glanced not up, nor waved his hand,
  Nor bad farewell, but sadly rode away.
  This was the one discourtesy that he used.

     So in her tower alone the maiden sat:
  His very shield was gone; only the case,
  Her own poor work, her empty labour, left.
  But still she heard him, still his picture formed
  And grew between her and the pictured wall.
  Then came her father, saying in low tones,
  'Have comfort,' whom she greeted quietly.
  Then came her brethren saying, 'Peace to thee,
  Sweet sister,' whom she answered with all calm.
  But when they left her to herself again,
  Death, like a friend's voice from a distant field
  Approaching through the darkness, called; the owls
  Wailing had power upon her, and she mixt
  Her fancies with the sallow-rifted glooms
  Of evening, and the moanings of the wind.

     And in those days she made a little song,
  And called her song 'The Song of Love and Death,'
  And sang it:  sweetly could she make and sing.

     'Sweet is true love though given in vain, in vain;
  And sweet is death who puts an end to pain:
  I know not which is sweeter, no, not I.

     'Love, art thou sweet? then bitter death must be:
  Love, thou art bitter; sweet is death to me.
  O Love, if death be sweeter, let me die.

     'Sweet love, that seems not made to fade away,
  Sweet death, that seems to make us loveless clay,
  I know not which is sweeter, no, not I.

     'I fain would follow love, if that could be;
  I needs must follow death, who calls for me;
  Call and I follow, I follow! let me die.'

     High with the last line scaled her voice, and this,
  All in a fiery dawning wild with wind
  That shook her tower, the brothers heard, and thought
  With shuddering, 'Hark the Phantom of the house
  That ever shrieks before a death,' and called
  The father, and all three in hurry and fear
  Ran to her, and lo! the blood-red light of dawn
  Flared on her face, she shrilling, 'Let me die!'

     As when we dwell upon a word we know,
  Repeating, till the word we know so well
  Becomes a wonder, and we know not why,
  So dwelt the father on her face, and thought
  'Is this Elaine?' till back the maiden fell,
  Then gave a languid hand to each, and lay,
  Speaking a still good-morrow with her eyes.
  At last she said, 'Sweet brothers, yesternight
  I seemed a curious little maid again,
  As happy as when we dwelt among the woods,
  And when ye used to take me with the flood
  Up the great river in the boatman's boat.
  Only ye would not pass beyond the cape
  That has the poplar on it:  there ye fixt
  Your limit, oft returning with the tide.
  And yet I cried because ye would not pass
  Beyond it, and far up the shining flood
  Until we found the palace of the King.
  And yet ye would not; but this night I dreamed
  That I was all alone upon the flood,
  And then I said, "Now shall I have my will:"
  And there I woke, but still the wish remained.
  So let me hence that I may pass at last
  Beyond the poplar and far up the flood,
  Until I find the palace of the King.
  There will I enter in among them all,
  And no man there will dare to mock at me;
  But there the fine Gawain will wonder at me,
  And there the great Sir Lancelot muse at me;
  Gawain, who bad a thousand farewells to me,
  Lancelot, who coldly went, nor bad me one:
  And there the King will know me and my love,
  And there the Queen herself will pity me,
  And all the gentle court will welcome me,
  And after my long voyage I shall rest!'

     'Peace,' said her father, 'O my child, ye seem
  Light-headed, for what force is yours to go
  So far, being sick? and wherefore would ye look
  On this proud fellow again, who scorns us all?'

     Then the rough Torre began to heave and move,
  And bluster into stormy sobs and say,
  'I never loved him:  an I meet with him,
  I care not howsoever great he be,
  Then will I strike at him and strike him down,
  Give me good fortune, I will strike him dead,
  For this discomfort he hath done the house.'

     To whom the gentle sister made reply,
  'Fret not yourself, dear brother, nor be wroth,
  Seeing it is no more Sir Lancelot's fault
  Not to love me, than it is mine to love
  Him of all men who seems to me the highest.'

     'Highest?' the father answered, echoing 'highest?'
  (He meant to break the passion in her) 'nay,
  Daughter, I know not what you call the highest;
  But this I know, for all the people know it,
  He loves the Queen, and in an open shame:
  And she returns his love in open shame;
  If this be high, what is it to be low?'

     Then spake the lily maid of Astolat:
  'Sweet father, all too faint and sick am I
  For anger:  these are slanders:  never yet
  Was noble man but made ignoble talk.
  He makes no friend who never made a foe.
  But now it is my glory to have loved
  One peerless, without stain:  so let me pass,
  My father, howsoe'er I seem to you,
  Not all unhappy, having loved God's best
  And greatest, though my love had no return:
  Yet, seeing you desire your child to live,
  Thanks, but you work against your own desire;
  For if I could believe the things you say
  I should but die the sooner; wherefore cease,
  Sweet father, and bid call the ghostly man
  Hither, and let me shrive me clean, and die.'

     So when the ghostly man had come and gone,
  She with a face, bright as for sin forgiven,
  Besought Lavaine to write as she devised
  A letter, word for word; and when he asked
  'Is it for Lancelot, is it for my dear lord?
  Then will I bear it gladly;' she replied,
  'For Lancelot and the Queen and all the world,
  But I myself must bear it.'  Then he wrote
  The letter she devised; which being writ
  And folded, 'O sweet father, tender and true,
  Deny me not,' she said--'ye never yet
  Denied my fancies--this, however strange,
  My latest:  lay the letter in my hand
  A little ere I die, and close the hand
  Upon it; I shall guard it even in death.
  And when the heat is gone from out my heart,
  Then take the little bed on which I died
  For Lancelot's love, and deck it like the Queen's
  For richness, and me also like the Queen
  In all I have of rich, and lay me on it.
  And let there be prepared a chariot-bier
  To take me to the river, and a barge
  Be ready on the river, clothed in black.
  I go in state to court, to meet the Queen.
  There surely I shall speak for mine own self,
  And none of you can speak for me so well.
  And therefore let our dumb old man alone
  Go with me, he can steer and row, and he
  Will guide me to that palace, to the doors.'

     She ceased:  her father promised; whereupon
  She grew so cheerful that they deemed her death
  Was rather in the fantasy than the blood.
  But ten slow mornings past, and on the eleventh
  Her father laid the letter in her hand,
  And closed the hand upon it, and she died.
  So that day there was dole in Astolat.

     But when the next sun brake from underground,
  Then, those two brethren slowly with bent brows
  Accompanying, the sad chariot-bier
  Past like a shadow through the field, that shone
  Full-summer, to that stream whereon the barge,
  Palled all its length in blackest samite, lay.
  There sat the lifelong creature of the house,
  Loyal, the dumb old servitor, on deck,
  Winking his eyes, and twisted all his face.
  So those two brethren from the chariot took
  And on the black decks laid her in her bed,
  Set in her hand a lily, o'er her hung
  The silken case with braided blazonings,
  And kissed her quiet brows, and saying to her
  'Sister, farewell for ever,' and again
  'Farewell, sweet sister,' parted all in tears.
  Then rose the dumb old servitor, and the dead,
  Oared by the dumb, went upward with the flood--
  In her right hand the lily, in her left
  The letter--all her bright hair streaming down--
  And all the coverlid was cloth of gold
  Drawn to her waist, and she herself in white
  All but her face, and that clear-featured face
  Was lovely, for she did not seem as dead,
  But fast asleep, and lay as though she smiled.

     That day Sir Lancelot at the palace craved
  Audience of Guinevere, to give at last,
  The price of half a realm, his costly gift,
  Hard-won and hardly won with bruise and blow,
  With deaths of others, and almost his own,
  The nine-years-fought-for diamonds:  for he saw
  One of her house, and sent him to the Queen
  Bearing his wish, whereto the Queen agreed
  With such and so unmoved a majesty
  She might have seemed her statue, but that he,
  Low-drooping till he wellnigh kissed her feet
  For loyal awe, saw with a sidelong eye
  The shadow of some piece of pointed lace,
  In the Queen's shadow, vibrate on the walls,
  And parted, laughing in his courtly heart.

     All in an oriel on the summer side,
  Vine-clad, of Arthur's palace toward the stream,
  They met, and Lancelot kneeling uttered, 'Queen,
  Lady, my liege, in whom I have my joy,
  Take, what I had not won except for you,
  These jewels, and make me happy, making them
  An armlet for the roundest arm on earth,
  Or necklace for a neck to which the swan's
  Is tawnier than her cygnet's:  these are words:
  Your beauty is your beauty, and I sin
  In speaking, yet O grant my worship of it
  Words, as we grant grief tears.  Such sin in words
  Perchance, we both can pardon:  but, my Queen,
  I hear of rumours flying through your court.
  Our bond, as not the bond of man and wife,
  Should have in it an absoluter trust
  To make up that defect:  let rumours be:
  When did not rumours fly? these, as I trust
  That you trust me in your own nobleness,
  I may not well believe that you believe.'

     While thus he spoke, half turned away, the Queen
  Brake from the vast oriel-embowering vine
  Leaf after leaf, and tore, and cast them off,
  Till all the place whereon she stood was green;
  Then, when he ceased, in one cold passive hand
  Received at once and laid aside the gems
  There on a table near her, and replied:

     'It may be, I am quicker of belief
  Than you believe me, Lancelot of the Lake.
  Our bond is not the bond of man and wife.
  This good is in it, whatsoe'er of ill,
  It can be broken easier.  I for you
  This many a year have done despite and wrong
  To one whom ever in my heart of hearts
  I did acknowledge nobler.  What are these?
  Diamonds for me! they had been thrice their worth
  Being your gift, had you not lost your own.
  To loyal hearts the value of all gifts
  Must vary as the giver's.  Not for me!
  For her! for your new fancy.  Only this
  Grant me, I pray you:  have your joys apart.
  I doubt not that however changed, you keep
  So much of what is graceful:  and myself
  Would shun to break those bounds of courtesy
  In which as Arthur's Queen I move and rule:
  So cannot speak my mind.  An end to this!
  A strange one! yet I take it with Amen.
  So pray you, add my diamonds to her pearls;
  Deck her with these; tell her, she shines me down:
  An armlet for an arm to which the Queen's
  Is haggard, or a necklace for a neck
  O as much fairer--as a faith once fair
  Was richer than these diamonds--hers not mine--
  Nay, by the mother of our Lord himself,
  Or hers or mine, mine now to work my will--
  She shall not have them.'

                           Saying which she seized,
  And, through the casement standing wide for heat,
  Flung them, and down they flashed, and smote the stream.
  Then from the smitten surface flashed, as it were,
  Diamonds to meet them, and they past away.
  Then while Sir Lancelot leant, in half disdain
  At love, life, all things, on the window ledge,
  Close underneath his eyes, and right across
  Where these had fallen, slowly past the barge.
  Whereon the lily maid of Astolat
  Lay smiling, like a star in blackest night.

     But the wild Queen, who saw not, burst away
  To weep and wail in secret; and the barge,
  On to the palace-doorway sliding, paused.
  There two stood armed, and kept the door; to whom,
  All up the marble stair, tier over tier,
  Were added mouths that gaped, and eyes that asked
  'What is it?' but that oarsman's haggard face,
  As hard and still as is the face that men
  Shape to their fancy's eye from broken rocks
  On some cliff-side, appalled them, and they said
  'He is enchanted, cannot speak--and she,
  Look how she sleeps--the Fairy Queen, so fair!
  Yea, but how pale! what are they? flesh and blood?
  Or come to take the King to Fairyland?
  For some do hold our Arthur cannot die,
  But that he passes into Fairyland.'

     While thus they babbled of the King, the King
  Came girt with knights:  then turned the tongueless man
  From the half-face to the full eye, and rose
  And pointed to the damsel, and the doors.
  So Arthur bad the meek Sir Percivale
  And pure Sir Galahad to uplift the maid;
  And reverently they bore her into hall.
  Then came the fine Gawain and wondered at her,
  And Lancelot later came and mused at her,
  And last the Queen herself, and pitied her:
  But Arthur spied the letter in her hand,
  Stoopt, took, brake seal, and read it; this was all:

     'Most noble lord, Sir Lancelot of the Lake,
  I, sometime called the maid of Astolat,
  Come, for you left me taking no farewell,
  Hither, to take my last farewell of you.
  I loved you, and my love had no return,
  And therefore my true love has been my death.
  And therefore to our Lady Guinevere,
  And to all other ladies, I make moan:
  Pray for my soul, and yield me burial.
  Pray for my soul thou too, Sir Lancelot,
  As thou art a knight peerless.'

                                 Thus he read;
  And ever in the reading, lords and dames
  Wept, looking often from his face who read
  To hers which lay so silent, and at times,
  So touched were they, half-thinking that her lips,
  Who had devised the letter, moved again.

     Then freely spoke Sir Lancelot to them all:
  'My lord liege Arthur, and all ye that hear,
  Know that for this most gentle maiden's death
  Right heavy am I; for good she was and true,
  But loved me with a love beyond all love
  In women, whomsoever I have known.
  Yet to be loved makes not to love again;
  Not at my years, however it hold in youth.
  I swear by truth and knighthood that I gave
  No cause, not willingly, for such a love:
  To this I call my friends in testimony,
  Her brethren, and her father, who himself
  Besought me to be plain and blunt, and use,
  To break her passion, some discourtesy
  Against my nature:  what I could, I did.
  I left her and I bad her no farewell;
  Though, had I dreamt the damsel would have died,
  I might have put my wits to some rough use,
  And helped her from herself.'

                               Then said the Queen
  (Sea was her wrath, yet working after storm)
  'Ye might at least have done her so much grace,
  Fair lord, as would have helped her from her death.'
  He raised his head, their eyes met and hers fell,
  He adding,
            'Queen, she would not be content
  Save that I wedded her, which could not be.
  Then might she follow me through the world, she asked;
  It could not be.  I told her that her love
  Was but the flash of youth, would darken down
  To rise hereafter in a stiller flame
  Toward one more worthy of her--then would I,
  More specially were he, she wedded, poor,
  Estate them with large land and territory
  In mine own realm beyond the narrow seas,
  To keep them in all joyance:  more than this
  I could not; this she would not, and she died.'

     He pausing, Arthur answered, 'O my knight,
  It will be to thy worship, as my knight,
  And mine, as head of all our Table Round,
  To see that she be buried worshipfully.'

     So toward that shrine which then in all the realm
  Was richest, Arthur leading, slowly went
  The marshalled Order of their Table Round,
  And Lancelot sad beyond his wont, to see
  The maiden buried, not as one unknown,
  Nor meanly, but with gorgeous obsequies,
  And mass, and rolling music, like a queen.
  And when the knights had laid her comely head
  Low in the dust of half-forgotten kings,
  Then Arthur spake among them, 'Let her tomb
  Be costly, and her image thereupon,
  And let the shield of Lancelot at her feet
  Be carven, and her lily in her hand.
  And let the story of her dolorous voyage
  For all true hearts be blazoned on her tomb
  In letters gold and azure!' which was wrought
  Thereafter; but when now the lords and dames
  And people, from the high door streaming, brake
  Disorderly, as homeward each, the Queen,
  Who marked Sir Lancelot where he moved apart,
  Drew near, and sighed in passing, 'Lancelot,
  Forgive me; mine was jealousy in love.'
  He answered with his eyes upon the ground,
  'That is love's curse; pass on, my Queen, forgiven.'
  But Arthur, who beheld his cloudy brows,
  Approached him, and with full affection said,

     'Lancelot, my Lancelot, thou in whom I have
  Most joy and most affiance, for I know
  What thou hast been in battle by my side,
  And many a time have watched thee at the tilt
  Strike down the lusty and long practised knight,
  And let the younger and unskilled go by
  To win his honour and to make his name,
  And loved thy courtesies and thee, a man
  Made to be loved; but now I would to God,
  Seeing the homeless trouble in thine eyes,
  Thou couldst have loved this maiden, shaped, it seems,
  By God for thee alone, and from her face,
  If one may judge the living by the dead,
  Delicately pure and marvellously fair,
  Who might have brought thee, now a lonely man
  Wifeless and heirless, noble issue, sons
  Born to the glory of thine name and fame,
  My knight, the great Sir Lancelot of the Lake.'

     Then answered Lancelot, 'Fair she was, my King,
  Pure, as you ever wish your knights to be.
  To doubt her fairness were to want an eye,
  To doubt her pureness were to want a heart--
  Yea, to be loved, if what is worthy love
  Could bind him, but free love will not be bound.'

     'Free love, so bound, were freest,' said the King.
  'Let love be free; free love is for the best:
  And, after heaven, on our dull side of death,
  What should be best, if not so pure a love
  Clothed in so pure a loveliness? yet thee
  She failed to bind, though being, as I think,
  Unbound as yet, and gentle, as I know.'

     And Lancelot answered nothing, but he went,
  And at the inrunning of a little brook
  Sat by the river in a cove, and watched
  The high reed wave, and lifted up his eyes
  And saw the barge that brought her moving down,
  Far-off, a blot upon the stream, and said
  Low in himself, 'Ah simple heart and sweet,
  Ye loved me, damsel, surely with a love
  Far tenderer than my Queen's.  Pray for thy soul?
  Ay, that will I.  Farewell too--now at last--
  Farewell, fair lily.  "Jealousy in love?"
  Not rather dead love's harsh heir, jealous pride?
  Queen, if I grant the jealousy as of love,
  May not your crescent fear for name and fame
  Speak, as it waxes, of a love that wanes?
  Why did the King dwell on my name to me?
  Mine own name shames me, seeming a reproach,
  Lancelot, whom the Lady of the Lake
  Caught from his mother's arms--the wondrous one
  Who passes through the vision of the night--
  She chanted snatches of mysterious hymns
  Heard on the winding waters, eve and morn
  She kissed me saying, "Thou art fair, my child,
  As a king's son," and often in her arms
  She bare me, pacing on the dusky mere.
  Would she had drowned me in it, where'er it be!
  For what am I? what profits me my name
  Of greatest knight?  I fought for it, and have it:
  Pleasure to have it, none; to lose it, pain;
  Now grown a part of me:  but what use in it?
  To make men worse by making my sin known?
  Or sin seem less, the sinner seeming great?
  Alas for Arthur's greatest knight, a man
  Not after Arthur's heart!  I needs must break
  These bonds that so defame me:  not without
  She wills it:  would I, if she willed it? nay,
  Who knows? but if I would not, then may God,
  I pray him, send a sudden Angel down
  To seize me by the hair and bear me far,
  And fling me deep in that forgotten mere,
  Among the tumbled fragments of the hills.'

     So groaned Sir Lancelot in remorseful pain,
  Not knowing he should die a holy man.



  The Holy Grail

  From noiseful arms, and acts of prowess done
  In tournament or tilt, Sir Percivale,
  Whom Arthur and his knighthood called The Pure,
  Had passed into the silent life of prayer,
  Praise, fast, and alms; and leaving for the cowl
  The helmet in an abbey far away
  From Camelot, there, and not long after, died.

     And one, a fellow-monk among the rest,
  Ambrosius, loved him much beyond the rest,
  And honoured him, and wrought into his heart
  A way by love that wakened love within,
  To answer that which came:  and as they sat
  Beneath a world-old yew-tree, darkening half
  The cloisters, on a gustful April morn
  That puffed the swaying branches into smoke
  Above them, ere the summer when he died
  The monk Ambrosius questioned Percivale:

     'O brother, I have seen this yew-tree smoke,
  Spring after spring, for half a hundred years:
  For never have I known the world without,
  Nor ever strayed beyond the pale:  but thee,
  When first thou camest--such a courtesy
  Spake through the limbs and in the voice--I knew
  For one of those who eat in Arthur's hall;
  For good ye are and bad, and like to coins,
  Some true, some light, but every one of you
  Stamped with the image of the King; and now
  Tell me, what drove thee from the Table Round,
  My brother? was it earthly passion crost?'

     'Nay,' said the knight; 'for no such passion mine.
  But the sweet vision of the Holy Grail
  Drove me from all vainglories, rivalries,
  And earthly heats that spring and sparkle out
  Among us in the jousts, while women watch
  Who wins, who falls; and waste the spiritual strength
  Within us, better offered up to Heaven.'

     To whom the monk:  'The Holy Grail!--I trust
  We are green in Heaven's eyes; but here too much
  We moulder--as to things without I mean--
  Yet one of your own knights, a guest of ours,
  Told us of this in our refectory,
  But spake with such a sadness and so low
  We heard not half of what he said.  What is it?
  The phantom of a cup that comes and goes?'

     'Nay, monk! what phantom?' answered Percivale.
  'The cup, the cup itself, from which our Lord
  Drank at the last sad supper with his own.
  This, from the blessed land of Aromat--
  After the day of darkness, when the dead
  Went wandering o'er Moriah--the good saint
  Arimathaean Joseph, journeying brought
  To Glastonbury, where the winter thorn
  Blossoms at Christmas, mindful of our Lord.
  And there awhile it bode; and if a man
  Could touch or see it, he was healed at once,
  By faith, of all his ills.  But then the times
  Grew to such evil that the holy cup
  Was caught away to Heaven, and disappeared.'

     To whom the monk:  'From our old books I know
  That Joseph came of old to Glastonbury,
  And there the heathen Prince, Arviragus,
  Gave him an isle of marsh whereon to build;
  And there he built with wattles from the marsh
  A little lonely church in days of yore,
  For so they say, these books of ours, but seem
  Mute of this miracle, far as I have read.
  But who first saw the holy thing today?'

     'A woman,' answered Percivale, 'a nun,
  And one no further off in blood from me
  Than sister; and if ever holy maid
  With knees of adoration wore the stone,
  A holy maid; though never maiden glowed,
  But that was in her earlier maidenhood,
  With such a fervent flame of human love,
  Which being rudely blunted, glanced and shot
  Only to holy things; to prayer and praise
  She gave herself, to fast and alms.  And yet,
  Nun as she was, the scandal of the Court,
  Sin against Arthur and the Table Round,
  And the strange sound of an adulterous race,
  Across the iron grating of her cell
  Beat, and she prayed and fasted all the more.

     'And he to whom she told her sins, or what
  Her all but utter whiteness held for sin,
  A man wellnigh a hundred winters old,
  Spake often with her of the Holy Grail,
  A legend handed down through five or six,
  And each of these a hundred winters old,
  From our Lord's time.  And when King Arthur made
  His Table Round, and all men's hearts became
  Clean for a season, surely he had thought
  That now the Holy Grail would come again;
  But sin broke out.  Ah, Christ, that it would come,
  And heal the world of all their wickedness!
  "O Father!" asked the maiden, "might it come
  To me by prayer and fasting?"  "Nay," said he,
  "I know not, for thy heart is pure as snow."
  And so she prayed and fasted, till the sun
  Shone, and the wind blew, through her, and I thought
  She might have risen and floated when I saw her.

     'For on a day she sent to speak with me.
  And when she came to speak, behold her eyes
  Beyond my knowing of them, beautiful,
  Beyond all knowing of them, wonderful,
  Beautiful in the light of holiness.
  And "O my brother Percivale," she said,
  "Sweet brother, I have seen the Holy Grail:
  For, waked at dead of night, I heard a sound
  As of a silver horn from o'er the hills
  Blown, and I thought, 'It is not Arthur's use
  To hunt by moonlight;' and the slender sound
  As from a distance beyond distance grew
  Coming upon me--O never harp nor horn,
  Nor aught we blow with breath, or touch with hand,
  Was like that music as it came; and then
  Streamed through my cell a cold and silver beam,
  And down the long beam stole the Holy Grail,
  Rose-red with beatings in it, as if alive,
  Till all the white walls of my cell were dyed
  With rosy colours leaping on the wall;
  And then the music faded, and the Grail
  Past, and the beam decayed, and from the walls
  The rosy quiverings died into the night.
  So now the Holy Thing is here again
  Among us, brother, fast thou too and pray,
  And tell thy brother knights to fast and pray,
  That so perchance the vision may be seen
  By thee and those, and all the world be healed."

     'Then leaving the pale nun, I spake of this
  To all men; and myself fasted and prayed
  Always, and many among us many a week
  Fasted and prayed even to the uttermost,
  Expectant of the wonder that would be.

     'And one there was among us, ever moved
  Among us in white armour, Galahad.
  "God make thee good as thou art beautiful,"
  Said Arthur, when he dubbed him knight; and none,
  In so young youth, was ever made a knight
  Till Galahad; and this Galahad, when he heard
  My sister's vision, filled me with amaze;
  His eyes became so like her own, they seemed
  Hers, and himself her brother more than I.

     'Sister or brother none had he; but some
  Called him a son of Lancelot, and some said
  Begotten by enchantment--chatterers they,
  Like birds of passage piping up and down,
  That gape for flies--we know not whence they come;
  For when was Lancelot wanderingly lewd?

     'But she, the wan sweet maiden, shore away
  Clean from her forehead all that wealth of hair
  Which made a silken mat-work for her feet;
  And out of this she plaited broad and long
  A strong sword-belt, and wove with silver thread
  And crimson in the belt a strange device,
  A crimson grail within a silver beam;
  And saw the bright boy-knight, and bound it on him,
  Saying, "My knight, my love, my knight of heaven,
  O thou, my love, whose love is one with mine,
  I, maiden, round thee, maiden, bind my belt.
  Go forth, for thou shalt see what I have seen,
  And break through all, till one will crown thee king
  Far in the spiritual city:" and as she spake
  She sent the deathless passion in her eyes
  Through him, and made him hers, and laid her mind
  On him, and he believed in her belief.

     'Then came a year of miracle:  O brother,
  In our great hall there stood a vacant chair,
  Fashioned by Merlin ere he past away,
  And carven with strange figures; and in and out
  The figures, like a serpent, ran a scroll
  Of letters in a tongue no man could read.
  And Merlin called it "The Siege perilous,"
  Perilous for good and ill; "for there," he said,
  "No man could sit but he should lose himself:"
  And once by misadvertence Merlin sat
  In his own chair, and so was lost; but he,
  Galahad, when he heard of Merlin's doom,
  Cried, "If I lose myself, I save myself!"

     'Then on a summer night it came to pass,
  While the great banquet lay along the hall,
  That Galahad would sit down in Merlin's chair.

     'And all at once, as there we sat, we heard
  A cracking and a riving of the roofs,
  And rending, and a blast, and overhead
  Thunder, and in the thunder was a cry.
  And in the blast there smote along the hall
  A beam of light seven times more clear than day:
  And down the long beam stole the Holy Grail
  All over covered with a luminous cloud.
  And none might see who bare it, and it past.
  But every knight beheld his fellow's face
  As in a glory, and all the knights arose,
  And staring each at other like dumb men
  Stood, till I found a voice and sware a vow.

     'I sware a vow before them all, that I,
  Because I had not seen the Grail, would ride
  A twelvemonth and a day in quest of it,
  Until I found and saw it, as the nun
  My sister saw it; and Galahad sware the vow,
  And good Sir Bors, our Lancelot's cousin, sware,
  And Lancelot sware, and many among the knights,
  And Gawain sware, and louder than the rest.'

     Then spake the monk Ambrosius, asking him,
  'What said the King?  Did Arthur take the vow?'

     'Nay, for my lord,' said Percivale, 'the King,
  Was not in hall:  for early that same day,
  Scaped through a cavern from a bandit hold,
  An outraged maiden sprang into the hall
  Crying on help:  for all her shining hair
  Was smeared with earth, and either milky arm
  Red-rent with hooks of bramble, and all she wore
  Torn as a sail that leaves the rope is torn
  In tempest:  so the King arose and went
  To smoke the scandalous hive of those wild bees
  That made such honey in his realm.  Howbeit
  Some little of this marvel he too saw,
  Returning o'er the plain that then began
  To darken under Camelot; whence the King
  Looked up, calling aloud, "Lo, there! the roofs
  Of our great hall are rolled in thunder-smoke!
  Pray Heaven, they be not smitten by the bolt."
  For dear to Arthur was that hall of ours,
  As having there so oft with all his knights
  Feasted, and as the stateliest under heaven.

     'O brother, had you known our mighty hall,
  Which Merlin built for Arthur long ago!
  For all the sacred mount of Camelot,
  And all the dim rich city, roof by roof,
  Tower after tower, spire beyond spire,
  By grove, and garden-lawn, and rushing brook,
  Climbs to the mighty hall that Merlin built.
  And four great zones of sculpture, set betwixt
  With many a mystic symbol, gird the hall:
  And in the lowest beasts are slaying men,
  And in the second men are slaying beasts,
  And on the third are warriors, perfect men,
  And on the fourth are men with growing wings,
  And over all one statue in the mould
  Of Arthur, made by Merlin, with a crown,
  And peaked wings pointed to the Northern Star.
  And eastward fronts the statue, and the crown
  And both the wings are made of gold, and flame
  At sunrise till the people in far fields,
  Wasted so often by the heathen hordes,
  Behold it, crying, "We have still a King."

     'And, brother, had you known our hall within,
  Broader and higher than any in all the lands!
  Where twelve great windows blazon Arthur's wars,
  And all the light that falls upon the board
  Streams through the twelve great battles of our King.
  Nay, one there is, and at the eastern end,
  Wealthy with wandering lines of mount and mere,
  Where Arthur finds the brand Excalibur.
  And also one to the west, and counter to it,
  And blank:  and who shall blazon it? when and how?--
  O there, perchance, when all our wars are done,
  The brand Excalibur will be cast away.

     'So to this hall full quickly rode the King,
  In horror lest the work by Merlin wrought,
  Dreamlike, should on the sudden vanish, wrapt
  In unremorseful folds of rolling fire.
  And in he rode, and up I glanced, and saw
  The golden dragon sparkling over all:
  And many of those who burnt the hold, their arms
  Hacked, and their foreheads grimed with smoke, and seared,
  Followed, and in among bright faces, ours,
  Full of the vision, prest:  and then the King
  Spake to me, being nearest, "Percivale,"
  (Because the hall was all in tumult--some
  Vowing, and some protesting), "what is this?"

     'O brother, when I told him what had chanced,
  My sister's vision, and the rest, his face
  Darkened, as I have seen it more than once,
  When some brave deed seemed to be done in vain,
  Darken; and "Woe is me, my knights," he cried,
  "Had I been here, ye had not sworn the vow."
  Bold was mine answer, "Had thyself been here,
  My King, thou wouldst have sworn."  "Yea, yea," said he,
  "Art thou so bold and hast not seen the Grail?"

     '"Nay, lord, I heard the sound, I saw the light,
  But since I did not see the Holy Thing,
  I sware a vow to follow it till I saw."

     'Then when he asked us, knight by knight, if any
  Had seen it, all their answers were as one:
  "Nay, lord, and therefore have we sworn our vows."

     '"Lo now," said Arthur, "have ye seen a cloud?
  What go ye into the wilderness to see?"

     'Then Galahad on the sudden, and in a voice
  Shrilling along the hall to Arthur, called,
  "But I, Sir Arthur, saw the Holy Grail,
  I saw the Holy Grail and heard a cry--
  'O Galahad, and O Galahad, follow me.'"

     '"Ah, Galahad, Galahad," said the King, "for such
  As thou art is the vision, not for these.
  Thy holy nun and thou have seen a sign--
  Holier is none, my Percivale, than she--
  A sign to maim this Order which I made.
  But ye, that follow but the leader's bell"
  (Brother, the King was hard upon his knights)
  "Taliessin is our fullest throat of song,
  And one hath sung and all the dumb will sing.
  Lancelot is Lancelot, and hath overborne
  Five knights at once, and every younger knight,
  Unproven, holds himself as Lancelot,
  Till overborne by one, he learns--and ye,
  What are ye? Galahads?--no, nor Percivales"
  (For thus it pleased the King to range me close
  After Sir Galahad); "nay," said he, "but men
  With strength and will to right the wronged, of power
  To lay the sudden heads of violence flat,
  Knights that in twelve great battles splashed and dyed
  The strong White Horse in his own heathen blood--
  But one hath seen, and all the blind will see.
  Go, since your vows are sacred, being made:
  Yet--for ye know the cries of all my realm
  Pass through this hall--how often, O my knights,
  Your places being vacant at my side,
  This chance of noble deeds will come and go
  Unchallenged, while ye follow wandering fires
  Lost in the quagmire!  Many of you, yea most,
  Return no more:  ye think I show myself
  Too dark a prophet:  come now, let us meet
  The morrow morn once more in one full field
  Of gracious pastime, that once more the King,
  Before ye leave him for this Quest, may count
  The yet-unbroken strength of all his knights,
  Rejoicing in that Order which he made."

     'So when the sun broke next from under ground,
  All the great table of our Arthur closed
  And clashed in such a tourney and so full,
  So many lances broken--never yet
  Had Camelot seen the like, since Arthur came;
  And I myself and Galahad, for a strength
  Was in us from this vision, overthrew
  So many knights that all the people cried,
  And almost burst the barriers in their heat,
  Shouting, "Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale!"

     'But when the next day brake from under ground--
  O brother, had you known our Camelot,
  Built by old kings, age after age, so old
  The King himself had fears that it would fall,
  So strange, and rich, and dim; for where the roofs
  Tottered toward each other in the sky,
  Met foreheads all along the street of those
  Who watched us pass; and lower, and where the long
  Rich galleries, lady-laden, weighed the necks
  Of dragons clinging to the crazy walls,
  Thicker than drops from thunder, showers of flowers
  Fell as we past; and men and boys astride
  On wyvern, lion, dragon, griffin, swan,
  At all the corners, named us each by name,
  Calling, "God speed!" but in the ways below
  The knights and ladies wept, and rich and poor
  Wept, and the King himself could hardly speak
  For grief, and all in middle street the Queen,
  Who rode by Lancelot, wailed and shrieked aloud,
  "This madness has come on us for our sins."
  So to the Gate of the three Queens we came,
  Where Arthur's wars are rendered mystically,
  And thence departed every one his way.

     'And I was lifted up in heart, and thought
  Of all my late-shown prowess in the lists,
  How my strong lance had beaten down the knights,
  So many and famous names; and never yet
  Had heaven appeared so blue, nor earth so green,
  For all my blood danced in me, and I knew
  That I should light upon the Holy Grail.

     'Thereafter, the dark warning of our King,
  That most of us would follow wandering fires,
  Came like a driving gloom across my mind.
  Then every evil word I had spoken once,
  And every evil thought I had thought of old,
  And every evil deed I ever did,
  Awoke and cried, "This Quest is not for thee."
  And lifting up mine eyes, I found myself
  Alone, and in a land of sand and thorns,
  And I was thirsty even unto death;
  And I, too, cried, "This Quest is not for thee."

     'And on I rode, and when I thought my thirst
  Would slay me, saw deep lawns, and then a brook,
  With one sharp rapid, where the crisping white
  Played ever back upon the sloping wave,
  And took both ear and eye; and o'er the brook
  Were apple-trees, and apples by the brook
  Fallen, and on the lawns.  "I will rest here,"
  I said, "I am not worthy of the Quest;"
  But even while I drank the brook, and ate
  The goodly apples, all these things at once
  Fell into dust, and I was left alone,
  And thirsting, in a land of sand and thorns.

     'And then behold a woman at a door
  Spinning; and fair the house whereby she sat,
  And kind the woman's eyes and innocent,
  And all her bearing gracious; and she rose
  Opening her arms to meet me, as who should say,
  "Rest here;" but when I touched her, lo! she, too,
  Fell into dust and nothing, and the house
  Became no better than a broken shed,
  And in it a dead babe; and also this
  Fell into dust, and I was left alone.

     'And on I rode, and greater was my thirst.
  Then flashed a yellow gleam across the world,
  And where it smote the plowshare in the field,
  The plowman left his plowing, and fell down
  Before it; where it glittered on her pail,
  The milkmaid left her milking, and fell down
  Before it, and I knew not why, but thought
  "The sun is rising," though the sun had risen.
  Then was I ware of one that on me moved
  In golden armour with a crown of gold
  About a casque all jewels; and his horse
  In golden armour jewelled everywhere:
  And on the splendour came, flashing me blind;
  And seemed to me the Lord of all the world,
  Being so huge.  But when I thought he meant
  To crush me, moving on me, lo! he, too,
  Opened his arms to embrace me as he came,
  And up I went and touched him, and he, too,
  Fell into dust, and I was left alone
  And wearying in a land of sand and thorns.

     'And I rode on and found a mighty hill,
  And on the top, a city walled:  the spires
  Pricked with incredible pinnacles into heaven.
  And by the gateway stirred a crowd; and these
  Cried to me climbing, "Welcome, Percivale!
  Thou mightiest and thou purest among men!"
  And glad was I and clomb, but found at top
  No man, nor any voice.  And thence I past
  Far through a ruinous city, and I saw
  That man had once dwelt there; but there I found
  Only one man of an exceeding age.
  "Where is that goodly company," said I,
  "That so cried out upon me?" and he had
  Scarce any voice to answer, and yet gasped,
  "Whence and what art thou?" and even as he spoke
  Fell into dust, and disappeared, and I
  Was left alone once more, and cried in grief,
  "Lo, if I find the Holy Grail itself
  And touch it, it will crumble into dust."

     'And thence I dropt into a lowly vale,
  Low as the hill was high, and where the vale
  Was lowest, found a chapel, and thereby
  A holy hermit in a hermitage,
  To whom I told my phantoms, and he said:

     '"O son, thou hast not true humility,
  The highest virtue, mother of them all;
  For when the Lord of all things made Himself
  Naked of glory for His mortal change,
  'Take thou my robe,' she said, 'for all is thine,'
  And all her form shone forth with sudden light
  So that the angels were amazed, and she
  Followed Him down, and like a flying star
  Led on the gray-haired wisdom of the east;
  But her thou hast not known:  for what is this
  Thou thoughtest of thy prowess and thy sins?
  Thou hast not lost thyself to save thyself
  As Galahad."  When the hermit made an end,
  In silver armour suddenly Galahad shone
  Before us, and against the chapel door
  Laid lance, and entered, and we knelt in prayer.
  And there the hermit slaked my burning thirst,
  And at the sacring of the mass I saw
  The holy elements alone; but he,
  "Saw ye no more?  I, Galahad, saw the Grail,
  The Holy Grail, descend upon the shrine:
  I saw the fiery face as of a child
  That smote itself into the bread, and went;
  And hither am I come; and never yet
  Hath what thy sister taught me first to see,
  This Holy Thing, failed from my side, nor come
  Covered, but moving with me night and day,
  Fainter by day, but always in the night
  Blood-red, and sliding down the blackened marsh
  Blood-red, and on the naked mountain top
  Blood-red, and in the sleeping mere below
  Blood-red.  And in the strength of this I rode,
  Shattering all evil customs everywhere,
  And past through Pagan realms, and made them mine,
  And clashed with Pagan hordes, and bore them down,
  And broke through all, and in the strength of this
  Come victor.  But my time is hard at hand,
  And hence I go; and one will crown me king
  Far in the spiritual city; and come thou, too,
  For thou shalt see the vision when I go."

     'While thus he spake, his eye, dwelling on mine,
  Drew me, with power upon me, till I grew
  One with him, to believe as he believed.
  Then, when the day began to wane, we went.

     'There rose a hill that none but man could climb,
  Scarred with a hundred wintry water-courses--
  Storm at the top, and when we gained it, storm
  Round us and death; for every moment glanced
  His silver arms and gloomed:  so quick and thick
  The lightnings here and there to left and right
  Struck, till the dry old trunks about us, dead,
  Yea, rotten with a hundred years of death,
  Sprang into fire:  and at the base we found
  On either hand, as far as eye could see,
  A great black swamp and of an evil smell,
  Part black, part whitened with the bones of men,
  Not to be crost, save that some ancient king
  Had built a way, where, linked with many a bridge,
  A thousand piers ran into the great Sea.
  And Galahad fled along them bridge by bridge,
  And every bridge as quickly as he crost
  Sprang into fire and vanished, though I yearned
  To follow; and thrice above him all the heavens
  Opened and blazed with thunder such as seemed
  Shoutings of all the sons of God:  and first
  At once I saw him far on the great Sea,
  In silver-shining armour starry-clear;
  And o'er his head the Holy Vessel hung
  Clothed in white samite or a luminous cloud.
  And with exceeding swiftness ran the boat,
  If boat it were--I saw not whence it came.
  And when the heavens opened and blazed again
  Roaring, I saw him like a silver star--
  And had he set the sail, or had the boat
  Become a living creature clad with wings?
  And o'er his head the Holy Vessel hung
  Redder than any rose, a joy to me,
  For now I knew the veil had been withdrawn.
  Then in a moment when they blazed again
  Opening, I saw the least of little stars
  Down on the waste, and straight beyond the star
  I saw the spiritual city and all her spires
  And gateways in a glory like one pearl--
  No larger, though the goal of all the saints--
  Strike from the sea; and from the star there shot
  A rose-red sparkle to the city, and there
  Dwelt, and I knew it was the Holy Grail,
  Which never eyes on earth again shall see.
  Then fell the floods of heaven drowning the deep.
  And how my feet recrost the deathful ridge
  No memory in me lives; but that I touched
  The chapel-doors at dawn I know; and thence
  Taking my war-horse from the holy man,
  Glad that no phantom vext me more, returned
  To whence I came, the gate of Arthur's wars.'

     'O brother,' asked Ambrosius,--'for in sooth
  These ancient books--and they would win thee--teem,
  Only I find not there this Holy Grail,
  With miracles and marvels like to these,
  Not all unlike; which oftentime I read,
  Who read but on my breviary with ease,
  Till my head swims; and then go forth and pass
  Down to the little thorpe that lies so close,
  And almost plastered like a martin's nest
  To these old walls--and mingle with our folk;
  And knowing every honest face of theirs
  As well as ever shepherd knew his sheep,
  And every homely secret in their hearts,
  Delight myself with gossip and old wives,
  And ills and aches, and teethings, lyings-in,
  And mirthful sayings, children of the place,
  That have no meaning half a league away:
  Or lulling random squabbles when they rise,
  Chafferings and chatterings at the market-cross,
  Rejoice, small man, in this small world of mine,
  Yea, even in their hens and in their eggs--
  O brother, saving this Sir Galahad,
  Came ye on none but phantoms in your quest,
  No man, no woman?'

                    Then Sir Percivale:
  'All men, to one so bound by such a vow,
  And women were as phantoms.  O, my brother,
  Why wilt thou shame me to confess to thee
  How far I faltered from my quest and vow?
  For after I had lain so many nights
  A bedmate of the snail and eft and snake,
  In grass and burdock, I was changed to wan
  And meagre, and the vision had not come;
  And then I chanced upon a goodly town
  With one great dwelling in the middle of it;
  Thither I made, and there was I disarmed
  By maidens each as fair as any flower:
  But when they led me into hall, behold,
  The Princess of that castle was the one,
  Brother, and that one only, who had ever
  Made my heart leap; for when I moved of old
  A slender page about her father's hall,
  And she a slender maiden, all my heart
  Went after her with longing:  yet we twain
  Had never kissed a kiss, or vowed a vow.
  And now I came upon her once again,
  And one had wedded her, and he was dead,
  And all his land and wealth and state were hers.
  And while I tarried, every day she set
  A banquet richer than the day before
  By me; for all her longing and her will
  Was toward me as of old; till one fair morn,
  I walking to and fro beside a stream
  That flashed across her orchard underneath
  Her castle-walls, she stole upon my walk,
  And calling me the greatest of all knights,
  Embraced me, and so kissed me the first time,
  And gave herself and all her wealth to me.
  Then I remembered Arthur's warning word,
  That most of us would follow wandering fires,
  And the Quest faded in my heart.  Anon,
  The heads of all her people drew to me,
  With supplication both of knees and tongue:
  "We have heard of thee:  thou art our greatest knight,
  Our Lady says it, and we well believe:
  Wed thou our Lady, and rule over us,
  And thou shalt be as Arthur in our land."
  O me, my brother! but one night my vow
  Burnt me within, so that I rose and fled,
  But wailed and wept, and hated mine own self,
  And even the Holy Quest, and all but her;
  Then after I was joined with Galahad
  Cared not for her, nor anything upon earth.'

     Then said the monk, 'Poor men, when yule is cold,
  Must be content to sit by little fires.
  And this am I, so that ye care for me
  Ever so little; yea, and blest be Heaven
  That brought thee here to this poor house of ours
  Where all the brethren are so hard, to warm
  My cold heart with a friend:  but O the pity
  To find thine own first love once more--to hold,
  Hold her a wealthy bride within thine arms,
  Or all but hold, and then--cast her aside,
  Foregoing all her sweetness, like a weed.
  For we that want the warmth of double life,
  We that are plagued with dreams of something sweet
  Beyond all sweetness in a life so rich,--
  Ah, blessed Lord, I speak too earthlywise,
  Seeing I never strayed beyond the cell,
  But live like an old badger in his earth,
  With earth about him everywhere, despite
  All fast and penance.  Saw ye none beside,
  None of your knights?'

                        'Yea so,' said Percivale:
  'One night my pathway swerving east, I saw
  The pelican on the casque of our Sir Bors
  All in the middle of the rising moon:
  And toward him spurred, and hailed him, and he me,
  And each made joy of either; then he asked,
  "Where is he? hast thou seen him--Lancelot?--Once,"
  Said good Sir Bors, "he dashed across me--mad,
  And maddening what he rode:  and when I cried,
  'Ridest thou then so hotly on a quest
  So holy,' Lancelot shouted, 'Stay me not!
  I have been the sluggard, and I ride apace,
  For now there is a lion in the way.'
  So vanished."

               'Then Sir Bors had ridden on
  Softly, and sorrowing for our Lancelot,
  Because his former madness, once the talk
  And scandal of our table, had returned;
  For Lancelot's kith and kin so worship him
  That ill to him is ill to them; to Bors
  Beyond the rest:  he well had been content
  Not to have seen, so Lancelot might have seen,
  The Holy Cup of healing; and, indeed,
  Being so clouded with his grief and love,
  Small heart was his after the Holy Quest:
  If God would send the vision, well:  if not,
  The Quest and he were in the hands of Heaven.

     'And then, with small adventure met, Sir Bors
  Rode to the lonest tract of all the realm,
  And found a people there among their crags,
  Our race and blood, a remnant that were left
  Paynim amid their circles, and the stones
  They pitch up straight to heaven:  and their wise men
  Were strong in that old magic which can trace
  The wandering of the stars, and scoffed at him
  And this high Quest as at a simple thing:
  Told him he followed--almost Arthur's words--
  A mocking fire:  "what other fire than he,
  Whereby the blood beats, and the blossom blows,
  And the sea rolls, and all the world is warmed?"
  And when his answer chafed them, the rough crowd,
  Hearing he had a difference with their priests,
  Seized him, and bound and plunged him into a cell
  Of great piled stones; and lying bounden there
  In darkness through innumerable hours
  He heard the hollow-ringing heavens sweep
  Over him till by miracle--what else?--
  Heavy as it was, a great stone slipt and fell,
  Such as no wind could move:  and through the gap
  Glimmered the streaming scud:  then came a night
  Still as the day was loud; and through the gap
  The seven clear stars of Arthur's Table Round--
  For, brother, so one night, because they roll
  Through such a round in heaven, we named the stars,
  Rejoicing in ourselves and in our King--
  And these, like bright eyes of familiar friends,
  In on him shone:  "And then to me, to me,"
  Said good Sir Bors, "beyond all hopes of mine,
  Who scarce had prayed or asked it for myself--
  Across the seven clear stars--O grace to me--
  In colour like the fingers of a hand
  Before a burning taper, the sweet Grail
  Glided and past, and close upon it pealed
  A sharp quick thunder."  Afterwards, a maid,
  Who kept our holy faith among her kin
  In secret, entering, loosed and let him go.'

     To whom the monk:  'And I remember now
  That pelican on the casque:  Sir Bors it was
  Who spake so low and sadly at our board;
  And mighty reverent at our grace was he:
  A square-set man and honest; and his eyes,
  An out-door sign of all the warmth within,
  Smiled with his lips--a smile beneath a cloud,
  But heaven had meant it for a sunny one:
  Ay, ay, Sir Bors, who else?  But when ye reached
  The city, found ye all your knights returned,
  Or was there sooth in Arthur's prophecy,
  Tell me, and what said each, and what the King?'

     Then answered Percivale:  'And that can I,
  Brother, and truly; since the living words
  Of so great men as Lancelot and our King
  Pass not from door to door and out again,
  But sit within the house.  O, when we reached
  The city, our horses stumbling as they trode
  On heaps of ruin, hornless unicorns,
  Cracked basilisks, and splintered cockatrices,
  And shattered talbots, which had left the stones
  Raw, that they fell from, brought us to the hall.

     'And there sat Arthur on the dais-throne,
  And those that had gone out upon the Quest,
  Wasted and worn, and but a tithe of them,
  And those that had not, stood before the King,
  Who, when he saw me, rose, and bad me hail,
  Saying, "A welfare in thine eye reproves
  Our fear of some disastrous chance for thee
  On hill, or plain, at sea, or flooding ford.
  So fierce a gale made havoc here of late
  Among the strange devices of our kings;
  Yea, shook this newer, stronger hall of ours,
  And from the statue Merlin moulded for us
  Half-wrenched a golden wing; but now--the Quest,
  This vision--hast thou seen the Holy Cup,
  That Joseph brought of old to Glastonbury?"

     'So when I told him all thyself hast heard,
  Ambrosius, and my fresh but fixt resolve
  To pass away into the quiet life,
  He answered not, but, sharply turning, asked
  Of Gawain, "Gawain, was this Quest for thee?"

     '"Nay, lord," said Gawain, "not for such as I.
  Therefore I communed with a saintly man,
  Who made me sure the Quest was not for me;
  For I was much awearied of the Quest:
  But found a silk pavilion in a field,
  And merry maidens in it; and then this gale
  Tore my pavilion from the tenting-pin,
  And blew my merry maidens all about
  With all discomfort; yea, and but for this,
  My twelvemonth and a day were pleasant to me."

     'He ceased; and Arthur turned to whom at first
  He saw not, for Sir Bors, on entering, pushed
  Athwart the throng to Lancelot, caught his hand,
  Held it, and there, half-hidden by him, stood,
  Until the King espied him, saying to him,
  "Hail, Bors! if ever loyal man and true
  Could see it, thou hast seen the Grail;" and Bors,
  "Ask me not, for I may not speak of it:
  I saw it;" and the tears were in his eyes.

     'Then there remained but Lancelot, for the rest
  Spake but of sundry perils in the storm;
  Perhaps, like him of Cana in Holy Writ,
  Our Arthur kept his best until the last;
  "Thou, too, my Lancelot," asked the king, "my friend,
  Our mightiest, hath this Quest availed for thee?"

     '"Our mightiest!" answered Lancelot, with a groan;
  "O King!"--and when he paused, methought I spied
  A dying fire of madness in his eyes--
  "O King, my friend, if friend of thine I be,
  Happier are those that welter in their sin,
  Swine in the mud, that cannot see for slime,
  Slime of the ditch:  but in me lived a sin
  So strange, of such a kind, that all of pure,
  Noble, and knightly in me twined and clung
  Round that one sin, until the wholesome flower
  And poisonous grew together, each as each,
  Not to be plucked asunder; and when thy knights
  Sware, I sware with them only in the hope
  That could I touch or see the Holy Grail
  They might be plucked asunder.  Then I spake
  To one most holy saint, who wept and said,
  That save they could be plucked asunder, all
  My quest were but in vain; to whom I vowed
  That I would work according as he willed.
  And forth I went, and while I yearned and strove
  To tear the twain asunder in my heart,
  My madness came upon me as of old,
  And whipt me into waste fields far away;
  There was I beaten down by little men,
  Mean knights, to whom the moving of my sword
  And shadow of my spear had been enow
  To scare them from me once; and then I came
  All in my folly to the naked shore,
  Wide flats, where nothing but coarse grasses grew;
  But such a blast, my King, began to blow,
  So loud a blast along the shore and sea,
  Ye could not hear the waters for the blast,
  Though heapt in mounds and ridges all the sea
  Drove like a cataract, and all the sand
  Swept like a river, and the clouded heavens
  Were shaken with the motion and the sound.
  And blackening in the sea-foam swayed a boat,
  Half-swallowed in it, anchored with a chain;
  And in my madness to myself I said,
  'I will embark and I will lose myself,
  And in the great sea wash away my sin.'
  I burst the chain, I sprang into the boat.
  Seven days I drove along the dreary deep,
  And with me drove the moon and all the stars;
  And the wind fell, and on the seventh night
  I heard the shingle grinding in the surge,
  And felt the boat shock earth, and looking up,
  Behold, the enchanted towers of Carbonek,
  A castle like a rock upon a rock,
  With chasm-like portals open to the sea,
  And steps that met the breaker! there was none
  Stood near it but a lion on each side
  That kept the entry, and the moon was full.
  Then from the boat I leapt, and up the stairs.
  There drew my sword.  With sudden-flaring manes
  Those two great beasts rose upright like a man,
  Each gript a shoulder, and I stood between;
  And, when I would have smitten them, heard a voice,
  'Doubt not, go forward; if thou doubt, the beasts
  Will tear thee piecemeal.'  Then with violence
  The sword was dashed from out my hand, and fell.
  And up into the sounding hall I past;
  But nothing in the sounding hall I saw,
  No bench nor table, painting on the wall
  Or shield of knight; only the rounded moon
  Through the tall oriel on the rolling sea.
  But always in the quiet house I heard,
  Clear as a lark, high o'er me as a lark,
  A sweet voice singing in the topmost tower
  To the eastward:  up I climbed a thousand steps
  With pain:  as in a dream I seemed to climb
  For ever:  at the last I reached a door,
  A light was in the crannies, and I heard,
  'Glory and joy and honour to our Lord
  And to the Holy Vessel of the Grail.'
  Then in my madness I essayed the door;
  It gave; and through a stormy glare, a heat
  As from a seventimes-heated furnace, I,
  Blasted and burnt, and blinded as I was,
  With such a fierceness that I swooned away--
  O, yet methought I saw the Holy Grail,
  All palled in crimson samite, and around
  Great angels, awful shapes, and wings and eyes.
  And but for all my madness and my sin,
  And then my swooning, I had sworn I saw
  That which I saw; but what I saw was veiled
  And covered; and this Quest was not for me."

     'So speaking, and here ceasing, Lancelot left
  The hall long silent, till Sir Gawain--nay,
  Brother, I need not tell thee foolish words,--
  A reckless and irreverent knight was he,
  Now boldened by the silence of his King,--
  Well, I will tell thee:  "O King, my liege," he said,
  "Hath Gawain failed in any quest of thine?
  When have I stinted stroke in foughten field?
  But as for thine, my good friend Percivale,
  Thy holy nun and thou have driven men mad,
  Yea, made our mightiest madder than our least.
  But by mine eyes and by mine ears I swear,
  I will be deafer than the blue-eyed cat,
  And thrice as blind as any noonday owl,
  To holy virgins in their ecstasies,
  Henceforward."

                '"Deafer," said the blameless King,
  "Gawain, and blinder unto holy things
  Hope not to make thyself by idle vows,
  Being too blind to have desire to see.
  But if indeed there came a sign from heaven,
  Blessed are Bors, Lancelot and Percivale,
  For these have seen according to their sight.
  For every fiery prophet in old times,
  And all the sacred madness of the bard,
  When God made music through them, could but speak
  His music by the framework and the chord;
  And as ye saw it ye have spoken truth.

     '"Nay--but thou errest, Lancelot:  never yet
  Could all of true and noble in knight and man
  Twine round one sin, whatever it might be,
  With such a closeness, but apart there grew,
  Save that he were the swine thou spakest of,
  Some root of knighthood and pure nobleness;
  Whereto see thou, that it may bear its flower.

     '"And spake I not too truly, O my knights?
  Was I too dark a prophet when I said
  To those who went upon the Holy Quest,
  That most of them would follow wandering fires,
  Lost in the quagmire?--lost to me and gone,
  And left me gazing at a barren board,
  And a lean Order--scarce returned a tithe--
  And out of those to whom the vision came
  My greatest hardly will believe he saw;
  Another hath beheld it afar off,
  And leaving human wrongs to right themselves,
  Cares but to pass into the silent life.
  And one hath had the vision face to face,
  And now his chair desires him here in vain,
  However they may crown him otherwhere.

     '"And some among you held, that if the King
  Had seen the sight he would have sworn the vow:
  Not easily, seeing that the King must guard
  That which he rules, and is but as the hind
  To whom a space of land is given to plow.
  Who may not wander from the allotted field
  Before his work be done; but, being done,
  Let visions of the night or of the day
  Come, as they will; and many a time they come,
  Until this earth he walks on seems not earth,
  This light that strikes his eyeball is not light,
  This air that smites his forehead is not air
  But vision--yea, his very hand and foot--
  In moments when he feels he cannot die,
  And knows himself no vision to himself,
  Nor the high God a vision, nor that One
  Who rose again:  ye have seen what ye have seen."

     'So spake the King:  I knew not all he meant.'



  Pelleas and Ettarre

  King Arthur made new knights to fill the gap
  Left by the Holy Quest; and as he sat
  In hall at old Caerleon, the high doors
  Were softly sundered, and through these a youth,
  Pelleas, and the sweet smell of the fields
  Past, and the sunshine came along with him.

     'Make me thy knight, because I know, Sir King,
  All that belongs to knighthood, and I love.'
  Such was his cry:  for having heard the King
  Had let proclaim a tournament--the prize
  A golden circlet and a knightly sword,
  Full fain had Pelleas for his lady won
  The golden circlet, for himself the sword:
  And there were those who knew him near the King,
  And promised for him:  and Arthur made him knight.

     And this new knight, Sir Pelleas of the isles--
  But lately come to his inheritance,
  And lord of many a barren isle was he--
  Riding at noon, a day or twain before,
  Across the forest called of Dean, to find
  Caerleon and the King, had felt the sun
  Beat like a strong knight on his helm, and reeled
  Almost to falling from his horse; but saw
  Near him a mound of even-sloping side,
  Whereon a hundred stately beeches grew,
  And here and there great hollies under them;
  But for a mile all round was open space,
  And fern and heath:  and slowly Pelleas drew
  To that dim day, then binding his good horse
  To a tree, cast himself down; and as he lay
  At random looking over the brown earth
  Through that green-glooming twilight of the grove,
  It seemed to Pelleas that the fern without
  Burnt as a living fire of emeralds,
  So that his eyes were dazzled looking at it.
  Then o'er it crost the dimness of a cloud
  Floating, and once the shadow of a bird
  Flying, and then a fawn; and his eyes closed.
  And since he loved all maidens, but no maid
  In special, half-awake he whispered, 'Where?
  O where? I love thee, though I know thee not.
  For fair thou art and pure as Guinevere,
  And I will make thee with my spear and sword
  As famous--O my Queen, my Guinevere,
  For I will be thine Arthur when we meet.'

     Suddenly wakened with a sound of talk
  And laughter at the limit of the wood,
  And glancing through the hoary boles, he saw,
  Strange as to some old prophet might have seemed
  A vision hovering on a sea of fire,
  Damsels in divers colours like the cloud
  Of sunset and sunrise, and all of them
  On horses, and the horses richly trapt
  Breast-high in that bright line of bracken stood:
  And all the damsels talked confusedly,
  And one was pointing this way, and one that,
  Because the way was lost.

                           And Pelleas rose,
  And loosed his horse, and led him to the light.
  There she that seemed the chief among them said,
  'In happy time behold our pilot-star!
  Youth, we are damsels-errant, and we ride,
  Armed as ye see, to tilt against the knights
  There at Caerleon, but have lost our way:
  To right? to left? straight forward? back again?
  Which? tell us quickly.'

                          Pelleas gazing thought,
  'Is Guinevere herself so beautiful?'
  For large her violet eyes looked, and her bloom
  A rosy dawn kindled in stainless heavens,
  And round her limbs, mature in womanhood;
  And slender was her hand and small her shape;
  And but for those large eyes, the haunts of scorn,
  She might have seemed a toy to trifle with,
  And pass and care no more.  But while he gazed
  The beauty of her flesh abashed the boy,
  As though it were the beauty of her soul:
  For as the base man, judging of the good,
  Puts his own baseness in him by default
  Of will and nature, so did Pelleas lend
  All the young beauty of his own soul to hers,
  Believing her; and when she spake to him,
  Stammered, and could not make her a reply.
  For out of the waste islands had he come,
  Where saving his own sisters he had known
  Scarce any but the women of his isles,
  Rough wives, that laughed and screamed against the gulls,
  Makers of nets, and living from the sea.

     Then with a slow smile turned the lady round
  And looked upon her people; and as when
  A stone is flung into some sleeping tarn,
  The circle widens till it lip the marge,
  Spread the slow smile through all her company.
  Three knights were thereamong; and they too smiled,
  Scorning him; for the lady was Ettarre,
  And she was a great lady in her land.

     Again she said, 'O wild and of the woods,
  Knowest thou not the fashion of our speech?
  Or have the Heavens but given thee a fair face,
  Lacking a tongue?'

                    'O damsel,' answered he,
  'I woke from dreams; and coming out of gloom
  Was dazzled by the sudden light, and crave
  Pardon:  but will ye to Caerleon?  I
  Go likewise:  shall I lead you to the King?'

     'Lead then,' she said; and through the woods they went.
  And while they rode, the meaning in his eyes,
  His tenderness of manner, and chaste awe,
  His broken utterances and bashfulness,
  Were all a burthen to her, and in her heart
  She muttered, 'I have lighted on a fool,
  Raw, yet so stale!'  But since her mind was bent
  On hearing, after trumpet blown, her name
  And title, 'Queen of Beauty,' in the lists
  Cried--and beholding him so strong, she thought
  That peradventure he will fight for me,
  And win the circlet:  therefore flattered him,
  Being so gracious, that he wellnigh deemed
  His wish by hers was echoed; and her knights
  And all her damsels too were gracious to him,
  For she was a great lady.

                           And when they reached
  Caerleon, ere they past to lodging, she,
  Taking his hand, 'O the strong hand,' she said,
  'See! look at mine! but wilt thou fight for me,
  And win me this fine circlet, Pelleas,
  That I may love thee?'

                        Then his helpless heart
  Leapt, and he cried, 'Ay! wilt thou if I win?'
  'Ay, that will I,' she answered, and she laughed,
  And straitly nipt the hand, and flung it from her;
  Then glanced askew at those three knights of hers,
  Till all her ladies laughed along with her.

     'O happy world,' thought Pelleas, 'all, meseems,
  Are happy; I the happiest of them all.'
  Nor slept that night for pleasure in his blood,
  And green wood-ways, and eyes among the leaves;
  Then being on the morrow knighted, sware
  To love one only.  And as he came away,
  The men who met him rounded on their heels
  And wondered after him, because his face
  Shone like the countenance of a priest of old
  Against the flame about a sacrifice
  Kindled by fire from heaven:  so glad was he.

     Then Arthur made vast banquets, and strange knights
  From the four winds came in:  and each one sat,
  Though served with choice from air, land, stream, and sea,
  Oft in mid-banquet measuring with his eyes
  His neighbour's make and might:  and Pelleas looked
  Noble among the noble, for he dreamed
  His lady loved him, and he knew himself
  Loved of the King:  and him his new-made knight
  Worshipt, whose lightest whisper moved him more
  Than all the ranged reasons of the world.

     Then blushed and brake the morning of the jousts,
  And this was called 'The Tournament of Youth:'
  For Arthur, loving his young knight, withheld
  His older and his mightier from the lists,
  That Pelleas might obtain his lady's love,
  According to her promise, and remain
  Lord of the tourney.  And Arthur had the jousts
  Down in the flat field by the shore of Usk
  Holden:  the gilded parapets were crowned
  With faces, and the great tower filled with eyes
  Up to the summit, and the trumpets blew.
  There all day long Sir Pelleas kept the field
  With honour:  so by that strong hand of his
  The sword and golden circlet were achieved.

     Then rang the shout his lady loved:  the heat
  Of pride and glory fired her face; her eye
  Sparkled; she caught the circlet from his lance,
  And there before the people crowned herself:
  So for the last time she was gracious to him.

     Then at Caerleon for a space--her look
  Bright for all others, cloudier on her knight--
  Lingered Ettarre:  and seeing Pelleas droop,
  Said Guinevere, 'We marvel at thee much,
  O damsel, wearing this unsunny face
  To him who won thee glory!'  And she said,
  'Had ye not held your Lancelot in your bower,
  My Queen, he had not won.'  Whereat the Queen,
  As one whose foot is bitten by an ant,
  Glanced down upon her, turned and went her way.

     But after, when her damsels, and herself,
  And those three knights all set their faces home,
  Sir Pelleas followed.  She that saw him cried,
  'Damsels--and yet I should be shamed to say it--
  I cannot bide Sir Baby.  Keep him back
  Among yourselves.  Would rather that we had
  Some rough old knight who knew the worldly way,
  Albeit grizzlier than a bear, to ride
  And jest with:  take him to you, keep him off,
  And pamper him with papmeat, if ye will,
  Old milky fables of the wolf and sheep,
  Such as the wholesome mothers tell their boys.
  Nay, should ye try him with a merry one
  To find his mettle, good:  and if he fly us,
  Small matter! let him.'  This her damsels heard,
  And mindful of her small and cruel hand,
  They, closing round him through the journey home,
  Acted her hest, and always from her side
  Restrained him with all manner of device,
  So that he could not come to speech with her.
  And when she gained her castle, upsprang the bridge,
  Down rang the grate of iron through the groove,
  And he was left alone in open field.

     'These be the ways of ladies,' Pelleas thought,
  'To those who love them, trials of our faith.
  Yea, let her prove me to the uttermost,
  For loyal to the uttermost am I.'
  So made his moan; and darkness falling, sought
  A priory not far off, there lodged, but rose
  With morning every day, and, moist or dry,
  Full-armed upon his charger all day long
  Sat by the walls, and no one opened to him.

     And this persistence turned her scorn to wrath.
  Then calling her three knights, she charged them, 'Out!
  And drive him from the walls.'  And out they came
  But Pelleas overthrew them as they dashed
  Against him one by one; and these returned,
  But still he kept his watch beneath the wall.

     Thereon her wrath became a hate; and once,
  A week beyond, while walking on the walls
  With her three knights, she pointed downward, 'Look,
  He haunts me--I cannot breathe--besieges me;
  Down! strike him! put my hate into your strokes,
  And drive him from my walls.'  And down they went,
  And Pelleas overthrew them one by one;
  And from the tower above him cried Ettarre,
  'Bind him, and bring him in.'

                               He heard her voice;
  Then let the strong hand, which had overthrown
  Her minion-knights, by those he overthrew
  Be bounden straight, and so they brought him in.

     Then when he came before Ettarre, the sight
  Of her rich beauty made him at one glance
  More bondsman in his heart than in his bonds.
  Yet with good cheer he spake, 'Behold me, Lady,
  A prisoner, and the vassal of thy will;
  And if thou keep me in thy donjon here,
  Content am I so that I see thy face
  But once a day:  for I have sworn my vows,
  And thou hast given thy promise, and I know
  That all these pains are trials of my faith,
  And that thyself, when thou hast seen me strained
  And sifted to the utmost, wilt at length
  Yield me thy love and know me for thy knight.'

     Then she began to rail so bitterly,
  With all her damsels, he was stricken mute;
  But when she mocked his vows and the great King,
  Lighted on words:  'For pity of thine own self,
  Peace, Lady, peace:  is he not thine and mine?'
  'Thou fool,' she said, 'I never heard his voice
  But longed to break away.  Unbind him now,
  And thrust him out of doors; for save he be
  Fool to the midmost marrow of his bones,
  He will return no more.'  And those, her three,
  Laughed, and unbound, and thrust him from the gate.

     And after this, a week beyond, again
  She called them, saying, 'There he watches yet,
  There like a dog before his master's door!
  Kicked, he returns:  do ye not hate him, ye?
  Ye know yourselves:  how can ye bide at peace,
  Affronted with his fulsome innocence?
  Are ye but creatures of the board and bed,
  No men to strike?  Fall on him all at once,
  And if ye slay him I reck not:  if ye fail,
  Give ye the slave mine order to be bound,
  Bind him as heretofore, and bring him in:
  It may be ye shall slay him in his bonds.'

     She spake; and at her will they couched their spears,
  Three against one:  and Gawain passing by,
  Bound upon solitary adventure, saw
  Low down beneath the shadow of those towers
  A villainy, three to one:  and through his heart
  The fire of honour and all noble deeds
  Flashed, and he called, 'I strike upon thy side--
  The caitiffs!'  'Nay,' said Pelleas, 'but forbear;
  He needs no aid who doth his lady's will.'

     So Gawain, looking at the villainy done,
  Forbore, but in his heat and eagerness
  Trembled and quivered, as the dog, withheld
  A moment from the vermin that he sees
  Before him, shivers, ere he springs and kills.

     And Pelleas overthrew them, one to three;
  And they rose up, and bound, and brought him in.
  Then first her anger, leaving Pelleas, burned
  Full on her knights in many an evil name
  Of craven, weakling, and thrice-beaten hound:
  'Yet, take him, ye that scarce are fit to touch,
  Far less to bind, your victor, and thrust him out,
  And let who will release him from his bonds.
  And if he comes again'--there she brake short;
  And Pelleas answered, 'Lady, for indeed
  I loved you and I deemed you beautiful,
  I cannot brook to see your beauty marred
  Through evil spite:  and if ye love me not,
  I cannot bear to dream you so forsworn:
  I had liefer ye were worthy of my love,
  Than to be loved again of you--farewell;
  And though ye kill my hope, not yet my love,
  Vex not yourself:  ye will not see me more.'

     While thus he spake, she gazed upon the man
  Of princely bearing, though in bonds, and thought,
  'Why have I pushed him from me? this man loves,
  If love there be:  yet him I loved not.  Why?
  I deemed him fool? yea, so? or that in him
  A something--was it nobler than myself?
  Seemed my reproach?  He is not of my kind.
  He could not love me, did he know me well.
  Nay, let him go--and quickly.'  And her knights
  Laughed not, but thrust him bounden out of door.

     Forth sprang Gawain, and loosed him from his bonds,
  And flung them o'er the walls; and afterward,
  Shaking his hands, as from a lazar's rag,
  'Faith of my body,' he said, 'and art thou not--
  Yea thou art he, whom late our Arthur made
  Knight of his table; yea and he that won
  The circlet? wherefore hast thou so defamed
  Thy brotherhood in me and all the rest,
  As let these caitiffs on thee work their will?'

     And Pelleas answered, 'O, their wills are hers
  For whom I won the circlet; and mine, hers,
  Thus to be bounden, so to see her face,
  Marred though it be with spite and mockery now,
  Other than when I found her in the woods;
  And though she hath me bounden but in spite,
  And all to flout me, when they bring me in,
  Let me be bounden, I shall see her face;
  Else must I die through mine unhappiness.'

     And Gawain answered kindly though in scorn,
  'Why, let my lady bind me if she will,
  And let my lady beat me if she will:
  But an she send her delegate to thrall
  These fighting hands of mine--Christ kill me then
  But I will slice him handless by the wrist,
  And let my lady sear the stump for him,
  Howl as he may.  But hold me for your friend:
  Come, ye know nothing:  here I pledge my troth,
  Yea, by the honour of the Table Round,
  I will be leal to thee and work thy work,
  And tame thy jailing princess to thine hand.
  Lend me thine horse and arms, and I will say
  That I have slain thee.  She will let me in
  To hear the manner of thy fight and fall;
  Then, when I come within her counsels, then
  From prime to vespers will I chant thy praise
  As prowest knight and truest lover, more
  Than any have sung thee living, till she long
  To have thee back in lusty life again,
  Not to be bound, save by white bonds and warm,
  Dearer than freedom.  Wherefore now thy horse
  And armour:  let me go:  be comforted:
  Give me three days to melt her fancy, and hope
  The third night hence will bring thee news of gold.'

     Then Pelleas lent his horse and all his arms,
  Saving the goodly sword, his prize, and took
  Gawain's, and said, 'Betray me not, but help--
  Art thou not he whom men call light-of-love?'

     'Ay,' said Gawain, 'for women be so light.'
  Then bounded forward to the castle walls,
  And raised a bugle hanging from his neck,
  And winded it, and that so musically
  That all the old echoes hidden in the wall
  Rang out like hollow woods at hunting-tide.

     Up ran a score of damsels to the tower;
  'Avaunt,' they cried, 'our lady loves thee not.'
  But Gawain lifting up his vizor said,
  'Gawain am I, Gawain of Arthur's court,
  And I have slain this Pelleas whom ye hate:
  Behold his horse and armour.  Open gates,
  And I will make you merry.'

                             And down they ran,
  Her damsels, crying to their lady, 'Lo!
  Pelleas is dead--he told us--he that hath
  His horse and armour:  will ye let him in?
  He slew him!  Gawain, Gawain of the court,
  Sir Gawain--there he waits below the wall,
  Blowing his bugle as who should say him nay.'

     And so, leave given, straight on through open door
  Rode Gawain, whom she greeted courteously.
  'Dead, is it so?' she asked.  'Ay, ay,' said he,
  'And oft in dying cried upon your name.'
  'Pity on him,' she answered, 'a good knight,
  But never let me bide one hour at peace.'
  'Ay,' thought Gawain, 'and you be fair enow:
  But I to your dead man have given my troth,
  That whom ye loathe, him will I make you love.'

     So those three days, aimless about the land,
  Lost in a doubt, Pelleas wandering
  Waited, until the third night brought a moon
  With promise of large light on woods and ways.

     Hot was the night and silent; but a sound
  Of Gawain ever coming, and this lay--
  Which Pelleas had heard sung before the Queen,
  And seen her sadden listening--vext his heart,
  And marred his rest--'A worm within the rose.'

     'A rose, but one, none other rose had I,
  A rose, one rose, and this was wondrous fair,
  One rose, a rose that gladdened earth and sky,
  One rose, my rose, that sweetened all mine air--
  I cared not for the thorns; the thorns were there.

     'One rose, a rose to gather by and by,
  One rose, a rose, to gather and to wear,
  No rose but one--what other rose had I?
  One rose, my rose; a rose that will not die,--
  He dies who loves it,--if the worm be there.'

     This tender rhyme, and evermore the doubt,
  'Why lingers Gawain with his golden news?'
  So shook him that he could not rest, but rode
  Ere midnight to her walls, and bound his horse
  Hard by the gates.  Wide open were the gates,
  And no watch kept; and in through these he past,
  And heard but his own steps, and his own heart
  Beating, for nothing moved but his own self,
  And his own shadow.  Then he crost the court,
  And spied not any light in hall or bower,
  But saw the postern portal also wide
  Yawning; and up a slope of garden, all
  Of roses white and red, and brambles mixt
  And overgrowing them, went on, and found,
  Here too, all hushed below the mellow moon,
  Save that one rivulet from a tiny cave
  Came lightening downward, and so spilt itself
  Among the roses, and was lost again.

     Then was he ware of three pavilions reared
  Above the bushes, gilden-peakt:  in one,
  Red after revel, droned her lurdane knights
  Slumbering, and their three squires across their feet:
  In one, their malice on the placid lip
  Frozen by sweet sleep, four of her damsels lay:
  And in the third, the circlet of the jousts
  Bound on her brow, were Gawain and Ettarre.

     Back, as a hand that pushes through the leaf
  To find a nest and feels a snake, he drew:
  Back, as a coward slinks from what he fears
  To cope with, or a traitor proven, or hound
  Beaten, did Pelleas in an utter shame
  Creep with his shadow through the court again,
  Fingering at his sword-handle until he stood
  There on the castle-bridge once more, and thought,
  'I will go back, and slay them where they lie.'

     And so went back, and seeing them yet in sleep
  Said, 'Ye, that so dishallow the holy sleep,
  Your sleep is death,' and drew the sword, and thought,
  'What! slay a sleeping knight? the King hath bound
  And sworn me to this brotherhood;' again,
  'Alas that ever a knight should be so false.'
  Then turned, and so returned, and groaning laid
  The naked sword athwart their naked throats,
  There left it, and them sleeping; and she lay,
  The circlet of her tourney round her brows,
  And the sword of the tourney across her throat.

     And forth he past, and mounting on his horse
  Stared at her towers that, larger than themselves
  In their own darkness, thronged into the moon.
  Then crushed the saddle with his thighs, and clenched
  His hands, and maddened with himself and moaned:

     'Would they have risen against me in their blood
  At the last day?  I might have answered them
  Even before high God.  O towers so strong,
  Huge, solid, would that even while I gaze
  The crack of earthquake shivering to your base
  Split you, and Hell burst up your harlot roofs
  Bellowing, and charred you through and through within,
  Black as the harlot's heart--hollow as a skull!
  Let the fierce east scream through your eyelet-holes,
  And whirl the dust of harlots round and round
  In dung and nettles! hiss, snake--I saw him there--
  Let the fox bark, let the wolf yell.  Who yells
  Here in the still sweet summer night, but I--
  I, the poor Pelleas whom she called her fool?
  Fool, beast--he, she, or I? myself most fool;
  Beast too, as lacking human wit--disgraced,
  Dishonoured all for trial of true love--
  Love?--we be all alike:  only the King
  Hath made us fools and liars.  O noble vows!
  O great and sane and simple race of brutes
  That own no lust because they have no law!
  For why should I have loved her to my shame?
  I loathe her, as I loved her to my shame.
  I never loved her, I but lusted for her--
  Away--'
         He dashed the rowel into his horse,
  And bounded forth and vanished through the night.

     Then she, that felt the cold touch on her throat,
  Awaking knew the sword, and turned herself
  To Gawain:  'Liar, for thou hast not slain
  This Pelleas! here he stood, and might have slain
  Me and thyself.'  And he that tells the tale
  Says that her ever-veering fancy turned
  To Pelleas, as the one true knight on earth,
  And only lover; and through her love her life
  Wasted and pined, desiring him in vain.

     But he by wild and way, for half the night,
  And over hard and soft, striking the sod
  From out the soft, the spark from off the hard,
  Rode till the star above the wakening sun,
  Beside that tower where Percivale was cowled,
  Glanced from the rosy forehead of the dawn.
  For so the words were flashed into his heart
  He knew not whence or wherefore:  'O sweet star,
  Pure on the virgin forehead of the dawn!'
  And there he would have wept, but felt his eyes
  Harder and drier than a fountain bed
  In summer:  thither came the village girls
  And lingered talking, and they come no more
  Till the sweet heavens have filled it from the heights
  Again with living waters in the change
  Of seasons:  hard his eyes; harder his heart
  Seemed; but so weary were his limbs, that he,
  Gasping, 'Of Arthur's hall am I, but here,
  Here let me rest and die,' cast himself down,
  And gulfed his griefs in inmost sleep; so lay,
  Till shaken by a dream, that Gawain fired
  The hall of Merlin, and the morning star
  Reeled in the smoke, brake into flame, and fell.

     He woke, and being ware of some one nigh,
  Sent hands upon him, as to tear him, crying,
  'False! and I held thee pure as Guinevere.'

     But Percivale stood near him and replied,
  'Am I but false as Guinevere is pure?
  Or art thou mazed with dreams? or being one
  Of our free-spoken Table hast not heard
  That Lancelot'--there he checked himself and paused.

     Then fared it with Sir Pelleas as with one
  Who gets a wound in battle, and the sword
  That made it plunges through the wound again,
  And pricks it deeper:  and he shrank and wailed,
  'Is the Queen false?' and Percivale was mute.
  'Have any of our Round Table held their vows?'
  And Percivale made answer not a word.
  'Is the King true?'  'The King!' said Percivale.
  'Why then let men couple at once with wolves.
  What! art thou mad?'

                      But Pelleas, leaping up,
  Ran through the doors and vaulted on his horse
  And fled:  small pity upon his horse had he,
  Or on himself, or any, and when he met
  A cripple, one that held a hand for alms--
  Hunched as he was, and like an old dwarf-elm
  That turns its back upon the salt blast, the boy
  Paused not, but overrode him, shouting, 'False,
  And false with Gawain!' and so left him bruised
  And battered, and fled on, and hill and wood
  Went ever streaming by him till the gloom,
  That follows on the turning of the world,
  Darkened the common path:  he twitched the reins,
  And made his beast that better knew it, swerve
  Now off it and now on; but when he saw
  High up in heaven the hall that Merlin built,
  Blackening against the dead-green stripes of even,
  'Black nest of rats,' he groaned, 'ye build too high.'

     Not long thereafter from the city gates
  Issued Sir Lancelot riding airily,
  Warm with a gracious parting from the Queen,
  Peace at his heart, and gazing at a star
  And marvelling what it was:  on whom the boy,
  Across the silent seeded meadow-grass
  Borne, clashed:  and Lancelot, saying, 'What name hast thou
  That ridest here so blindly and so hard?'
  'No name, no name,' he shouted, 'a scourge am I
  To lash the treasons of the Table Round.'
  'Yea, but thy name?'  'I have many names,' he cried:
  'I am wrath and shame and hate and evil fame,
  And like a poisonous wind I pass to blast
  And blaze the crime of Lancelot and the Queen.'
  'First over me,' said Lancelot, 'shalt thou pass.'
  'Fight therefore,' yelled the youth, and either knight
  Drew back a space, and when they closed, at once
  The weary steed of Pelleas floundering flung
  His rider, who called out from the dark field,
  'Thou art as false as Hell:  slay me:  I have no sword.'
  Then Lancelot, 'Yea, between thy lips--and sharp;
  But here I will disedge it by thy death.'
  'Slay then,' he shrieked, 'my will is to be slain,'
  And Lancelot, with his heel upon the fallen,
  Rolling his eyes, a moment stood, then spake:
  'Rise, weakling; I am Lancelot; say thy say.'

     And Lancelot slowly rode his warhorse back
  To Camelot, and Sir Pelleas in brief while
  Caught his unbroken limbs from the dark field,
  And followed to the city.  It chanced that both
  Brake into hall together, worn and pale.
  There with her knights and dames was Guinevere.
  Full wonderingly she gazed on Lancelot
  So soon returned, and then on Pelleas, him
  Who had not greeted her, but cast himself
  Down on a bench, hard-breathing.  'Have ye fought?'
  She asked of Lancelot.  'Ay, my Queen,' he said.
  'And hast thou overthrown him?'  'Ay, my Queen.'
  Then she, turning to Pelleas, 'O young knight,
  Hath the great heart of knighthood in thee failed
  So far thou canst not bide, unfrowardly,
  A fall from him?'  Then, for he answered not,
  'Or hast thou other griefs?  If I, the Queen,
  May help them, loose thy tongue, and let me know.'
  But Pelleas lifted up an eye so fierce
  She quailed; and he, hissing 'I have no sword,'
  Sprang from the door into the dark.  The Queen
  Looked hard upon her lover, he on her;
  And each foresaw the dolorous day to be:
  And all talk died, as in a grove all song
  Beneath the shadow of some bird of prey;
  Then a long silence came upon the hall,
  And Modred thought, 'The time is hard at hand.'



  The Last Tournament

  Dagonet, the fool, whom Gawain in his mood
  Had made mock-knight of Arthur's Table Round,
  At Camelot, high above the yellowing woods,
  Danced like a withered leaf before the hall.
  And toward him from the hall, with harp in hand,
  And from the crown thereof a carcanet
  Of ruby swaying to and fro, the prize
  Of Tristram in the jousts of yesterday,
  Came Tristram, saying, 'Why skip ye so, Sir Fool?'

     For Arthur and Sir Lancelot riding once
  Far down beneath a winding wall of rock
  Heard a child wail.  A stump of oak half-dead,
  From roots like some black coil of carven snakes,
  Clutched at the crag, and started through mid air
  Bearing an eagle's nest:  and through the tree
  Rushed ever a rainy wind, and through the wind
  Pierced ever a child's cry:  and crag and tree
  Scaling, Sir Lancelot from the perilous nest,
  This ruby necklace thrice around her neck,
  And all unscarred from beak or talon, brought
  A maiden babe; which Arthur pitying took,
  Then gave it to his Queen to rear:  the Queen
  But coldly acquiescing, in her white arms
  Received, and after loved it tenderly,
  And named it Nestling; so forgot herself
  A moment, and her cares; till that young life
  Being smitten in mid heaven with mortal cold
  Past from her; and in time the carcanet
  Vext her with plaintive memories of the child:
  So she, delivering it to Arthur, said,
  'Take thou the jewels of this dead innocence,
  And make them, an thou wilt, a tourney-prize.'

     To whom the King, 'Peace to thine eagle-borne
  Dead nestling, and this honour after death,
  Following thy will! but, O my Queen, I muse
  Why ye not wear on arm, or neck, or zone
  Those diamonds that I rescued from the tarn,
  And Lancelot won, methought, for thee to wear.'

     'Would rather you had let them fall,' she cried,
  'Plunge and be lost--ill-fated as they were,
  A bitterness to me!--ye look amazed,
  Not knowing they were lost as soon as given--
  Slid from my hands, when I was leaning out
  Above the river--that unhappy child
  Past in her barge:  but rosier luck will go
  With these rich jewels, seeing that they came
  Not from the skeleton of a brother-slayer,
  But the sweet body of a maiden babe.
  Perchance--who knows?--the purest of thy knights
  May win them for the purest of my maids.'

     She ended, and the cry of a great jousts
  With trumpet-blowings ran on all the ways
  From Camelot in among the faded fields
  To furthest towers; and everywhere the knights
  Armed for a day of glory before the King.

     But on the hither side of that loud morn
  Into the hall staggered, his visage ribbed
  From ear to ear with dogwhip-weals, his nose
  Bridge-broken, one eye out, and one hand off,
  And one with shattered fingers dangling lame,
  A churl, to whom indignantly the King,

     'My churl, for whom Christ died, what evil beast
  Hath drawn his claws athwart thy face? or fiend?
  Man was it who marred heaven's image in thee thus?'

     Then, sputtering through the hedge of splintered teeth,
  Yet strangers to the tongue, and with blunt stump
  Pitch-blackened sawing the air, said the maimed churl,

     'He took them and he drave them to his tower--
  Some hold he was a table-knight of thine--
  A hundred goodly ones--the Red Knight, he--
  Lord, I was tending swine, and the Red Knight
  Brake in upon me and drave them to his tower;
  And when I called upon thy name as one
  That doest right by gentle and by churl,
  Maimed me and mauled, and would outright have slain,
  Save that he sware me to a message, saying,
  "Tell thou the King and all his liars, that I
  Have founded my Round Table in the North,
  And whatsoever his own knights have sworn
  My knights have sworn the counter to it--and say
  My tower is full of harlots, like his court,
  But mine are worthier, seeing they profess
  To be none other than themselves--and say
  My knights are all adulterers like his own,
  But mine are truer, seeing they profess
  To be none other; and say his hour is come,
  The heathen are upon him, his long lance
  Broken, and his Excalibur a straw."'

     Then Arthur turned to Kay the seneschal,
  'Take thou my churl, and tend him curiously
  Like a king's heir, till all his hurts be whole.
  The heathen--but that ever-climbing wave,
  Hurled back again so often in empty foam,
  Hath lain for years at rest--and renegades,
  Thieves, bandits, leavings of confusion, whom
  The wholesome realm is purged of otherwhere,
  Friends, through your manhood and your fealty,--now
  Make their last head like Satan in the North.
  My younger knights, new-made, in whom your flower
  Waits to be solid fruit of golden deeds,
  Move with me toward their quelling, which achieved,
  The loneliest ways are safe from shore to shore.
  But thou, Sir Lancelot, sitting in my place
  Enchaired tomorrow, arbitrate the field;
  For wherefore shouldst thou care to mingle with it,
  Only to yield my Queen her own again?
  Speak, Lancelot, thou art silent:  is it well?'

     Thereto Sir Lancelot answered, 'It is well:
  Yet better if the King abide, and leave
  The leading of his younger knights to me.
  Else, for the King has willed it, it is well.'

     Then Arthur rose and Lancelot followed him,
  And while they stood without the doors, the King
  Turned to him saying, 'Is it then so well?
  Or mine the blame that oft I seem as he
  Of whom was written, "A sound is in his ears"?
  The foot that loiters, bidden go,--the glance
  That only seems half-loyal to command,--
  A manner somewhat fallen from reverence--
  Or have I dreamed the bearing of our knights
  Tells of a manhood ever less and lower?
  Or whence the fear lest this my realm, upreared,
  By noble deeds at one with noble vows,
  From flat confusion and brute violences,
  Reel back into the beast, and be no more?'

     He spoke, and taking all his younger knights,
  Down the slope city rode, and sharply turned
  North by the gate.  In her high bower the Queen,
  Working a tapestry, lifted up her head,
  Watched her lord pass, and knew not that she sighed.
  Then ran across her memory the strange rhyme
  Of bygone Merlin, 'Where is he who knows?
  From the great deep to the great deep he goes.'

     But when the morning of a tournament,
  By these in earnest those in mockery called
  The Tournament of the Dead Innocence,
  Brake with a wet wind blowing, Lancelot,
  Round whose sick head all night, like birds of prey,
  The words of Arthur flying shrieked, arose,
  And down a streetway hung with folds of pure
  White samite, and by fountains running wine,
  Where children sat in white with cups of gold,
  Moved to the lists, and there, with slow sad steps
  Ascending, filled his double-dragoned chair.

     He glanced and saw the stately galleries,
  Dame, damsel, each through worship of their Queen
  White-robed in honour of the stainless child,
  And some with scattered jewels, like a bank
  Of maiden snow mingled with sparks of fire.
  He looked but once, and vailed his eyes again.

     The sudden trumpet sounded as in a dream
  To ears but half-awaked, then one low roll
  Of Autumn thunder, and the jousts began:
  And ever the wind blew, and yellowing leaf
  And gloom and gleam, and shower and shorn plume
  Went down it.  Sighing weariedly, as one
  Who sits and gazes on a faded fire,
  When all the goodlier guests are past away,
  Sat their great umpire, looking o'er the lists.
  He saw the laws that ruled the tournament
  Broken, but spake not; once, a knight cast down
  Before his throne of arbitration cursed
  The dead babe and the follies of the King;
  And once the laces of a helmet cracked,
  And showed him, like a vermin in its hole,
  Modred, a narrow face:  anon he heard
  The voice that billowed round the barriers roar
  An ocean-sounding welcome to one knight,
  But newly-entered, taller than the rest,
  And armoured all in forest green, whereon
  There tript a hundred tiny silver deer,
  And wearing but a holly-spray for crest,
  With ever-scattering berries, and on shield
  A spear, a harp, a bugle--Tristram--late
  From overseas in Brittany returned,
  And marriage with a princess of that realm,
  Isolt the White--Sir Tristram of the Woods--
  Whom Lancelot knew, had held sometime with pain
  His own against him, and now yearned to shake
  The burthen off his heart in one full shock
  With Tristram even to death:  his strong hands gript
  And dinted the gilt dragons right and left,
  Until he groaned for wrath--so many of those,
  That ware their ladies' colours on the casque,
  Drew from before Sir Tristram to the bounds,
  And there with gibes and flickering mockeries
  Stood, while he muttered, 'Craven crests!  O shame!
  What faith have these in whom they sware to love?
  The glory of our Round Table is no more.'

     So Tristram won, and Lancelot gave, the gems,
  Not speaking other word than 'Hast thou won?
  Art thou the purest, brother?  See, the hand
  Wherewith thou takest this, is red!' to whom
  Tristram, half plagued by Lancelot's languorous mood,
  Made answer, 'Ay, but wherefore toss me this
  Like a dry bone cast to some hungry hound?
  Lest be thy fair Queen's fantasy.  Strength of heart
  And might of limb, but mainly use and skill,
  Are winners in this pastime of our King.
  My hand--belike the lance hath dript upon it--
  No blood of mine, I trow; but O chief knight,
  Right arm of Arthur in the battlefield,
  Great brother, thou nor I have made the world;
  Be happy in thy fair Queen as I in mine.'

     And Tristram round the gallery made his horse
  Caracole; then bowed his homage, bluntly saying,
  'Fair damsels, each to him who worships each
  Sole Queen of Beauty and of love, behold
  This day my Queen of Beauty is not here.'
  And most of these were mute, some angered, one
  Murmuring, 'All courtesy is dead,' and one,
  'The glory of our Round Table is no more.'

     Then fell thick rain, plume droopt and mantle clung,
  And pettish cries awoke, and the wan day
  Went glooming down in wet and weariness:
  But under her black brows a swarthy one
  Laughed shrilly, crying, 'Praise the patient saints,
  Our one white day of Innocence hath past,
  Though somewhat draggled at the skirt.  So be it.
  The snowdrop only, flowering through the year,
  Would make the world as blank as Winter-tide.
  Come--let us gladden their sad eyes, our Queen's
  And Lancelot's, at this night's solemnity
  With all the kindlier colours of the field.'

     So dame and damsel glittered at the feast
  Variously gay:  for he that tells the tale
  Likened them, saying, as when an hour of cold
  Falls on the mountain in midsummer snows,
  And all the purple slopes of mountain flowers
  Pass under white, till the warm hour returns
  With veer of wind, and all are flowers again;
  So dame and damsel cast the simple white,
  And glowing in all colours, the live grass,
  Rose-campion, bluebell, kingcup, poppy, glanced
  About the revels, and with mirth so loud
  Beyond all use, that, half-amazed, the Queen,
  And wroth at Tristram and the lawless jousts,
  Brake up their sports, then slowly to her bower
  Parted, and in her bosom pain was lord.

     And little Dagonet on the morrow morn,
  High over all the yellowing Autumn-tide,
  Danced like a withered leaf before the hall.
  Then Tristram saying, 'Why skip ye so, Sir Fool?'
  Wheeled round on either heel, Dagonet replied,
  'Belike for lack of wiser company;
  Or being fool, and seeing too much wit
  Makes the world rotten, why, belike I skip
  To know myself the wisest knight of all.'
  'Ay, fool,' said Tristram, 'but 'tis eating dry
  To dance without a catch, a roundelay
  To dance to.'  Then he twangled on his harp,
  And while he twangled little Dagonet stood
  Quiet as any water-sodden log
  Stayed in the wandering warble of a brook;
  But when the twangling ended, skipt again;
  And being asked, 'Why skipt ye not, Sir Fool?'
  Made answer, 'I had liefer twenty years
  Skip to the broken music of my brains
  Than any broken music thou canst make.'
  Then Tristram, waiting for the quip to come,
  'Good now, what music have I broken, fool?'
  And little Dagonet, skipping, 'Arthur, the King's;
  For when thou playest that air with Queen Isolt,
  Thou makest broken music with thy bride,
  Her daintier namesake down in Brittany--
  And so thou breakest Arthur's music too.'
  'Save for that broken music in thy brains,
  Sir Fool,' said Tristram, 'I would break thy head.
  Fool, I came too late, the heathen wars were o'er,
  The life had flown, we sware but by the shell--
  I am but a fool to reason with a fool--
  Come, thou art crabbed and sour:  but lean me down,
  Sir Dagonet, one of thy long asses' ears,
  And harken if my music be not true.

     '"Free love--free field--we love but while we may:
  The woods are hushed, their music is no more:
  The leaf is dead, the yearning past away:
  New leaf, new life--the days of frost are o'er:
  New life, new love, to suit the newer day:
  New loves are sweet as those that went before:
  Free love--free field--we love but while we may."

     'Ye might have moved slow-measure to my tune,
  Not stood stockstill.  I made it in the woods,
  And heard it ring as true as tested gold.'

     But Dagonet with one foot poised in his hand,
  'Friend, did ye mark that fountain yesterday
  Made to run wine?--but this had run itself
  All out like a long life to a sour end--
  And them that round it sat with golden cups
  To hand the wine to whosoever came--
  The twelve small damosels white as Innocence,
  In honour of poor Innocence the babe,
  Who left the gems which Innocence the Queen
  Lent to the King, and Innocence the King
  Gave for a prize--and one of those white slips
  Handed her cup and piped, the pretty one,
  "Drink, drink, Sir Fool," and thereupon I drank,
  Spat--pish--the cup was gold, the draught was mud.'

     And Tristram, 'Was it muddier than thy gibes?
  Is all the laughter gone dead out of thee?--
  Not marking how the knighthood mock thee, fool--
  "Fear God:  honour the King--his one true knight--
  Sole follower of the vows"--for here be they
  Who knew thee swine enow before I came,
  Smuttier than blasted grain:  but when the King
  Had made thee fool, thy vanity so shot up
  It frighted all free fool from out thy heart;
  Which left thee less than fool, and less than swine,
  A naked aught--yet swine I hold thee still,
  For I have flung thee pearls and find thee swine.'

     And little Dagonet mincing with his feet,
  'Knight, an ye fling those rubies round my neck
  In lieu of hers, I'll hold thou hast some touch
  Of music, since I care not for thy pearls.
  Swine?  I have wallowed, I have washed--the world
  Is flesh and shadow--I have had my day.
  The dirty nurse, Experience, in her kind
  Hath fouled me--an I wallowed, then I washed--
  I have had my day and my philosophies--
  And thank the Lord I am King Arthur's fool.
  Swine, say ye? swine, goats, asses, rams and geese
  Trooped round a Paynim harper once, who thrummed
  On such a wire as musically as thou
  Some such fine song--but never a king's fool.'

     And Tristram, 'Then were swine, goats, asses, geese
  The wiser fools, seeing thy Paynim bard
  Had such a mastery of his mystery
  That he could harp his wife up out of hell.'

     Then Dagonet, turning on the ball of his foot,
  'And whither harp'st thou thine? down! and thyself
  Down! and two more:  a helpful harper thou,
  That harpest downward!  Dost thou know the star
  We call the harp of Arthur up in heaven?'

     And Tristram, 'Ay, Sir Fool, for when our King
  Was victor wellnigh day by day, the knights,
  Glorying in each new glory, set his name
  High on all hills, and in the signs of heaven.'

     And Dagonet answered, 'Ay, and when the land
  Was freed, and the Queen false, ye set yourself
  To babble about him, all to show your wit--
  And whether he were King by courtesy,
  Or King by right--and so went harping down
  The black king's highway, got so far, and grew
  So witty that ye played at ducks and drakes
  With Arthur's vows on the great lake of fire.
  Tuwhoo! do ye see it? do ye see the star?'

     'Nay, fool,' said Tristram, 'not in open day.'
  And Dagonet, 'Nay, nor will:  I see it and hear.
  It makes a silent music up in heaven,
  And I, and Arthur and the angels hear,
  And then we skip.'  'Lo, fool,' he said, 'ye talk
  Fool's treason:  is the King thy brother fool?'
  Then little Dagonet clapt his hands and shrilled,
  'Ay, ay, my brother fool, the king of fools!
  Conceits himself as God that he can make
  Figs out of thistles, silk from bristles, milk
  From burning spurge, honey from hornet-combs,
  And men from beasts--Long live the king of fools!'

     And down the city Dagonet danced away;
  But through the slowly-mellowing avenues
  And solitary passes of the wood
  Rode Tristram toward Lyonnesse and the west.
  Before him fled the face of Queen Isolt
  With ruby-circled neck, but evermore
  Past, as a rustle or twitter in the wood
  Made dull his inner, keen his outer eye
  For all that walked, or crept, or perched, or flew.
  Anon the face, as, when a gust hath blown,
  Unruffling waters re-collect the shape
  Of one that in them sees himself, returned;
  But at the slot or fewmets of a deer,
  Or even a fallen feather, vanished again.

     So on for all that day from lawn to lawn
  Through many a league-long bower he rode.  At length
  A lodge of intertwisted beechen-boughs
  Furze-crammed, and bracken-rooft, the which himself
  Built for a summer day with Queen Isolt
  Against a shower, dark in the golden grove
  Appearing, sent his fancy back to where
  She lived a moon in that low lodge with him:
  Till Mark her lord had past, the Cornish King,
  With six or seven, when Tristram was away,
  And snatched her thence; yet dreading worse than shame
  Her warrior Tristram, spake not any word,
  But bode his hour, devising wretchedness.

     And now that desert lodge to Tristram lookt
  So sweet, that halting, in he past, and sank
  Down on a drift of foliage random-blown;
  But could not rest for musing how to smoothe
  And sleek his marriage over to the Queen.
  Perchance in lone Tintagil far from all
  The tonguesters of the court she had not heard.
  But then what folly had sent him overseas
  After she left him lonely here? a name?
  Was it the name of one in Brittany,
  Isolt, the daughter of the King?  'Isolt
  Of the white hands' they called her:  the sweet name
  Allured him first, and then the maid herself,
  Who served him well with those white hands of hers,
  And loved him well, until himself had thought
  He loved her also, wedded easily,
  But left her all as easily, and returned.
  The black-blue Irish hair and Irish eyes
  Had drawn him home--what marvel? then he laid
  His brows upon the drifted leaf and dreamed.

     He seemed to pace the strand of Brittany
  Between Isolt of Britain and his bride,
  And showed them both the ruby-chain, and both
  Began to struggle for it, till his Queen
  Graspt it so hard, that all her hand was red.
  Then cried the Breton, 'Look, her hand is red!
  These be no rubies, this is frozen blood,
  And melts within her hand--her hand is hot
  With ill desires, but this I gave thee, look,
  Is all as cool and white as any flower.'
  Followed a rush of eagle's wings, and then
  A whimpering of the spirit of the child,
  Because the twain had spoiled her carcanet.

     He dreamed; but Arthur with a hundred spears
  Rode far, till o'er the illimitable reed,
  And many a glancing plash and sallowy isle,
  The wide-winged sunset of the misty marsh
  Glared on a huge machicolated tower
  That stood with open doors, whereout was rolled
  A roar of riot, as from men secure
  Amid their marshes, ruffians at their ease
  Among their harlot-brides, an evil song.
  'Lo there,' said one of Arthur's youth, for there,
  High on a grim dead tree before the tower,
  A goodly brother of the Table Round
  Swung by the neck:  and on the boughs a shield
  Showing a shower of blood in a field noir,
  And therebeside a horn, inflamed the knights
  At that dishonour done the gilded spur,
  Till each would clash the shield, and blow the horn.
  But Arthur waved them back.  Alone he rode.
  Then at the dry harsh roar of the great horn,
  That sent the face of all the marsh aloft
  An ever upward-rushing storm and cloud
  Of shriek and plume, the Red Knight heard, and all,
  Even to tipmost lance and topmost helm,
  In blood-red armour sallying, howled to the King,

     'The teeth of Hell flay bare and gnash thee flat!--
  Lo! art thou not that eunuch-hearted King
  Who fain had clipt free manhood from the world--
  The woman-worshipper?  Yea, God's curse, and I!
  Slain was the brother of my paramour
  By a knight of thine, and I that heard her whine
  And snivel, being eunuch-hearted too,
  Sware by the scorpion-worm that twists in hell,
  And stings itself to everlasting death,
  To hang whatever knight of thine I fought
  And tumbled.  Art thou King? --Look to thy life!'

     He ended:  Arthur knew the voice; the face
  Wellnigh was helmet-hidden, and the name
  Went wandering somewhere darkling in his mind.
  And Arthur deigned not use of word or sword,
  But let the drunkard, as he stretched from horse
  To strike him, overbalancing his bulk,
  Down from the causeway heavily to the swamp
  Fall, as the crest of some slow-arching wave,
  Heard in dead night along that table-shore,
  Drops flat, and after the great waters break
  Whitening for half a league, and thin themselves,
  Far over sands marbled with moon and cloud,
  From less and less to nothing; thus he fell
  Head-heavy; then the knights, who watched him, roared
  And shouted and leapt down upon the fallen;
  There trampled out his face from being known,
  And sank his head in mire, and slimed themselves:
  Nor heard the King for their own cries, but sprang
  Through open doors, and swording right and left
  Men, women, on their sodden faces, hurled
  The tables over and the wines, and slew
  Till all the rafters rang with woman-yells,
  And all the pavement streamed with massacre:
  Then, echoing yell with yell, they fired the tower,
  Which half that autumn night, like the live North,
  Red-pulsing up through Alioth and Alcor,
  Made all above it, and a hundred meres
  About it, as the water Moab saw
  Came round by the East, and out beyond them flushed
  The long low dune, and lazy-plunging sea.

     So all the ways were safe from shore to shore,
  But in the heart of Arthur pain was lord.

     Then, out of Tristram waking, the red dream
  Fled with a shout, and that low lodge returned,
  Mid-forest, and the wind among the boughs.
  He whistled his good warhorse left to graze
  Among the forest greens, vaulted upon him,
  And rode beneath an ever-showering leaf,
  Till one lone woman, weeping near a cross,
  Stayed him.  'Why weep ye?'  'Lord,' she said, 'my man
  Hath left me or is dead;' whereon he thought--
  'What, if she hate me now? I would not this.
  What, if she love me still? I would not that.
  I know not what I would'--but said to her,
  'Yet weep not thou, lest, if thy mate return,
  He find thy favour changed and love thee not'--
  Then pressing day by day through Lyonnesse
  Last in a roky hollow, belling, heard
  The hounds of Mark, and felt the goodly hounds
  Yelp at his heart, but turning, past and gained
  Tintagil, half in sea, and high on land,
  A crown of towers.

                    Down in a casement sat,
  A low sea-sunset glorying round her hair
  And glossy-throated grace, Isolt the Queen.
  And when she heard the feet of Tristram grind
  The spiring stone that scaled about her tower,
  Flushed, started, met him at the doors, and there
  Belted his body with her white embrace,
  Crying aloud, 'Not Mark--not Mark, my soul!
  The footstep fluttered me at first:  not he:
  Catlike through his own castle steals my Mark,
  But warrior-wise thou stridest through his halls
  Who hates thee, as I him--even to the death.
  My soul, I felt my hatred for my Mark
  Quicken within me, and knew that thou wert nigh.'
  To whom Sir Tristram smiling, 'I am here.
  Let be thy Mark, seeing he is not thine.'

     And drawing somewhat backward she replied,
  'Can he be wronged who is not even his own,
  But save for dread of thee had beaten me,
  Scratched, bitten, blinded, marred me somehow--Mark?
  What rights are his that dare not strike for them?
  Not lift a hand--not, though he found me thus!
  But harken! have ye met him? hence he went
  Today for three days' hunting--as he said--
  And so returns belike within an hour.
  Mark's way, my soul!--but eat not thou with Mark,
  Because he hates thee even more than fears;
  Nor drink:  and when thou passest any wood
  Close vizor, lest an arrow from the bush
  Should leave me all alone with Mark and hell.
  My God, the measure of my hate for Mark
  Is as the measure of my love for thee.'

     So, plucked one way by hate and one by love,
  Drained of her force, again she sat, and spake
  To Tristram, as he knelt before her, saying,
  'O hunter, and O blower of the horn,
  Harper, and thou hast been a rover too,
  For, ere I mated with my shambling king,
  Ye twain had fallen out about the bride
  Of one--his name is out of me--the prize,
  If prize she were--(what marvel--she could see)--
  Thine, friend; and ever since my craven seeks
  To wreck thee villainously:  but, O Sir Knight,
  What dame or damsel have ye kneeled to last?'

     And Tristram, 'Last to my Queen Paramount,
  Here now to my Queen Paramount of love
  And loveliness--ay, lovelier than when first
  Her light feet fell on our rough Lyonnesse,
  Sailing from Ireland.'

                        Softly laughed Isolt;
  'Flatter me not, for hath not our great Queen
  My dole of beauty trebled?' and he said,
  'Her beauty is her beauty, and thine thine,
  And thine is more to me--soft, gracious, kind--
  Save when thy Mark is kindled on thy lips
  Most gracious; but she, haughty, even to him,
  Lancelot; for I have seen him wan enow
  To make one doubt if ever the great Queen
  Have yielded him her love.'

                             To whom Isolt,
  'Ah then, false hunter and false harper, thou
  Who brakest through the scruple of my bond,
  Calling me thy white hind, and saying to me
  That Guinevere had sinned against the highest,
  And I--misyoked with such a want of man--
  That I could hardly sin against the lowest.'

     He answered, 'O my soul, be comforted!
  If this be sweet, to sin in leading-strings,
  If here be comfort, and if ours be sin,
  Crowned warrant had we for the crowning sin
  That made us happy:  but how ye greet me--fear
  And fault and doubt--no word of that fond tale--
  Thy deep heart-yearnings, thy sweet memories
  Of Tristram in that year he was away.'

     And, saddening on the sudden, spake Isolt,
  'I had forgotten all in my strong joy
  To see thee--yearnings?--ay! for, hour by hour,
  Here in the never-ended afternoon,
  O sweeter than all memories of thee,
  Deeper than any yearnings after thee
  Seemed those far-rolling, westward-smiling seas,
  Watched from this tower.  Isolt of Britain dashed
  Before Isolt of Brittany on the strand,
  Would that have chilled her bride-kiss?  Wedded her?
  Fought in her father's battles? wounded there?
  The King was all fulfilled with gratefulness,
  And she, my namesake of the hands, that healed
  Thy hurt and heart with unguent and caress--
  Well--can I wish her any huger wrong
  Than having known thee? her too hast thou left
  To pine and waste in those sweet memories.
  O were I not my Mark's, by whom all men
  Are noble, I should hate thee more than love.'

     And Tristram, fondling her light hands, replied,
  'Grace, Queen, for being loved:  she loved me well.
  Did I love her? the name at least I loved.
  Isolt?--I fought his battles, for Isolt!
  The night was dark; the true star set.  Isolt!
  The name was ruler of the dark--Isolt?
  Care not for her! patient, and prayerful, meek,
  Pale-blooded, she will yield herself to God.'

     And Isolt answered, 'Yea, and why not I?
  Mine is the larger need, who am not meek,
  Pale-blooded, prayerful.  Let me tell thee now.
  Here one black, mute midsummer night I sat,
  Lonely, but musing on thee, wondering where,
  Murmuring a light song I had heard thee sing,
  And once or twice I spake thy name aloud.
  Then flashed a levin-brand; and near me stood,
  In fuming sulphur blue and green, a fiend--
  Mark's way to steal behind one in the dark--
  For there was Mark:  "He has wedded her," he said,
  Not said, but hissed it:  then this crown of towers
  So shook to such a roar of all the sky,
  That here in utter dark I swooned away,
  And woke again in utter dark, and cried,
  "I will flee hence and give myself to God"--
  And thou wert lying in thy new leman's arms.'

     Then Tristram, ever dallying with her hand,
  'May God be with thee, sweet, when old and gray,
  And past desire!' a saying that angered her.
  '"May God be with thee, sweet, when thou art old,
  And sweet no more to me!"  I need Him now.
  For when had Lancelot uttered aught so gross
  Even to the swineherd's malkin in the mast?
  The greater man, the greater courtesy.
  Far other was the Tristram, Arthur's knight!
  But thou, through ever harrying thy wild beasts--
  Save that to touch a harp, tilt with a lance
  Becomes thee well--art grown wild beast thyself.
  How darest thou, if lover, push me even
  In fancy from thy side, and set me far
  In the gray distance, half a life away,
  Her to be loved no more?  Unsay it, unswear!
  Flatter me rather, seeing me so weak,
  Broken with Mark and hate and solitude,
  Thy marriage and mine own, that I should suck
  Lies like sweet wines:  lie to me:  I believe.
  Will ye not lie? not swear, as there ye kneel,
  And solemnly as when ye sware to him,
  The man of men, our King--My God, the power
  Was once in vows when men believed the King!
  They lied not then, who sware, and through their vows
  The King prevailing made his realm:--I say,
  Swear to me thou wilt love me even when old,
  Gray-haired, and past desire, and in despair.'

     Then Tristram, pacing moodily up and down,
  'Vows! did you keep the vow you made to Mark
  More than I mine?  Lied, say ye?  Nay, but learnt,
  The vow that binds too strictly snaps itself--
  My knighthood taught me this--ay, being snapt--
  We run more counter to the soul thereof
  Than had we never sworn.  I swear no more.
  I swore to the great King, and am forsworn.
  For once--even to the height--I honoured him.
  "Man, is he man at all?" methought, when first
  I rode from our rough Lyonnesse, and beheld
  That victor of the Pagan throned in hall--
  His hair, a sun that rayed from off a brow
  Like hillsnow high in heaven, the steel-blue eyes,
  The golden beard that clothed his lips with light--
  Moreover, that weird legend of his birth,
  With Merlin's mystic babble about his end
  Amazed me; then, his foot was on a stool
  Shaped as a dragon; he seemed to me no man,
  But Michael trampling Satan; so I sware,
  Being amazed:  but this went by-- The vows!
  O ay--the wholesome madness of an hour--
  They served their use, their time; for every knight
  Believed himself a greater than himself,
  And every follower eyed him as a God;
  Till he, being lifted up beyond himself,
  Did mightier deeds than elsewise he had done,
  And so the realm was made; but then their vows--
  First mainly through that sullying of our Queen--
  Began to gall the knighthood, asking whence
  Had Arthur right to bind them to himself?
  Dropt down from heaven? washed up from out the deep?
  They failed to trace him through the flesh and blood
  Of our old kings:  whence then? a doubtful lord
  To bind them by inviolable vows,
  Which flesh and blood perforce would violate:
  For feel this arm of mine--the tide within
  Red with free chase and heather-scented air,
  Pulsing full man; can Arthur make me pure
  As any maiden child? lock up my tongue
  From uttering freely what I freely hear?
  Bind me to one?  The wide world laughs at it.
  And worldling of the world am I, and know
  The ptarmigan that whitens ere his hour
  Woos his own end; we are not angels here
  Nor shall be:  vows--I am woodman of the woods,
  And hear the garnet-headed yaffingale
  Mock them:  my soul, we love but while we may;
  And therefore is my love so large for thee,
  Seeing it is not bounded save by love.'

     Here ending, he moved toward her, and she said,
  'Good:  an I turned away my love for thee
  To some one thrice as courteous as thyself--
  For courtesy wins woman all as well
  As valour may, but he that closes both
  Is perfect, he is Lancelot--taller indeed,
  Rosier and comelier, thou--but say I loved
  This knightliest of all knights, and cast thee back
  Thine own small saw, "We love but while we may,"
  Well then, what answer?'

                          He that while she spake,
  Mindful of what he brought to adorn her with,
  The jewels, had let one finger lightly touch
  The warm white apple of her throat, replied,
  'Press this a little closer, sweet, until--
  Come, I am hungered and half-angered--meat,
  Wine, wine--and I will love thee to the death,
  And out beyond into the dream to come.'

     So then, when both were brought to full accord,
  She rose, and set before him all he willed;
  And after these had comforted the blood
  With meats and wines, and satiated their hearts--
  Now talking of their woodland paradise,
  The deer, the dews, the fern, the founts, the lawns;
  Now mocking at the much ungainliness,
  And craven shifts, and long crane legs of Mark--
  Then Tristram laughing caught the harp, and sang:

     'Ay, ay, O ay--the winds that bend the brier!
  A star in heaven, a star within the mere!
  Ay, ay, O ay--a star was my desire,
  And one was far apart, and one was near:
  Ay, ay, O ay--the winds that bow the grass!
  And one was water and one star was fire,
  And one will ever shine and one will pass.
  Ay, ay, O ay--the winds that move the mere.'

     Then in the light's last glimmer Tristram showed
  And swung the ruby carcanet.  She cried,
  'The collar of some Order, which our King
  Hath newly founded, all for thee, my soul,
  For thee, to yield thee grace beyond thy peers.'

     'Not so, my Queen,' he said, 'but the red fruit
  Grown on a magic oak-tree in mid-heaven,
  And won by Tristram as a tourney-prize,
  And hither brought by Tristram for his last
  Love-offering and peace-offering unto thee.'

     He spoke, he turned, then, flinging round her neck,
  Claspt it, and cried, 'Thine Order, O my Queen!'
  But, while he bowed to kiss the jewelled throat,
  Out of the dark, just as the lips had touched,
  Behind him rose a shadow and a shriek--
  'Mark's way,' said Mark, and clove him through the brain.

     That night came Arthur home, and while he climbed,
  All in a death-dumb autumn-dripping gloom,
  The stairway to the hall, and looked and saw
  The great Queen's bower was dark,--about his feet
  A voice clung sobbing till he questioned it,
  'What art thou?' and the voice about his feet
  Sent up an answer, sobbing, 'I am thy fool,
  And I shall never make thee smile again.'



  Guinevere

  Queen Guinevere had fled the court, and sat
  There in the holy house at Almesbury
  Weeping, none with her save a little maid,
  A novice:  one low light betwixt them burned
  Blurred by the creeping mist, for all abroad,
  Beneath a moon unseen albeit at full,
  The white mist, like a face-cloth to the face,
  Clung to the dead earth, and the land was still.

     For hither had she fled, her cause of flight
  Sir Modred; he that like a subtle beast
  Lay couchant with his eyes upon the throne,
  Ready to spring, waiting a chance:  for this
  He chilled the popular praises of the King
  With silent smiles of slow disparagement;
  And tampered with the Lords of the White Horse,
  Heathen, the brood by Hengist left; and sought
  To make disruption in the Table Round
  Of Arthur, and to splinter it into feuds
  Serving his traitorous end; and all his aims
  Were sharpened by strong hate for Lancelot.

     For thus it chanced one morn when all the court,
  Green-suited, but with plumes that mocked the may,
  Had been, their wont, a-maying and returned,
  That Modred still in green, all ear and eye,
  Climbed to the high top of the garden-wall
  To spy some secret scandal if he might,
  And saw the Queen who sat betwixt her best
  Enid, and lissome Vivien, of her court
  The wiliest and the worst; and more than this
  He saw not, for Sir Lancelot passing by
  Spied where he couched, and as the gardener's hand
  Picks from the colewort a green caterpillar,
  So from the high wall and the flowering grove
  Of grasses Lancelot plucked him by the heel,
  And cast him as a worm upon the way;
  But when he knew the Prince though marred with dust,
  He, reverencing king's blood in a bad man,
  Made such excuses as he might, and these
  Full knightly without scorn; for in those days
  No knight of Arthur's noblest dealt in scorn;
  But, if a man were halt or hunched, in him
  By those whom God had made full-limbed and tall,
  Scorn was allowed as part of his defect,
  And he was answered softly by the King
  And all his Table.  So Sir Lancelot holp
  To raise the Prince, who rising twice or thrice
  Full sharply smote his knees, and smiled, and went:
  But, ever after, the small violence done
  Rankled in him and ruffled all his heart,
  As the sharp wind that ruffles all day long
  A little bitter pool about a stone
  On the bare coast.

                    But when Sir Lancelot told
  This matter to the Queen, at first she laughed
  Lightly, to think of Modred's dusty fall,
  Then shuddered, as the village wife who cries
  'I shudder, some one steps across my grave;'
  Then laughed again, but faintlier, for indeed
  She half-foresaw that he, the subtle beast,
  Would track her guilt until he found, and hers
  Would be for evermore a name of scorn.
  Henceforward rarely could she front in hall,
  Or elsewhere, Modred's narrow foxy face,
  Heart-hiding smile, and gray persistent eye:
  Henceforward too, the Powers that tend the soul,
  To help it from the death that cannot die,
  And save it even in extremes, began
  To vex and plague her.  Many a time for hours,
  Beside the placid breathings of the King,
  In the dead night, grim faces came and went
  Before her, or a vague spiritual fear--
  Like to some doubtful noise of creaking doors,
  Heard by the watcher in a haunted house,
  That keeps the rust of murder on the walls--
  Held her awake:  or if she slept, she dreamed
  An awful dream; for then she seemed to stand
  On some vast plain before a setting sun,
  And from the sun there swiftly made at her
  A ghastly something, and its shadow flew
  Before it, till it touched her, and she turned--
  When lo! her own, that broadening from her feet,
  And blackening, swallowed all the land, and in it
  Far cities burnt, and with a cry she woke.
  And all this trouble did not pass but grew;
  Till even the clear face of the guileless King,
  And trustful courtesies of household life,
  Became her bane; and at the last she said,
  'O Lancelot, get thee hence to thine own land,
  For if thou tarry we shall meet again,
  And if we meet again, some evil chance
  Will make the smouldering scandal break and blaze
  Before the people, and our lord the King.'
  And Lancelot ever promised, but remained,
  And still they met and met.  Again she said,
  'O Lancelot, if thou love me get thee hence.'
  And then they were agreed upon a night
  (When the good King should not be there) to meet
  And part for ever.  Vivien, lurking, heard.
  She told Sir Modred.  Passion-pale they met
  And greeted.  Hands in hands, and eye to eye,
  Low on the border of her couch they sat
  Stammering and staring.  It was their last hour,
  A madness of farewells.  And Modred brought
  His creatures to the basement of the tower
  For testimony; and crying with full voice
  'Traitor, come out, ye are trapt at last,' aroused
  Lancelot, who rushing outward lionlike
  Leapt on him, and hurled him headlong, and he fell
  Stunned, and his creatures took and bare him off,
  And all was still:  then she, 'The end is come,
  And I am shamed for ever;' and he said,
  'Mine be the shame; mine was the sin:  but rise,
  And fly to my strong castle overseas:
  There will I hide thee, till my life shall end,
  There hold thee with my life against the world.'
  She answered, 'Lancelot, wilt thou hold me so?
  Nay, friend, for we have taken our farewells.
  Would God that thou couldst hide me from myself!
  Mine is the shame, for I was wife, and thou
  Unwedded:  yet rise now, and let us fly,
  For I will draw me into sanctuary,
  And bide my doom.'  So Lancelot got her horse,
  Set her thereon, and mounted on his own,
  And then they rode to the divided way,
  There kissed, and parted weeping:  for he past,
  Love-loyal to the least wish of the Queen,
  Back to his land; but she to Almesbury
  Fled all night long by glimmering waste and weald,
  And heard the Spirits of the waste and weald
  Moan as she fled, or thought she heard them moan:
  And in herself she moaned 'Too late, too late!'
  Till in the cold wind that foreruns the morn,
  A blot in heaven, the Raven, flying high,
  Croaked, and she thought, 'He spies a field of death;
  For now the Heathen of the Northern Sea,
  Lured by the crimes and frailties of the court,
  Begin to slay the folk, and spoil the land.'

     And when she came to Almesbury she spake
  There to the nuns, and said, 'Mine enemies
  Pursue me, but, O peaceful Sisterhood,
  Receive, and yield me sanctuary, nor ask
  Her name to whom ye yield it, till her time
  To tell you:' and her beauty, grace and power,
  Wrought as a charm upon them, and they spared
  To ask it.

            So the stately Queen abode
  For many a week, unknown, among the nuns;
  Nor with them mixed, nor told her name, nor sought,
  Wrapt in her grief, for housel or for shrift,
  But communed only with the little maid,
  Who pleased her with a babbling heedlessness
  Which often lured her from herself; but now,
  This night, a rumour wildly blown about
  Came, that Sir Modred had usurped the realm,
  And leagued him with the heathen, while the King
  Was waging war on Lancelot:  then she thought,
  'With what a hate the people and the King
  Must hate me,' and bowed down upon her hands
  Silent, until the little maid, who brooked
  No silence, brake it, uttering, 'Late! so late!
  What hour, I wonder, now?' and when she drew
  No answer, by and by began to hum
  An air the nuns had taught her; 'Late, so late!'
  Which when she heard, the Queen looked up, and said,
  'O maiden, if indeed ye list to sing,
  Sing, and unbind my heart that I may weep.'
  Whereat full willingly sang the little maid.

     'Late, late, so late! and dark the night and chill!
  Late, late, so late! but we can enter still.
  Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.

     'No light had we:  for that we do repent;
  And learning this, the bridegroom will relent.
  Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.

     'No light:  so late! and dark and chill the night!
  O let us in, that we may find the light!
  Too late, too late:  ye cannot enter now.

     'Have we not heard the bridegroom is so sweet?
  O let us in, though late, to kiss his feet!
  No, no, too late! ye cannot enter now.'

     So sang the novice, while full passionately,
  Her head upon her hands, remembering
  Her thought when first she came, wept the sad Queen.
  Then said the little novice prattling to her,
     'O pray you, noble lady, weep no more;
  But let my words, the words of one so small,
  Who knowing nothing knows but to obey,
  And if I do not there is penance given--
  Comfort your sorrows; for they do not flow
  From evil done; right sure am I of that,
  Who see your tender grace and stateliness.
  But weigh your sorrows with our lord the King's,
  And weighing find them less; for gone is he
  To wage grim war against Sir Lancelot there,
  Round that strong castle where he holds the Queen;
  And Modred whom he left in charge of all,
  The traitor--Ah sweet lady, the King's grief
  For his own self, and his own Queen, and realm,
  Must needs be thrice as great as any of ours.
  For me, I thank the saints, I am not great.
  For if there ever come a grief to me
  I cry my cry in silence, and have done.
  None knows it, and my tears have brought me good:
  But even were the griefs of little ones
  As great as those of great ones, yet this grief
  Is added to the griefs the great must bear,
  That howsoever much they may desire
  Silence, they cannot weep behind a cloud:
  As even here they talk at Almesbury
  About the good King and his wicked Queen,
  And were I such a King with such a Queen,
  Well might I wish to veil her wickedness,
  But were I such a King, it could not be.'

     Then to her own sad heart muttered the Queen,
  'Will the child kill me with her innocent talk?'
  But openly she answered, 'Must not I,
  If this false traitor have displaced his lord,
  Grieve with the common grief of all the realm?'

     'Yea,' said the maid, 'this is all woman's grief,
  That she is woman, whose disloyal life
  Hath wrought confusion in the Table Round
  Which good King Arthur founded, years ago,
  With signs and miracles and wonders, there
  At Camelot, ere the coming of the Queen.'

     Then thought the Queen within herself again,
  'Will the child kill me with her foolish prate?'
  But openly she spake and said to her,
  'O little maid, shut in by nunnery walls,
  What canst thou know of Kings and Tables Round,
  Or what of signs and wonders, but the signs
  And simple miracles of thy nunnery?'

     To whom the little novice garrulously,
  'Yea, but I know:  the land was full of signs
  And wonders ere the coming of the Queen.
  So said my father, and himself was knight
  Of the great Table--at the founding of it;
  And rode thereto from Lyonnesse, and he said
  That as he rode, an hour or maybe twain
  After the sunset, down the coast, he heard
  Strange music, and he paused, and turning--there,
  All down the lonely coast of Lyonnesse,
  Each with a beacon-star upon his head,
  And with a wild sea-light about his feet,
  He saw them--headland after headland flame
  Far on into the rich heart of the west:
  And in the light the white mermaiden swam,
  And strong man-breasted things stood from the sea,
  And sent a deep sea-voice through all the land,
  To which the little elves of chasm and cleft
  Made answer, sounding like a distant horn.
  So said my father--yea, and furthermore,
  Next morning, while he past the dim-lit woods,
  Himself beheld three spirits mad with joy
  Come dashing down on a tall wayside flower,
  That shook beneath them, as the thistle shakes
  When three gray linnets wrangle for the seed:
  And still at evenings on before his horse
  The flickering fairy-circle wheeled and broke
  Flying, and linked again, and wheeled and broke
  Flying, for all the land was full of life.
  And when at last he came to Camelot,
  A wreath of airy dancers hand-in-hand
  Swung round the lighted lantern of the hall;
  And in the hall itself was such a feast
  As never man had dreamed; for every knight
  Had whatsoever meat he longed for served
  By hands unseen; and even as he said
  Down in the cellars merry bloated things
  Shouldered the spigot, straddling on the butts
  While the wine ran:  so glad were spirits and men
  Before the coming of the sinful Queen.'

     Then spake the Queen and somewhat bitterly,
  'Were they so glad? ill prophets were they all,
  Spirits and men:  could none of them foresee,
  Not even thy wise father with his signs
  And wonders, what has fallen upon the realm?'

     To whom the novice garrulously again,
  'Yea, one, a bard; of whom my father said,
  Full many a noble war-song had he sung,
  Even in the presence of an enemy's fleet,
  Between the steep cliff and the coming wave;
  And many a mystic lay of life and death
  Had chanted on the smoky mountain-tops,
  When round him bent the spirits of the hills
  With all their dewy hair blown back like flame:
  So said my father--and that night the bard
  Sang Arthur's glorious wars, and sang the King
  As wellnigh more than man, and railed at those
  Who called him the false son of Gorlois:
  For there was no man knew from whence he came;
  But after tempest, when the long wave broke
  All down the thundering shores of Bude and Bos,
  There came a day as still as heaven, and then
  They found a naked child upon the sands
  Of dark Tintagil by the Cornish sea;
  And that was Arthur; and they fostered him
  Till he by miracle was approven King:
  And that his grave should be a mystery
  From all men, like his birth; and could he find
  A woman in her womanhood as great
  As he was in his manhood, then, he sang,
  The twain together well might change the world.
  But even in the middle of his song
  He faltered, and his hand fell from the harp,
  And pale he turned, and reeled, and would have fallen,
  But that they stayed him up; nor would he tell
  His vision; but what doubt that he foresaw
  This evil work of Lancelot and the Queen?'

     Then thought the Queen, 'Lo! they have set her on,
  Our simple-seeming Abbess and her nuns,
  To play upon me,' and bowed her head nor spake.
  Whereat the novice crying, with clasped hands,
  Shame on her own garrulity garrulously,
  Said the good nuns would check her gadding tongue
  Full often, 'and, sweet lady, if I seem
  To vex an ear too sad to listen to me,
  Unmannerly, with prattling and the tales
  Which my good father told me, check me too
  Nor let me shame my father's memory, one
  Of noblest manners, though himself would say
  Sir Lancelot had the noblest; and he died,
  Killed in a tilt, come next, five summers back,
  And left me; but of others who remain,
  And of the two first-famed for courtesy--
  And pray you check me if I ask amiss--
  But pray you, which had noblest, while you moved
  Among them, Lancelot or our lord the King?'

     Then the pale Queen looked up and answered her,
  'Sir Lancelot, as became a noble knight,
  Was gracious to all ladies, and the same
  In open battle or the tilting-field
  Forbore his own advantage, and the King
  In open battle or the tilting-field
  Forbore his own advantage, and these two
  Were the most nobly-mannered men of all;
  For manners are not idle, but the fruit
  Of loyal nature, and of noble mind.'

     'Yea,' said the maid, 'be manners such fair fruit?'
  Then Lancelot's needs must be a thousand-fold
  Less noble, being, as all rumour runs,
  The most disloyal friend in all the world.'

     To which a mournful answer made the Queen:
  'O closed about by narrowing nunnery-walls,
  What knowest thou of the world, and all its lights
  And shadows, all the wealth and all the woe?
  If ever Lancelot, that most noble knight,
  Were for one hour less noble than himself,
  Pray for him that he scape the doom of fire,
  And weep for her that drew him to his doom.'

     'Yea,' said the little novice, 'I pray for both;
  But I should all as soon believe that his,
  Sir Lancelot's, were as noble as the King's,
  As I could think, sweet lady, yours would be
  Such as they are, were you the sinful Queen.'

     So she, like many another babbler, hurt
  Whom she would soothe, and harmed where she would heal;
  For here a sudden flush of wrathful heat
  Fired all the pale face of the Queen, who cried,
  'Such as thou art be never maiden more
  For ever! thou their tool, set on to plague
  And play upon, and harry me, petty spy
  And traitress.'  When that storm of anger brake
  From Guinevere, aghast the maiden rose,
  White as her veil, and stood before the Queen
  As tremulously as foam upon the beach
  Stands in a wind, ready to break and fly,
  And when the Queen had added 'Get thee hence,'
  Fled frighted.  Then that other left alone
  Sighed, and began to gather heart again,
  Saying in herself, 'The simple, fearful child
  Meant nothing, but my own too-fearful guilt,
  Simpler than any child, betrays itself.
  But help me, heaven, for surely I repent.
  For what is true repentance but in thought--
  Not even in inmost thought to think again
  The sins that made the past so pleasant to us:
  And I have sworn never to see him more,
  To see him more.'

                   And even in saying this,
  Her memory from old habit of the mind
  Went slipping back upon the golden days
  In which she saw him first, when Lancelot came,
  Reputed the best knight and goodliest man,
  Ambassador, to lead her to his lord
  Arthur, and led her forth, and far ahead
  Of his and her retinue moving, they,
  Rapt in sweet talk or lively, all on love
  And sport and tilts and pleasure, (for the time
  Was maytime, and as yet no sin was dreamed,)
  Rode under groves that looked a paradise
  Of blossom, over sheets of hyacinth
  That seemed the heavens upbreaking through the earth,
  And on from hill to hill, and every day
  Beheld at noon in some delicious dale
  The silk pavilions of King Arthur raised
  For brief repast or afternoon repose
  By couriers gone before; and on again,
  Till yet once more ere set of sun they saw
  The Dragon of the great Pendragonship,
  That crowned the state pavilion of the King,
  Blaze by the rushing brook or silent well.

     But when the Queen immersed in such a trance,
  And moving through the past unconsciously,
  Came to that point where first she saw the King
  Ride toward her from the city, sighed to find
  Her journey done, glanced at him, thought him cold,
  High, self-contained, and passionless, not like him,
  'Not like my Lancelot'--while she brooded thus
  And grew half-guilty in her thoughts again,
  There rode an armed warrior to the doors.
  A murmuring whisper through the nunnery ran,
  Then on a sudden a cry, 'The King.'  She sat
  Stiff-stricken, listening; but when armed feet
  Through the long gallery from the outer doors
  Rang coming, prone from off her seat she fell,
  And grovelled with her face against the floor:
  There with her milkwhite arms and shadowy hair
  She made her face a darkness from the King:
  And in the darkness heard his armed feet
  Pause by her; then came silence, then a voice,
  Monotonous and hollow like a Ghost's
  Denouncing judgment, but though changed, the King's:

     'Liest thou here so low, the child of one
  I honoured, happy, dead before thy shame?
  Well is it that no child is born of thee.
  The children born of thee are sword and fire,
  Red ruin, and the breaking up of laws,
  The craft of kindred and the Godless hosts
  Of heathen swarming o'er the Northern Sea;
  Whom I, while yet Sir Lancelot, my right arm,
  The mightiest of my knights, abode with me,
  Have everywhere about this land of Christ
  In twelve great battles ruining overthrown.
  And knowest thou now from whence I come--from him
  From waging bitter war with him:  and he,
  That did not shun to smite me in worse way,
  Had yet that grace of courtesy in him left,
  He spared to lift his hand against the King
  Who made him knight:  but many a knight was slain;
  And many more, and all his kith and kin
  Clave to him, and abode in his own land.
  And many more when Modred raised revolt,
  Forgetful of their troth and fealty, clave
  To Modred, and a remnant stays with me.
  And of this remnant will I leave a part,
  True men who love me still, for whom I live,
  To guard thee in the wild hour coming on,
  Lest but a hair of this low head be harmed.
  Fear not:  thou shalt be guarded till my death.
  Howbeit I know, if ancient prophecies
  Have erred not, that I march to meet my doom.
  Thou hast not made my life so sweet to me,
  That I the King should greatly care to live;
  For thou hast spoilt the purpose of my life.
  Bear with me for the last time while I show,
  Even for thy sake, the sin which thou hast sinned.
  For when the Roman left us, and their law
  Relaxed its hold upon us, and the ways
  Were filled with rapine, here and there a deed
  Of prowess done redressed a random wrong.
  But I was first of all the kings who drew
  The knighthood-errant of this realm and all
  The realms together under me, their Head,
  In that fair Order of my Table Round,
  A glorious company, the flower of men,
  To serve as model for the mighty world,
  And be the fair beginning of a time.
  I made them lay their hands in mine and swear
  To reverence the King, as if he were
  Their conscience, and their conscience as their King,
  To break the heathen and uphold the Christ,
  To ride abroad redressing human wrongs,
  To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it,
  To honour his own word as if his God's,
  To lead sweet lives in purest chastity,
  To love one maiden only, cleave to her,
  And worship her by years of noble deeds,
  Until they won her; for indeed I knew
  Of no more subtle master under heaven
  Than is the maiden passion for a maid,
  Not only to keep down the base in man,
  But teach high thought, and amiable words
  And courtliness, and the desire of fame,
  And love of truth, and all that makes a man.
  And all this throve before I wedded thee,
  Believing, "lo mine helpmate, one to feel
  My purpose and rejoicing in my joy."
  Then came thy shameful sin with Lancelot;
  Then came the sin of Tristram and Isolt;
  Then others, following these my mightiest knights,
  And drawing foul ensample from fair names,
  Sinned also, till the loathsome opposite
  Of all my heart had destined did obtain,
  And all through thee! so that this life of mine
  I guard as God's high gift from scathe and wrong,
  Not greatly care to lose; but rather think
  How sad it were for Arthur, should he live,
  To sit once more within his lonely hall,
  And miss the wonted number of my knights,
  And miss to hear high talk of noble deeds
  As in the golden days before thy sin.
  For which of us, who might be left, could speak
  Of the pure heart, nor seem to glance at thee?
  And in thy bowers of Camelot or of Usk
  Thy shadow still would glide from room to room,
  And I should evermore be vext with thee
  In hanging robe or vacant ornament,
  Or ghostly footfall echoing on the stair.
  For think not, though thou wouldst not love thy lord,
  Thy lord hast wholly lost his love for thee.
  I am not made of so slight elements.
  Yet must I leave thee, woman, to thy shame.
  I hold that man the worst of public foes
  Who either for his own or children's sake,
  To save his blood from scandal, lets the wife
  Whom he knows false, abide and rule the house:
  For being through his cowardice allowed
  Her station, taken everywhere for pure,
  She like a new disease, unknown to men,
  Creeps, no precaution used, among the crowd,
  Makes wicked lightnings of her eyes, and saps
  The fealty of our friends, and stirs the pulse
  With devil's leaps, and poisons half the young.
  Worst of the worst were that man he that reigns!
  Better the King's waste hearth and aching heart
  Than thou reseated in thy place of light,
  The mockery of my people, and their bane.'

     He paused, and in the pause she crept an inch
  Nearer, and laid her hands about his feet.
  Far off a solitary trumpet blew.
  Then waiting by the doors the warhorse neighed
  At a friend's voice, and he spake again:

     'Yet think not that I come to urge thy crimes,
  I did not come to curse thee, Guinevere,
  I, whose vast pity almost makes me die
  To see thee, laying there thy golden head,
  My pride in happier summers, at my feet.
  The wrath which forced my thoughts on that fierce law,
  The doom of treason and the flaming death,
  (When first I learnt thee hidden here) is past.
  The pang--which while I weighed thy heart with one
  Too wholly true to dream untruth in thee,
  Made my tears burn--is also past--in part.
  And all is past, the sin is sinned, and I,
  Lo! I forgive thee, as Eternal God
  Forgives:  do thou for thine own soul the rest.
  But how to take last leave of all I loved?
  O golden hair, with which I used to play
  Not knowing! O imperial-moulded form,
  And beauty such as never woman wore,
  Until it became a kingdom's curse with thee--
  I cannot touch thy lips, they are not mine,
  But Lancelot's:  nay, they never were the King's.
  I cannot take thy hand:  that too is flesh,
  And in the flesh thou hast sinned; and mine own flesh,
  Here looking down on thine polluted, cries
  "I loathe thee:" yet not less, O Guinevere,
  For I was ever virgin save for thee,
  My love through flesh hath wrought into my life
  So far, that my doom is, I love thee still.
  Let no man dream but that I love thee still.
  Perchance, and so thou purify thy soul,
  And so thou lean on our fair father Christ,
  Hereafter in that world where all are pure
  We two may meet before high God, and thou
  Wilt spring to me, and claim me thine, and know
  I am thine husband--not a smaller soul,
  Nor Lancelot, nor another.  Leave me that,
  I charge thee, my last hope.  Now must I hence.
  Through the thick night I hear the trumpet blow:
  They summon me their King to lead mine hosts
  Far down to that great battle in the west,
  Where I must strike against the man they call
  My sister's son--no kin of mine, who leagues
  With Lords of the White Horse, heathen, and knights,
  Traitors--and strike him dead, and meet myself
  Death, or I know not what mysterious doom.
  And thou remaining here wilt learn the event;
  But hither shall I never come again,
  Never lie by thy side; see thee no more--
  Farewell!'

            And while she grovelled at his feet,
  She felt the King's breath wander o'er her neck,
  And in the darkness o'er her fallen head,
  Perceived the waving of his hands that blest.

     Then, listening till those armed steps were gone,
  Rose the pale Queen, and in her anguish found
  The casement:  'peradventure,' so she thought,
  'If I might see his face, and not be seen.'
  And lo, he sat on horseback at the door!
  And near him the sad nuns with each a light
  Stood, and he gave them charge about the Queen,
  To guard and foster her for evermore.
  And while he spake to these his helm was lowered,
  To which for crest the golden dragon clung
  Of Britain; so she did not see the face,
  Which then was as an angel's, but she saw,
  Wet with the mists and smitten by the lights,
  The Dragon of the great Pendragonship
  Blaze, making all the night a steam of fire.
  And even then he turned; and more and more
  The moony vapour rolling round the King,
  Who seemed the phantom of a Giant in it,
  Enwound him fold by fold, and made him gray
  And grayer, till himself became as mist
  Before her, moving ghostlike to his doom.

     Then she stretched out her arms and cried aloud
  'Oh Arthur!' there her voice brake suddenly,
  Then--as a stream that spouting from a cliff
  Fails in mid air, but gathering at the base
  Re-makes itself, and flashes down the vale--
  Went on in passionate utterance:

                                  'Gone--my lord!
  Gone through my sin to slay and to be slain!
  And he forgave me, and I could not speak.
  Farewell?  I should have answered his farewell.
  His mercy choked me.  Gone, my lord the King,
  My own true lord! how dare I call him mine?
  The shadow of another cleaves to me,
  And makes me one pollution:  he, the King,
  Called me polluted:  shall I kill myself?
  What help in that?  I cannot kill my sin,
  If soul be soul; nor can I kill my shame;
  No, nor by living can I live it down.
  The days will grow to weeks, the weeks to months
  The months will add themselves and make the years,
  The years will roll into the centuries,
  And mine will ever be a name of scorn.
  I must not dwell on that defeat of fame.
  Let the world be; that is but of the world.
  What else? what hope? I think there was a hope,
  Except he mocked me when he spake of hope;
  His hope he called it; but he never mocks,
  For mockery is the fume of little hearts.
  And blessed be the King, who hath forgiven
  My wickedness to him, and left me hope
  That in mine own heart I can live down sin
  And be his mate hereafter in the heavens
  Before high God.  Ah great and gentle lord,
  Who wast, as is the conscience of a saint
  Among his warring senses, to thy knights--
  To whom my false voluptuous pride, that took
  Full easily all impressions from below,
  Would not look up, or half-despised the height
  To which I would not or I could not climb--
  I thought I could not breathe in that fine air
  That pure severity of perfect light--
  I yearned for warmth and colour which I found
  In Lancelot--now I see thee what thou art,
  Thou art the highest and most human too,
  Not Lancelot, nor another.  Is there none
  Will tell the King I love him though so late?
  Now--ere he goes to the great Battle? none:
  Myself must tell him in that purer life,
  But now it were too daring.  Ah my God,
  What might I not have made of thy fair world,
  Had I but loved thy highest creature here?
  It was my duty to have loved the highest:
  It surely was my profit had I known:
  It would have been my pleasure had I seen.
  We needs must love the highest when we see it,
  Not Lancelot, nor another.'

                             Here her hand
  Grasped, made her vail her eyes:  she looked and saw
  The novice, weeping, suppliant, and said to her,
  'Yea, little maid, for am I not forgiven?'
  Then glancing up beheld the holy nuns
  All round her, weeping; and her heart was loosed
  Within her, and she wept with these and said,

     'Ye know me then, that wicked one, who broke
  The vast design and purpose of the King.
  O shut me round with narrowing nunnery-walls,
  Meek maidens, from the voices crying "shame."
  I must not scorn myself:  he loves me still.
  Let no one dream but that he loves me still.
  So let me, if you do not shudder at me,
  Nor shun to call me sister, dwell with you;
  Wear black and white, and be a nun like you,
  Fast with your fasts, not feasting with your feasts;
  Grieve with your griefs, not grieving at your joys,
  But not rejoicing; mingle with your rites;
  Pray and be prayed for; lie before your shrines;
  Do each low office of your holy house;
  Walk your dim cloister, and distribute dole
  To poor sick people, richer in His eyes
  Who ransomed us, and haler too than I;
  And treat their loathsome hurts and heal mine own;
  And so wear out in almsdeed and in prayer
  The sombre close of that voluptuous day,
  Which wrought the ruin of my lord the King.'

     She said:  they took her to themselves; and she
  Still hoping, fearing 'is it yet too late?'
  Dwelt with them, till in time their Abbess died.
  Then she, for her good deeds and her pure life,
  And for the power of ministration in her,
  And likewise for the high rank she had borne,
  Was chosen Abbess, there, an Abbess, lived
  For three brief years, and there, an Abbess, past
  To where beyond these voices there is peace.



  The Passing of Arthur

  That story which the bold Sir Bedivere,
  First made and latest left of all the knights,
  Told, when the man was no more than a voice
  In the white winter of his age, to those
  With whom he dwelt, new faces, other minds.

     For on their march to westward, Bedivere,
  Who slowly paced among the slumbering host,
  Heard in his tent the moanings of the King:

     'I found Him in the shining of the stars,
  I marked Him in the flowering of His fields,
  But in His ways with men I find Him not.
  I waged His wars, and now I pass and die.
  O me! for why is all around us here
  As if some lesser god had made the world,
  But had not force to shape it as he would,
  Till the High God behold it from beyond,
  And enter it, and make it beautiful?
  Or else as if the world were wholly fair,
  But that these eyes of men are dense and dim,
  And have not power to see it as it is:
  Perchance, because we see not to the close;--
  For I, being simple, thought to work His will,
  And have but stricken with the sword in vain;
  And all whereon I leaned in wife and friend
  Is traitor to my peace, and all my realm
  Reels back into the beast, and is no more.
  My God, thou hast forgotten me in my death;
  Nay--God my Christ--I pass but shall not die.'

     Then, ere that last weird battle in the west,
  There came on Arthur sleeping, Gawain killed
  In Lancelot's war, the ghost of Gawain blown
  Along a wandering wind, and past his ear
  Went shrilling, 'Hollow, hollow all delight!
  Hail, King! tomorrow thou shalt pass away.
  Farewell! there is an isle of rest for thee.
  And I am blown along a wandering wind,
  And hollow, hollow, hollow all delight.'
  And fainter onward, like wild birds that change
  Their season in the night and wail their way
  From cloud to cloud, down the long wind the dream
  Shrilled; but in going mingled with dim cries
  Far in the moonlit haze among the hills,
  As of some lonely city sacked by night,
  When all is lost, and wife and child with wail
  Pass to new lords; and Arthur woke and called,
  'Who spake?  A dream.  O light upon the wind,
  Thine, Gawain, was the voice--are these dim cries
  Thine? or doth all that haunts the waste and wild
  Mourn, knowing it will go along with me?'

     This heard the bold Sir Bedivere and spake:
  'O me, my King, let pass whatever will,
  Elves, and the harmless glamour of the field;
  But in their stead thy name and glory cling
  To all high places like a golden cloud
  For ever:  but as yet thou shalt not pass.
  Light was Gawain in life, and light in death
  Is Gawain, for the ghost is as the man;
  And care not thou for dreams from him, but rise--
  I hear the steps of Modred in the west,
  And with him many of thy people, and knights
  Once thine, whom thou hast loved, but grosser grown
  Than heathen, spitting at their vows and thee.
  Right well in heart they know thee for the King.
  Arise, go forth and conquer as of old.'

     Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  'Far other is this battle in the west
  Whereto we move, than when we strove in youth,
  And brake the petty kings, and fought with Rome,
  Or thrust the heathen from the Roman wall,
  And shook him through the north.  Ill doom is mine
  To war against my people and my knights.
  The king who fights his people fights himself.
  And they my knights, who loved me once, the stroke
  That strikes them dead is as my death to me.
  Yet let us hence, and find or feel a way
  Through this blind haze, which ever since I saw
  One lying in the dust at Almesbury,
  Hath folded in the passes of the world.'

     Then rose the King and moved his host by night,
  And ever pushed Sir Modred, league by league,
  Back to the sunset bound of Lyonnesse--
  A land of old upheaven from the abyss
  By fire, to sink into the abyss again;
  Where fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt,
  And the long mountains ended in a coast
  Of ever-shifting sand, and far away
  The phantom circle of a moaning sea.
  There the pursuer could pursue no more,
  And he that fled no further fly the King;
  And there, that day when the great light of heaven
  Burned at his lowest in the rolling year,
  On the waste sand by the waste sea they closed.
  Nor ever yet had Arthur fought a fight
  Like this last, dim, weird battle of the west.
  A deathwhite mist slept over sand and sea:
  Whereof the chill, to him who breathed it, drew
  Down with his blood, till all his heart was cold
  With formless fear; and even on Arthur fell
  Confusion, since he saw not whom he fought.
  For friend and foe were shadows in the mist,
  And friend slew friend not knowing whom he slew;
  And some had visions out of golden youth,
  And some beheld the faces of old ghosts
  Look in upon the battle; and in the mist
  Was many a noble deed, many a base,
  And chance and craft and strength in single fights,
  And ever and anon with host to host
  Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail hewn,
  Shield-breakings, and the clash of brands, the crash
  Of battleaxes on shattered helms, and shrieks
  After the Christ, of those who falling down
  Looked up for heaven, and only saw the mist;
  And shouts of heathen and the traitor knights,
  Oaths, insults, filth, and monstrous blasphemies,
  Sweat, writhings, anguish, labouring of the lungs
  In that close mist, and cryings for the light,
  Moans of the dying, and voices of the dead.

     Last, as by some one deathbed after wail
  Of suffering, silence follows, or through death
  Or deathlike swoon, thus over all that shore,
  Save for some whisper of the seething seas,
  A dead hush fell; but when the dolorous day
  Grew drearier toward twilight falling, came
  A bitter wind, clear from the North, and blew
  The mist aside, and with that wind the tide
  Rose, and the pale King glanced across the field
  Of battle:  but no man was moving there;
  Nor any cry of Christian heard thereon,
  Nor yet of heathen; only the wan wave
  Brake in among dead faces, to and fro
  Swaying the helpless hands, and up and down
  Tumbling the hollow helmets of the fallen,
  And shivered brands that once had fought with Rome,
  And rolling far along the gloomy shores
  The voice of days of old and days to be.

     Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere,
  And whiter than the mist that all day long
  Had held the field of battle was the King:

     'Hearest thou this great voice that shakes the world,
  And wastes the narrow realm whereon we move,
  And beats upon the faces of the dead,
  My dead, as though they had not died for me?--
  O Bedivere, for on my heart hath fallen
  Confusion, till I know not what I am,
  Nor whence I am, nor whether I be King.
  Behold, I seem but King among the dead.'

     Then spake the bold Sir Bedivere:  'My King,
  King everywhere! and so the dead have kings,
  There also will I worship thee as King.
  Yet still thy life is whole, and still I live
  Who love thee; but who hates thee, he that brought
  The heathen back among us, yonder stands,
  Modred, unharmed, the traitor of thine house.'

     Then spake the King:  'My house hath been my doom.
  But call not thou this traitor of my house
  Who hath but dwelt beneath one roof with me.
  My house are rather they who sware my vows,
  Yea, even while they brake them, owned me King.
  And well for thee, saying in my dark hour,
  When all the purport of my throne hath failed,
  That quick or dead thou holdest me for King.
  King am I, whatsoever be their cry;
  And one last act of kinghood shalt thou see
  Yet, ere I pass.'  And uttering this the King
  Made at the man:  then Modred smote his liege
  Hard on that helm which many a heathen sword
  Had beaten thin; while Arthur at one blow,
  Striking the last stroke with Excalibur,
  Slew him, and all but slain himself, he fell.

     So all day long the noise of battle rolled
  Among the mountains by the winter sea;
  Until King Arthur's Table, man by man,
  Had fallen in Lyonnesse about their lord,
  King Arthur.  Then, because his wound was deep,
  The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him,
  And bore him to a chapel nigh the field,
  A broken chancel with a broken cross,
  That stood on a dark strait of barren land:
  On one side lay the Ocean, and on one
  Lay a great water, and the moon was full.

     Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  'The sequel of today unsolders all
  The goodliest fellowship of famous knights
  Whereof this world holds record.  Such a sleep
  They sleep--the men I loved.  I think that we
  Shall never more, at any future time,
  Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds,
  Walking about the gardens and the halls
  Of Camelot, as in the days that were.
  I perish by this people which I made,--
  Though Merlin sware that I should come again
  To rule once more; but, let what will be, be,
  I am so deeply smitten through the helm
  That without help I cannot last till morn.
  Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur,
  Which was my pride:  for thou rememberest how
  In those old days, one summer noon, an arm
  Rose up from out the bosom of the lake,
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  Holding the sword--and how I rowed across
  And took it, and have worn it, like a king;
  And, wheresoever I am sung or told
  In aftertime, this also shall be known:
  But now delay not:  take Excalibur,
  And fling him far into the middle mere:
  Watch what thou seest, and lightly bring me word.'

     To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus,
  Aidless, alone, and smitten through the helm--
  A little thing may harm a wounded man;
  Yet I thy hest will all perform at full,
  Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word.'

     So saying, from the ruined shrine he stept,
  And in the moon athwart the place of tombs,
  Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men,
  Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang
  Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam.  He, stepping down
  By zigzag paths, and juts of pointed rock,
  Came on the shining levels of the lake.

     There drew he forth the brand Excalibur,
  And o'er him, drawing it, the winter moon,
  Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth
  And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt:
  For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks,
  Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work
  Of subtlest jewellery.  He gazed so long
  That both his eyes were dazzled as he stood,
  This way and that dividing the swift mind,
  In act to throw:  but at the last it seemed
  Better to leave Excalibur concealed
  There in the many-knotted waterflags,
  That whistled stiff and dry about the marge.
  So strode he back slow to the wounded King.

     Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  'Hast thou performed my mission which I gave?
  What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?'

     And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'I heard the ripple washing in the reeds,
  And the wild water lapping on the crag.'

     To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale:
  'Thou hast betrayed thy nature and thy name,
  Not rendering true answer, as beseemed
  Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight:
  For surer sign had followed, either hand,
  Or voice, or else a motion of the mere.
  This is a shameful thing for men to lie.
  Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again,
  As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing
  I bade thee, watch, and lightly bring me word.'

     Then went Sir Bedivere the second time
  Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere,
  Counting the dewy pebbles, fixed in thought;
  But when he saw the wonder of the hilt,
  How curiously and strangely chased, he smote
  His palms together, and he cried aloud:

     'And if indeed I cast the brand away,
  Surely a precious thing, one worthy note,
  Should thus be lost for ever from the earth,
  Which might have pleased the eyes of many men.
  What good should follow this, if this were done?
  What harm, undone?  Deep harm to disobey,
  Seeing obedience is the bond of rule.
  Were it well to obey then, if a king demand
  An act unprofitable, against himself?
  The King is sick, and knows not what he does.
  What record, or what relic of my lord
  Should be to aftertime, but empty breath
  And rumours of a doubt?  But were this kept,
  Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings,
  Some one might show it at a joust of arms,
  Saying, "King Arthur's sword, Excalibur,
  Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake.
  Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps
  Upon the hidden bases of the hills."
  So might some old man speak in the aftertime
  To all the people, winning reverence.
  But now much honour and much fame were lost.'

     So spake he, clouded with his own conceit,
  And hid Excalibur the second time,
  And so strode back slow to the wounded King.

     Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily:
  'What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?'

     And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'I heard the water lapping on the crag,
  And the long ripple washing in the reeds.'

     To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath:
  'Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue,
  Unknightly, traitor-hearted!  Woe is me!
  Authority forgets a dying king,
  Laid widowed of the power in his eye
  That bowed the will.  I see thee what thou art,
  For thou, the latest-left of all my knights,
  In whom should meet the offices of all,
  Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt;
  Either from lust of gold, or like a girl
  Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes.
  Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice,
  And the third time may prosper, get thee hence:
  But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur,
  I will arise and slay thee with my hands.'

     Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran,
  And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged
  Among the bulrush beds, and clutched the sword,
  And strongly wheeled and threw it.  The great brand
  Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,
  And flashing round and round, and whirled in an arch,
  Shot like a streamer of the northern morn,
  Seen where the moving isles of winter shock
  By night, with noises of the Northern Sea.
  So flashed and fell the brand Excalibur:
  But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  And caught him by the hilt, and brandished him
  Three times, and drew him under in the mere.
  And lightly went the other to the King.

     Then spoke King Arthur, drawing thicker breath:
  'Now see I by thine eyes that this is done.
  Speak out:  what is it thou hast heard, or seen?'

     And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems
  Should blind my purpose, for I never saw,
  Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die,
  Not though I live three lives of mortal men,
  So great a miracle as yonder hilt.
  Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him;
  But when I looked again, behold an arm,
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  That caught him by the hilt, and brandished him
  Three times, and drew him under in the mere.'

     And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard:
  'My end draws nigh; 'tis time that I were gone.
  Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight,
  And bear me to the margin; yet I fear
  My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die.'

     So saying, from the pavement he half rose,
  Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm,
  And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes
  As in a picture.  Him Sir Bedivere
  Remorsefully regarded through his tears,
  And would have spoken, but he found not words;
  Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee,
  O'er both his shoulders drew the languid hands,
  And rising bore him through the place of tombs.

     But, as he walked, King Arthur panted hard,
  Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed
  When all the house is mute.  So sighed the King,
  Muttering and murmuring at his ear, 'Quick, quick!
  I fear it is too late, and I shall die.'

     But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge,
  Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walked,
  Larger than human on the frozen hills.
  He heard the deep behind him, and a cry
  Before.  His own thought drove him like a goad.
  Dry clashed his harness in the icy caves
  And barren chasms, and all to left and right
  The bare black cliff clanged round him, as he based
  His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
  Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels--
  And on a sudden, lo! the level lake,
  And the long glories of the winter moon.

     Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge,
  Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,
  Beneath them; and descending they were ware
  That all the decks were dense with stately forms,
  Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream--by these
  Three Queens with crowns of gold:  and from them rose
  A cry that shivered to the tingling stars,
  And, as it were one voice, an agony
  Of lamentation, like a wind that shrills
  All night in a waste land, where no one comes,
  Or hath come, since the making of the world.

     Then murmured Arthur, 'Place me in the barge.'
  So to the barge they came.  There those three Queens
  Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept.
  But she, that rose the tallest of them all
  And fairest, laid his head upon her lap,
  And loosed the shattered casque, and chafed his hands,
  And called him by his name, complaining loud,
  And dropping bitter tears against a brow
  Striped with dark blood:  for all his face was white
  And colourless, and like the withered moon
  Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east;
  And all his greaves and cuisses dashed with drops
  Of onset; and the light and lustrous curls--
  That made his forehead like a rising sun
  High from the dais-throne--were parched with dust;
  Or, clotted into points and hanging loose,
  Mixed with the knightly growth that fringed his lips.
  So like a shattered column lay the King;
  Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest,
  From spur to plume a star of tournament,
  Shot through the lists at Camelot, and charged
  Before the eyes of ladies and of kings.

     Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go?
  Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes?
  For now I see the true old times are dead,
  When every morning brought a noble chance,
  And every chance brought out a noble knight.
  Such times have been not since the light that led
  The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh.
  But now the whole Round Table is dissolved
  Which was an image of the mighty world,
  And I, the last, go forth companionless,
  And the days darken round me, and the years,
  Among new men, strange faces, other minds.'

     And slowly answered Arthur from the barge:
  'The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
  And God fulfils himself in many ways,
  Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.
  Comfort thyself:  what comfort is in me?
  I have lived my life, and that which I have done
  May He within himself make pure! but thou,
  If thou shouldst never see my face again,
  Pray for my soul.  More things are wrought by prayer
  Than this world dreams of.  Wherefore, let thy voice
  Rise like a fountain for me night and day.
  For what are men better than sheep or goats
  That nourish a blind life within the brain,
  If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
  Both for themselves and those who call them friend?
  For so the whole round earth is every way
  Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.
  But now farewell.  I am going a long way
  With these thou seest--if indeed I go
  (For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)--
  To the island-valley of Avilion;
  Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
  Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
  Deep-meadowed, happy, fair with orchard lawns
  And bowery hollows crowned with summer sea,
  Where I will heal me of my grievous wound.'

     So said he, and the barge with oar and sail
  Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan
  That, fluting a wild carol ere her death,
  Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood
  With swarthy webs.  Long stood Sir Bedivere
  Revolving many memories, till the hull
  Looked one black dot against the verge of dawn,
  And on the mere the wailing died away.

     But when that moan had past for evermore,
  The stillness of the dead world's winter dawn
  Amazed him, and he groaned, 'The King is gone.'
  And therewithal came on him the weird rhyme,
  'From the great deep to the great deep he goes.'

     Whereat he slowly turned and slowly clomb
  The last hard footstep of that iron crag;
  Thence marked the black hull moving yet, and cried,
  'He passes to be King among the dead,
  And after healing of his grievous wound
  He comes again; but--if he come no more--
  O me, be yon dark Queens in yon black boat,
  Who shrieked and wailed, the three whereat we gazed
  On that high day, when, clothed with living light,
  They stood before his throne in silence, friends
  Of Arthur, who should help him at his need?'

     Then from the dawn it seemed there came, but faint
  As from beyond the limit of the world,
  Like the last echo born of a great cry,
  Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice
  Around a king returning from his wars.

     Thereat once more he moved about, and clomb
  Even to the highest he could climb, and saw,
  Straining his eyes beneath an arch of hand,
  Or thought he saw, the speck that bare the King,
  Down that long water opening on the deep
  Somewhere far off, pass on and on, and go
  From less to less and vanish into light.
  And the new sun rose bringing the new year.



  To the Queen

  O loyal to the royal in thyself,
  And loyal to thy land, as this to thee--
  Bear witness, that rememberable day,
  When, pale as yet, and fever-worn, the Prince
  Who scarce had plucked his flickering life again
  From halfway down the shadow of the grave,
  Past with thee through thy people and their love,
  And London rolled one tide of joy through all
  Her trebled millions, and loud leagues of man
  And welcome! witness, too, the silent cry,
  The prayer of many a race and creed, and clime--
  Thunderless lightnings striking under sea
  From sunset and sunrise of all thy realm,
  And that true North, whereof we lately heard
  A strain to shame us 'keep you to yourselves;
  So loyal is too costly! friends--your love
  Is but a burthen:  loose the bond, and go.'
  Is this the tone of empire? here the faith
  That made us rulers? this, indeed, her voice
  And meaning, whom the roar of Hougoumont
  Left mightiest of all peoples under heaven?
  What shock has fooled her since, that she should speak
  So feebly? wealthier--wealthier--hour by hour!
  The voice of Britain, or a sinking land,
  Some third-rate isle half-lost among her seas?
  There rang her voice, when the full city pealed
  Thee and thy Prince!  The loyal to their crown
  Are loyal to their own far sons, who love
  Our ocean-empire with her boundless homes
  For ever-broadening England, and her throne
  In our vast Orient, and one isle, one isle,
  That knows not her own greatness:  if she knows
  And dreads it we are fallen. --But thou, my Queen,
  Not for itself, but through thy living love
  For one to whom I made it o'er his grave
  Sacred, accept this old imperfect tale,
  New-old, and shadowing Sense at war with Soul,
  Ideal manhood closed in real man,
  Rather than that gray king, whose name, a ghost,
  Streams like a cloud, man-shaped, from mountain peak,
  And cleaves to cairn and cromlech still; or him
  Of Geoffrey's book, or him of Malleor's, one
  Touched by the adulterous finger of a time
  That hovered between war and wantonness,
  And crownings and dethronements:  take withal
  Thy poet's blessing, and his trust that Heaven
  Will blow the tempest in the distance back
  From thine and ours:  for some are scared, who mark,
  Or wisely or unwisely, signs of storm,
  Waverings of every vane with every wind,
  And wordy trucklings to the transient hour,
  And fierce or careless looseners of the faith,
  And Softness breeding scorn of simple life,
  Or Cowardice, the child of lust for gold,
  Or Labour, with a groan and not a voice,
  Or Art with poisonous honey stolen from France,
  And that which knows, but careful for itself,
  And that which knows not, ruling that which knows
  To its own harm:  the goal of this great world
  Lies beyond sight:  yet--if our slowly-grown
  And crowned Republic's crowning common-sense,
  That saved her many times, not fail--their fears
  Are morning shadows huger than the shapes
  That cast them, not those gloomier which forego
  The darkness of that battle in the West,
  Where all of high and holy dies away.










End of Project Gutenberg's Idylls of the King, by Alfred, Lord Tennyson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDYLLS OF THE KING ***

***** This file should be named 610.txt or 610.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/610/

Produced by Ng E-Ching.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






UMNs 

to 




^ 



TIRESIAS 



AND OTHER POEMS 



T I R E S I A S 

AND OTHER POEMS 



BY 

ALFRED 
LORD TENNYSON 

D.C.L. P.L. 



iLontoon 

MACMILLAN AND CO. 
1885 



Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh. 



TO MY GOOD FRIEND 

ROBERT BROWNING, 

WHOSE GENIUS AND GENIALITY 

WILL BEST APPRECIATE WHAT MAY BE BEST, 

AND MAKE MOST ALLOWANCE FOR WHAT MAY BE WORST, 

THIS VOLUME 

IS 

AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED. 



M 9526 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

To E. Fitzgerald i 

Tiresias 5 

The Wreck 19 

Despair 37 

The Ancient Sage 53 

The Flight 72 

Tomorrow 88 

The Spinster's Sweet- Arts . . . .101 

Balin and Balan 117 

Prologue 155 

The Charge of the Heavy Brigade at Balaclava 158 

Epilogue 164 

To Virgil 170 



vill CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

The Dead Prophet 174 

Early Spring ". 181 

Prefatory Poem to my Brother's Sonnets . 185 

* Frater Ave atque Vale ' . . . . 188 

Helen's Tower 190 

Epitaph on Lord Stratford de Redcliffe . 191 
Epitaph on General Gordon . . . .192 

Epitaph on Caxton 193 

To the Duke of Argyll 194 

Hands all round 195 

Freedom 198 

To H.R.H. Princess Beatrice .... 202 

' Old Poets foster'd under friendlier skies ' . 204 



TO E. FITZGERALD. 

Old Fitz, who from your suburb grange, 

Where once I tarried for a while, 
Glance at the wheeling Orb of change, 

And greet it with a kindly smile ; 
Whom yet I see as there you sit 

Beneath your sheltering garden-tree, 
And watch your doves about you flit, 

And plant on shoulder, hand and knee, 
Or on your head their rosy feet, 

As if they knew your diet spares 
Whatever moved in that full sheet 

Let down to Peter at his prayers ; 

B 



TO E. FITZGERALD. 



Who live on milk an4 meal and grass \ 

And once tor ten'long weeks I tried 
Your table of Pythagoras, 

And seem'd at first * a thing enskied ' 
(As Shakespeare has it) airy-light 

To float above the ways of men, 
Then fell from that half-spiritual height 

Chill'd, till I tasted flesh again 
One night when earth was winter-black, 

And all the heavens flash'd in frost; 
And on me, half-asleep, came back 

That wholesome heat the blood had lost, 
And set me climbing icy capes 

And glaciers, over which there roll'd 
To meet me long-arm'd vines with grapes 

Of Eshcol hugeness ; for the cold 
Without, and warmth within me, wrought 



TO E. FITZGERALD. 

To mould the dream ; but none can say 
That Lenten fare makes Lenten thought, 

Who reads your golden Eastern lay, 
Than which I know no version done 

In English more divinely well ; 
A planet equal to the sun 

Which cast it, that large infidel 
Your Omar j and your Omar drew 

Full-handed plaudits from our best 
In modern letters, and from two, 

Old friends outvaluing all the rest, 
Two voices heard on earth no more ; 

But we old friends are still alive, 
And I am nearing seventy-four, 

While you have touch'd at seventy-five, 
And so I send a birthday line 

Of greeting \ and my son, who dipt 



4 TO E. FITZGERALD. 

In some forgotten book of mine 

With sallow scraps of manuscript, 
And dating many a year ago, 

Has hit on this, which you will take 
My Fitz, and welcome, as I know 

Less for its own than for the sake 
Of one recalling gracious times, 

When, in our younger London days, 
You found some merit in my rhymes, 

And I more pleasure in your praise. 



TIRESIAS. 

I wish I were as in the years of old, 
While yet the blessed daylight made itself 
Ruddy thro' both the roofs of sight, and woke 
These eyes, now dull, but then so keen to seek 
The meanings ambush'd under all they saw, 
The flight of birds, the flame of sacrifice, 
What omens may foreshadow fate to man 
And woman, and the secret of the Gods. 

My son, the Gods, despite of human prayer, 
Are slower to forgive than human kings. 
The great God, Ares, burns in anger still 
Against the guiltless heirs of him from Tyre, 



6 TIRESIAS. 

Our Cadmus, out of whom thou art, who found 
Beside the springs of Dirce, smote, and still'd 
Thro' all its folds the multitudinous beast, 
The dragon, which our trembling fathers call'd 
The God's own son. 

A tale, that told to me, 
When but thine age, by age as winter-white 
As mine is now, amazed, but made me yearn 
For larger glimpses of that more than man 
Which rolls the heavens, and lifts, and lays the deep, 
Yet loves and hates with mortal hates and loves, 
And moves unseen among the ways of men. 

Then, in my wanderings all the lands that lie 
Subjected to the Heliconian ridge 
Have heard this footstep fall, altho' my wont 
Was more to scale the highest of the heights 
With some strange hope to see the nearer God. 



TIRESIAS. 7 

One naked peak — the sister of the sun 
Would climb from out the dark, and linger there 
To silver all the valleys with her shafts — 
There once, but long ago, five-fold thy term 
Of years, I lay ; the winds were dead for heat ; 
The noonday crag made the hand burn \ and sick 
For shadow — not one bush was near — I rose 
Following a torrent till its myriad falls 
Found silence in the hollows underneath. 

There in a secret olive-glade I saw 
Pallas Athene climbing from the bath 
In anger \ yet one glittering foot disturb'd 
The lucid well ; one snowy knee was prest 
Against the margin flowers ; a dreadful light 
Came from her golden hair, her golden helm 
And all her golden armour on the grass, 
And from her virgin breast, and virgin eyes 



8 TIRESIAS. 

Remaining fixt on mine, till mine grew dark 
For ever, and I heard a voice that said 
' Henceforth be blind, for thou hast seen too much, 
And speak the truth that no man may believe.' 
Son, in the hidden world of sight, that lives 
Behind this darkness, I behold her still, 
Beyond all work of those who carve the stone, 
Beyond all dreams of Godlike womanhood, 
Ineffable beauty, out of whom, at a glance, 
And as it were, perforce, upon me flash'd 
The power of prophesying — but to me 
No power — so chain'd and coupled with the curse 
Of blindness and their unbelief, who heard 
And heard not, when I spake of famine, plague, 
Shrine-shattering earthquake, fire, flood, thunder- 
bolt, 
And angers of the Gods for evil done 



TIRESIAS. 9 

And expiation lack'd — no power on Fate, 

Theirs, or mine own ! for when the crowd would roar 

For blood, for war, whose issue was their doom, 

To cast wise words among the multitude 

Was flinging fruit to lions ; nor, in hours 

Of civil outbreak, when I knew the twain 

Would each waste each, and bring on both the yoke 

Of stronger states, was mine the voice to curb 

The madness of our cities and their kings. 

Who ever turn'd upon his heel to hear 
My warning that the tyranny of one 
Was prelude to the tyranny of all ? 
My counsel that the tyranny of all 
Led backward to the tyranny of one ? 

This power hath work'd no good to aught that 
lives, 
And these blind hands were useless in their wars. 



io TIRESIAS. 

therefore that the unfulfill'd desire, 
The grief for ever born from griefs to be, 
The boundless yearning of the Prophet's heart — 
Could that stand forth, and like a statue, rear'd 
To some great citizen, win all praise from all 
Who past it, saying, * That was he ! ' 

In vain ! 
Virtue must shape itself in deed, and those 
Whom weakness or necessity have cramp'd 
Within themselves, immerging, each, his urn 
In his own well, draw solace as he may. 

Menaceus, thou hast eyes, and I can hear 
Too plainly what full tides of onset sap 
Our seven high gates, and what a weight of war 
Rides on those ringing axles ! jingle of bits, 
Shouts, arrows, tramp of the hornfooted horse 
That grind the glebe to powder ! Stony showers 



TIRES I AS. ii 

Of that ear-stunning hail of Ares crash 
Along the sounding walls. Above, below, 
Shock after shock, the song-built towers and gates 
Reel, bruised and butted with the shuddering 
War-thunder of iron rams ; and from within 
The city comes a murmur void of joy, 
Lest she be taken captive — maidens, wives, 
And mothers with their babblers of the dawn, 
And oldest age in shadow from the night, 
Falling about their shrines before their Gods, 
And wailing ' Save us.' 

And they wail to thee ! 
These eyeless eyes, that cannot see thine own, 
See this, that only in thy virtue lies 
The saving of our Thebes ; for, yesternight, 
To me, the great God Ares, whose one bliss 
Is war, and human sacrifice — himself 



12 TIRES I AS. 

Blood-red from battle, spear and helmet tipt 
With stormy light as on a mast at sea, 
Stood out before a darkness, crying ' Thebes, 
Thy Thebes shall fall and perish, for I loathe 
The seed of Cadmus — yet if one of these 

By his own hand — if one of these ' 

My son, 
No sound is breathed so potent to coerce, 
And to conciliate, as their names who dare 
For that sweet mother land which gave them birth 
Nobly to do, nobly to die. Their names, 
Graven on memorial columns, are a song 
Heard in the future \ few, but more than wall 
And rampart, their examples reach a hand 
Far thro' all years, and everywhere they meet 
And kindle generous purpose, and the strength 
To mould it into action pure as theirs. 



TIRES I AS. 13 

Fairer thy fate than mine, if life's best end 
Be to end well ! and thou refusing this, 
Unvenerable will thy memory be 
While men shall move the lips : but if thou dare — 
Thou, one of these, the race of Cadmus — then 
No stone is fitted in yon marble girth 
Whose echo shall not tongue thy glorious doom, 
Nor in this pavement but shall ring thy name 
To every hoof that clangs it, and the springs 
Of Dirce laving yonder battle-plain, 
Heard from the roofs by night, will murmur thee 
To thine own Thebes, while Thebes thro' thee 

shall stand 
Firm-based with all her Gods. 

The Dragon's cave 
Half hid, they tell me, now in flowing vines — 
Where once he dwelt and whence he roll'd himself 



14 TIRES I AS. 

At dead of night — thou knowest, and that smooth 

rock 
Before it, altar-fashion'd, where of late 
The woman -breasted Sphinx, with wings drawn 

back, 
Folded her lion paws, and look'd to Thebes. 
There blanch the bones of whom she slew, and these 
Mixt with her own, because the fierce beast found 
A wiser than herself, and dash'd herself 
Dead in her rage : but thou art wise enough, 
Tho' young, to love thy wiser, blunt the curse 
Of Pallas, hear, and tho' I speak the truth 
Believe I speak it, let thine own hand strike 
Thy youthful pulses into rest and quench 
The red God's anger, fearing not to plunge 
Thy torch of life in darkness, rather — thou 
Rejoicing that the sun, the moon, the stars 



TIRESIAS. 15 

Send no such light upon the ways of men 
As one great deed. 

Thither, my son, and there 
Thou, that hast never known the embrace of love, 
Offer thy maiden life. 

This useless hand ! 
I felt one warm tear fall upon it. Gone ! 
He will achieve his greatness. 

But for me, 
I would that I were gather'd to my rest, 
And mingled with the famous kings of old, 
On whom about their ocean-islands flash 
The faces of the Gods — the wise man's word, 
Here trampled by the populace underfoot, 
There crown'd with worship — and these eyes will find 
The men I knew, and watch the chariot whirl 
About the goal again, and hunters race 



1 6 TIRES I AS. 

The shadowy lion, and the warrior-kings, 
In height and prowess more than human, strive 
Again for glory, while the golden lyre 
Is ever sounding in heroic ears 
Heroic hymns, and every way the vales 
Wind, clouded with the grateful incense-fume 
Of those who mix all odour to the Gods 
On one far height in one far-shining fire. 



' One height and one far-shining fire ' 
And while I fancied that my friend 

For this brief idyll would require 
A less diffuse and opulent end, 

And would defend his judgment well, 
If I should deem it over nice — 

The tolling of his funeral bell 



TIRES IAS. 17 

Broke on my Pagan Paradise, 
And mixt the dream of classic times, 

And all the phantoms of the dream, 
With present grief, and made the rhymes, 

That miss'd his living welcome, seem 
Like would-be guests an hour too late, 

Who down the highway moving on 
With easy laughter find the gate 

Is bolted, and the master gone. 
Gone into darkness, that full light 

Of friendship ! past, in sleep, away 
By night, into the deeper night ! 

The deeper night ? A clearer day 
Than our poor twilight dawn on earth — 

If night, what barren toil to be ! 
What life, so maim'd by night, were worth 

Our living out ? Not mine to me 
c 



1 8 TIRES I AS. 

Remembering all the golden hours 

Now silent, and so many dead, 
And him the last ; and laying flowers, 

This wreath, above his honour'd head, 
And praying that, when I from hence 

Shall fade with him into the unknown, 
My close of earth's experience 

May prove as peaceful as his own. 



THE WRECK. 

i. 
Hide me, Mother ! my Fathers belong'd to the 

church of old, 
I am driven by storm and sin and death to the 

ancient fold, 
I cling to the Catholic Cross once more, to the 

Faith that saves, 
My brain is full of the crash of wrecks, and the 

roar of waves, 
My life itself is a wreck, I have sullied a noble 

name, 
I am flung from the rushing tide of the world as a 

waif of shame, 



20 THE WRECK. 

I am roused by the wail of a child, and awake to a 

livid light. 
And a ghastlier face than ever has haunted a grave 

by night, 
I would hide from the storm without, I would flee 

from the storm within, 
I would make my life one prayer for a soul that 

died in his sin, 
I was the tempter, Mother, and mine was the 

deeper fall ; 
I will sit at your feet, I will hide my face, I will 

tell you all. 

ii. 

He that they gave me to, Mother, a heedless and 

innocent bride — 
I never have wrong'd his heart, I have only wounded 

his pride — 



THE WRECK. 21 

Spain in his blood and the Jew dark-visaged, 

stately and tall — 
A princelier-looking man never stept thro' a Prince's 

hall. 
And who, when his anger was kindled, would ven- 
ture to give him the nay ? 
And a man men fear is a man to be loved by the 

women they say. 
And I could have loved him too, if the blossom 

can doat on the blight, 
Or the young green leaf rejoice in the frost that 

sears it at night ; 
He would open the books that I prized, and toss 

them away with a yawn, 
Repell'd by the magnet of Art to the which my 

nature was drawn, 
The word of the Poet by whom the deeps of the 

world are stirr'd, 



22 THE WRECK. 

The music that robes it in language beneath and 

beyond the word ! 
My Shelley would fall from my hands when he cast 

a contemptuous glance 
From where he was poring over his Tables of Trade 

and Finance ; 
My hands, when I heard him coming would drop 

from the chords or the keys, 
But ever I fail'd to please him, however I strove 

to please — 
All day long far-off in the cloud of the city, and 

there 
Lost, head and heart, in the chances of dividend, 

consol, and share — 
And at home if I sought for a kindly caress, being 

woman and weak, 
His formal kiss fell chill as a flake of snow on the 

cheek : 



THE WRECK. 23 

And so, when I bore him a girl, when I held it 

aloft in my joy, 
He look'd at it coldly, and said to me ' Pity it isn't 

a boy.' 
The one thing given me, to love and to live for, 

glanced at in scorn ! 
The child that I felt I could die for — as if she were 

basely born ! 
I had lived a wild-flower life, I was planted now in 

a tomb ; 
The daisy will shut to the shadow, I closed my 

heart to the gloom ; 
I threw myself all abroad — I would play my part 

with the young 
By the low foot-lights of the world — and I caught 

the wreath that was flung. 



24 THE WRECK. 

III. 

Mother, I have not — however their tongues may 

have babbled of me — 
Sinn'd thro' an animal vileness, for all but a dwarf 

was he, 
And all but a hunchback too ; and I look'd at him, 

first, askance 
With pity — not he the knight for an amorous girl's 

romance ! 
Tho' wealthy enough to have bask'd in the light of 

a dowerless smile, 
Having lands at home and abroad in a rich West- 
Indian isle ; 
But I came on him once at a ball, the heart of a 

listening crowd — 
Why, what a brow was there ! he was seated — 

speaking aloud 



THE WRECK. 25 

To women, the flower of the time, and men at the 

helm of state — 
Flowing with easy greatness and touching on all 

things great, 
Science, philosophy, song — till I felt myself ready 

to weep 
For I knew not what, when I heard that voice, — as 

mellow and deep 
As a psalm by a mighty master and peal'd from an 

organ, — roll 
Rising and falling — for, Mother, the voice was the 

voice of the soul ; 
And the sun of the soul made day in the dark of 

his wonderful eyes. 
Here was the hand that would help me, would heal 

me — the heart that was wise ! 
And he, poor man, when he learnt that I hated the 

ring I wore, 



26 THE WRECK. 

He helpt me with death, and he heal'd me with 
sorrow for evermore. 

IV. 

For I broke the bond. That day my nurse had 

brought me the child. 
The small sweet face was flush'd, but it coo'd to 

the Mother and smiled. 
' Anything ailing/ I ask'd her, 'with baby?' She 

shook her head, 
And the Motherless Mother kiss'd it, and turn'd in 

her haste and fled. 



Low warm winds had gently breathed us away from 

the land — 
Ten long sweet summer days upon deck, sitting 

hand in hand — 



THE WRECK. 27 

When he clothed a naked mind with the wisdom 
and wealth of his own, 

And I bow'd myself down as a slave to his intel- 
lectual throne, 

When he coin'd into English gold some treasure of 
classical song, 

When he flouted a statesman's error, or flamed at 
a public wrong, 

When he rose as it were on the wings of an eagle 
beyond me, and past 

Over the range and the change of the world from 
the first to the last, 

When he spoke of his tropical home in the canes 
by the purple tide, 

And the high star-crowns of his palms on the deep- 
wooded mountain-side, 

And cliffs all robed in lianas that dropt to the brink 
of his bay, 



28 THE WRECK. 

And trees like the towers of a minster, the sons of 

a winterless day. 
' Paradise there ! ' so he said, but I seem'd in Para- 
dise then 
With the first great love I had felt for the first and 

greatest of men, 
Ten long days of summer and sin — if it must be 

so — 
But days of a larger light than I ever again shall 

know — 
Days that will glimmer, I fear, thro' life to my latest 

breath \ 
1 No frost there,' so he said, \ as in truest Love no 

Death.' 

VI. 

Mother, one morning a bird with a warble plain- 
tively sweet 



THE WRECK. 29 

Perch'd on the shrouds, and then fell fluttering 

down at my feet ; 
I took it, he made it a cage, we fondled it, Stephen 

and I, 
But it died, and I thought of the child for a 

moment, I scarce know why. 

VII. 

But if sin be sin, not inherited fate, as many will 

say, 
My sin to my desolate little one found me at sea 

on a day, 
When her orphan wail came borne in the shriek of 

a growing wind, 
And a voice rang out in the thunders of Ocean and 

Heaven ' Thou hast sinn'd.' 
And down in the cabin were we, for the towering 

crest of the tides 



30 THE WRECK. 

Plunged on the vessel and swept in a cataract off 

from her sides, 
And ever the great storm grew with a howl and a 

hoot of the blast 
In the rigging, voices of hell — then came the crash 

of the mast. 
' The wages of sin is death/ and then I began to 

weep, 

* I am the Jonah, the crew should cast me into the 

deep, 
For ah God, what a heart was mine to forsake her 

even for you.' 
c Never the heart among women,' he said, c more 

tender and true.' 
' The heart ! not a mother's heart, when I left my 

darling alone.' 

* Comfort yourself, for the heart of the father will 

care for his own.' 



THE WRECK. 31 

1 The heart of the father will spurn her,' I cried, ' for 

the sin of the wife, 
The cloud of the mother's shame will enfold her 

and darken her life.' 
Then his pale face twitch'd; 'O Stephen, I love 

you, I love you, and yet '— - 
As I lean'd away from his arms — ' would God, we 

had never met ! ' 
And he spoke not — only the storm; till after a 

little, I yearn'd 
For his voice again, and he call'd to me * Kiss me ! ' 

and there — as I turn'd — 
* The heart, the heart !' I kiss'd him, I clung to the 

sinking form, 
And the storm went roaring above us, and he — 

was out of the storm. 



32 THE WRECK. 

VIII. 

And then, then, Mother, the ship stagger'd under 

a thunderous shock, 
That shook us asunder, as if she had struck and 

crash'd on a rock ; 
For a huge sea smote every soul from the decks of 

The Falcon but one ; 
All of them, all but the man that was lash'd to the 

helm had gone ; 
And I fell — and the storm and the days went by, 

but I knew no more — 
Lost myself — lay like the dead by the dead on the 

cabin floor, 
Dead to the death beside me, and lost to the loss 

that was mine, 
With a dim dream, now and then, of a hand giving 

bread and wine, 



THE WRECK. 33 

Till I woke from the trance, and the ship stood 

still, and the skies were blue, 
But the face I had known, O Mother, was not the 

face that I knew. 

IX. 

The strange misfeaturing mask that I saw so amazed 

me, that I 
Stumbled on deck, half mad. I would fling myself 

over and die ! 
But one — he was waving a flag — the one man left 

on the wreck — 
1 Woman ' — he graspt at my arm — ' stay there ' — I 

crouch'd on the deck — 
' We are sinking, and yet there's hope : look yonder,' 

he cried, ' a sail ' 
In a tone so rough that I broke into passionate 

tears, and the wail 



34 THE WRECK. 

Of a beaten babe, till I saw that a boat was nearing 

us — then 

All on a sudden I thought, I shall look on the 

child again. 

x. 

They lower'd me down the side, and there in the 

boat I lay 
With sad eyes fixt on the lost sea -home, as we 

glided away, 
And I sigh'd, as the low dark hull dipt under the 

smiling main, 
1 Had I stay'd with hint, I had now — with him — 

been out of my pain.' 

XI. 

They took us aboard : the crew were gentle, the 

captain kind ; 
But / was the lonely slave of an often-wandering 

mind; 



THE WRECK. 35 

For whenever a rougher gust might tumble a 

stormier wave, 
'0 Stephen/ I moan'd, 'I am coming to thee in 

thine Ocean-grave.' 
And again, when a balmier breeze curl'd over a 

peacefuller sea, 
I found myself moaning again 'O child, I am 

coming to thee/ 

XII. 

The broad white brow of the Isle — that bay with 

the colour'd sand — 
Rich was the rose of sunset there, as we drew to 

the land ; 
All so quiet the ripple would hardly blanch into 

spray 
At the feet of the cliff; and I pray'd — 'my child' 

— for I still could pray — 



36 THE WRECK. 

1 May her life be as blissfully calm, be never 

gloom'd by the curse 
Of a sin, not hers V 

Was it well with the child ? 

I wrote to the nurse 
Who had borne my flower on her hireling heart ; 

and an answer came 
Not from the nurse — nor yet to the wife — to her 

maiden name ! 
I shook as I open'd the letter — I knew that hand 

too well — 
And from it a scrap, dipt out of the ' deaths ' in a 

paper, fell. 
' Ten long sweet summer days ' of fever, and want 

of care ! 
And gone — that day of the storm — O Mother, she 

came to me there. 



DESPAIR. 

A man and his wife having lost faith in a God, and hope 
of a life to come, and being utterly miserable in this, resolve 
to end themselves by drowning. The woman is drowned, 
but the man rescued by a minister of the sect he had 
abandoned. 

I. 

Is it you, that preach'd in the chapel there looking 

over the sand ? 
Follow'd us too that night, and dogg'd us, and drew 

me to land ? 

ii. 
What did I feel that night? You are curious. 

How should I tell ? 



38 DESPAIR. 

Does it matter so much what I felt ? You rescued 

me — yet — was it well 
That you came unwish'd for, uncall'd, between me 

and the deep and my doom, 
Three days since, three more dark days of the 

Godless gloom 
Of a life without sun, without health, without hope, 

without any delight 
In anything here upon earth? but ah God, that 

night, that night 
When the rolling eyes of the light-house there on 

the fatal neck 
Of land running out into rock — they had saved 

many hundreds from wreck — 
Glared on our way toward death, I remember I 

thought, as we past, 
Does it matter how many they saved ? we are all 

of us wreck'd at last — 



DESPAIR. 39 

1 Do you fear,' and there came thro' the roar of the 

breaker a whisper, a breath, 
* Fear ? am I not with you ? I am frighted at life 

not death.' 

in. 
And the suns of the limitless Universe sparkled 

and shone in the sky, 
Flashing with fires as of God, but we knew that 

their light was a lie — 
Bright as with deathless hope — but, however they 

sparkled and shone, 
The dark little worlds running round them were 

worlds of woe like our own — 
No soul in the heaven above, no soul on the earth 

below, 
A fiery scroll written over with lamentation and 

woe. 



40 DESPAIR. 

IV. 
See, we were nursed in the drear night-fold of your 

fatalist creed, 
And we turn'd to the growing dawn, we had hoped 

for a dawn indeed, 
When the light of a Sun that was coming would 

scatter the ghosts of the Past, 
And the cramping creeds that had madden'd the 

peoples would vanish at last, 
And we broke away from the Christ, our human 

brother and friend, 
For He spoke, or it seem'd that He spoke, of a 

Hell without help, without end. 

v. 
Hoped for a dawn and it came, but the promise 
had faded away ; 



DESPAIR. 41 

We had past from a cheerless night to the glare of 

a drearier day ; 
He is only a cloud and a smoke who was once a 

pillar of fire, 
The guess of a worm in the dust and the shadow 

of its desire — 
Of a worm as it writhes in a world of the weak 

trodden down by the strong, 
Of a dying worm in a world, all massacre, murder, 

and wrong. 

VI. 

O we poor orphans of nothing — alone on that lonely 

shore — 
Born of the brainless Nature who knew not that 

which she bore ! 
Trusting no longer that earthly flower would be 

heavenly fruit — 



42 DESPAIR. 

Come from the brute, poor souls — no souls — and 
to die with the brute 

VII. 

Nay, but I am not claiming your pity : I know you 

of old- 
Small pity for those that have ranged from the 

narrow warmth of your fold, 
Where you bawl'd the dark side of your faith and a 

God of eternal rage, 
Till you flung us back on ourselves, and the human 

heart, and the Age. 

VIII. 

But pity — the Pagan held it a vice — was in her and 

in me, 
Helpless, taking the place of the pitying God that 

should be ! 



DESPAIR. 43 

Pity for all that aches in the grasp of an idiot 

power, 
And pity for our own selves on an earth that bore 

not a flower ; 
Pity for all that suffers on land or in air or the deep, 
And pity for our own selves till we long'd for eternal 

sleep. 

IX. 

' Lightly step over the sands ! the waters — you hear 

them call ! 
Life with its anguish, and horrors, and errors — away 

with it all!' 
And she laid her hand in my own — she was always 

loyal and sweet — 
Till the points of the foam in the dusk came playing 

about our feet. 



44 DESPAIR. 

There was a strong sea-current would sweep us out 

to the main. 
'Ah God' tho' I felt as I spoke I was taking the 

name in vain — 
1 Ah God ' and we turn'd to each other, we kiss'd, 

we embraced, she and I, 
Knowing the Love we were used to believe ever- 
lasting would die : 
We had read their know-nothing books and we lean'd 

to the darker side — 
Ah God, should we find Him, perhaps, perhaps, if 

we died, if we died ; 
We never had found Him on earth, this earth is a 

fatherless Hell — 
1 Dear Love, for ever and ever, for ever and ever 

farewell/ 
Never a cry so desolate, not since the world began, 



DESPAIR. 45 

Never a kiss so sad, no, not since the coming of 
man ! 

x. 

But the blind wave cast me ashore, and you saved 

me, a valueless life. 
Not a grain of gratitude mine ! You have parted 

the man from the wife. 
I am left alone on the land, she is all alone in the 

sea; 
If a curse meant ought, I would curse you for not 

having let me be. 

XI. 

Visions of youth — for my brain was drunk with the 

water, it seems ; 
I had past into perfect quiet at length out of 

pleasant dreams, 



46 DESPAIR. 

And the transient trouble of drowning — what was 

it when match'd with the pains 
Of the hellish heat of a wretched life rushing back 

thro' the veins ? 

XII. 

Why should I live? one son had forged on his 

father and fled, 
And if I believed in a God, I would thank him, 

the other is dead, 
And there was a baby-girl, that had never look'd 

on the light : 
Happiest she of us all, for she past from the night 

to the night. 

XIII. 

But the crime, if a crime, of her eldest-born, her 
glory, her boast, 



DESPAIR. 47 

Struck hard at the tender heart of the mother, and 

broke it almost ; 
Tho', glory and shame dying out for ever in endless 

time, 
Does it matter so much whether crown'd for a virtue, 

or hang'd for a crime ? 



XIV. 

And ruin'd by him, by him, I stood there, naked, 

amazed 
In a world of arrogant opulence, fear'd myself 

turning crazed, 
And I would not be mock'd in a madhouse ! and 

she, the delicate wife, 
With a grief that could only be cured, if cured, by 

the surgeon's knife, — 



48 DESPAIR. 

XV. 

Why should we bear with an hour of torture, a 

moment of pain, 
If every man die for ever, if all his griefs are in vain, 
And the homeless planet at length will be wheel'd 

thro' the silence of space, 
Motherless evermore of an ever-vanishing race, 
When the worm shall have writhed its last, and its 

last brother-worm will have fled 
From the dead fossil skull that is left in the rocks 

of an earth that is dead ? 



Have I crazed myself over their horrible infidel 

writings ? O yes, 
For these are the new dark ages, you see, of the 

popular press, 



DESPAIR. 49 

When the bat comes out of his cave, and the owls 

are whooping at noon, 
And Doubt is the lord of this dunghill and crows 

to the sun and the moon, 
Till the Sun and the Moon of our science are both 

of them turn'd into blood, 
And Hope will have broken her heart, running 

after a shadow of good ; 
For their knowing and know-nothing books are 

scatter'd from hand to hand — 
We have knelt in your know-all chapel too looking 

over the sand. 

XVII. 

What ! I should call on that Infinite Love that has 

served us so well ? 
Infinite cruelty rather that made everlasting Hell, 



5o DESPAIR. 

Made us, foreknew us, foredoom'd us, and does 

what he will with his own ; 
Better our dead brute mother who never has heard 



us groan ! 



XVIII. 

Hell ? if the souls of men were immortal, as men 

have been told, 
The lecher would cleave to his lusts, and the miser 

would yearn for his gold, 
And so there were Hell for ever ! but were there a 

God as you say, 
His Love would have power over Hell till it utterly 

vanish'd away. 

XIX. 

Ah yet — I have had some glimmer, at times, in 
my gloomiest woe, 



DESPAIR. 51 

Of a God behind all — after all — the great God for 

aught that I know ; 
But the God of Love and of Hell together — they 

cannot be thought, 
If there be such a God, may the Great God curse 

him and bring him to nought ! 



xx. 

Blasphemy ! whose is the fault ? is it mine ? for 

why would you save 
A madman to vex you with wretched words, who 

is best in his grave ? 
Blasphemy ! ay, why not, being damn'd beyond 

hope of grace ? 
O would I were yonder with her, and away from 

your faith and your face ! 



52 DESPAIR. 

Blasphemy ! true ! I have scared you pale with my 

scandalous talk, 
But the blasphemy to my mind lies all in the way 

that you walk. 

XXI. 

Hence ! she is gone ! can I stay ? can I breathe 
divorced from the Past ? 

You needs must have good lynx-eyes if I do not 
escape you at last. 

Our orthodox coroner doubtless will find it a felo- 
de-se, 

And the stake and the cross-road, fool, if you will, 
does it matter to me ? 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

A thousand summers ere the time of Christ 
From out his ancient city came a Seer 
Whom one that loved, and honour'd him, and yet 
Was no disciple, richly garb'd, but worn 
From wasteful living, follow'd— in his hand 
A scroll of verse — till that old man before 
A cavern whence an affluent fountain pour'd 
From darkness into daylight, turn'd and spoke. 

This wealth of waters might but seem to draw 
From yon dark cave, but, son, the source is higher, 
Yon summit half-a-league in air — and higher, 



54 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

The cloud that hides it — higher still, the heavens 
Whereby the cloud was moulded, and whereout 
The cloud descended. Force is from the heights. 
I am wearied of our city, son, and go 
To spend my one last year among the hills. 
What hast thou there ? Some deathsong for the 

Ghouls 
To make their banquet relish ? let me read. 

" How far thro' all the bloom and brake 

That nightingale is heard ! 
What power but the bird's could make 

This music in the bird ? 
How summer-bright are yonder skies, 

And earth as fair in hue ! 
And yet what sign of aught that lies 

Behind the green and blue ? 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 55 

But man to-day is fancy's fool 

As man hath ever been. 
The nameless Power, or Powers, that rule 

Were never heard or seen." 

If thou would'st hear the Nameless, and wilt dive 
Into the Temple-cave of thine own self, 
There, brooding by the central altar, thou 
May'st haply learn the Nameless hath a voice, 
By which thou wilt abide, if thou be wise, 
As if thou knewest, tho' thou canst not know ; 
For Knowledge is the swallow on the lake 
That sees and stirs the surface-shadow there 
But never yet hath dipt into the abysm, 
The Abysm of all Abysms, beneath, within 
The blue of sky and sea, the green of earth, 
And in the million-millionth of a grain 



56 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

Which cleft and cleft again for evermore, 
And ever vanishing, never vanishes, 
To me, my son, more mystic than myself, 
Or even than the Nameless is to me. 

And when thou sendest thy free soul thro' heaven, 
Nor understandest bound nor boundlessness, 
Thou seest the Nameless of the hundred names. 

And if the Nameless should withdraw from all 
Thy frailty counts most real, all thy world 
Might vanish like thy shadow in the dark. 

" And since — from when this earth began — 

The Nameless never came 
Among us, never spake with man, 

And never named the Name " — 

Thou canst not prove the Nameless, O my son, 
Nor canst thou prove the world thou movest in, 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 57 

Thou canst not prove that thou art body alone, 
Nor canst thou prove that thou art spirit alone 
Nor canst thou prove that thou art both in one : 
Thou canst not prove thou art immortal, no 
Nor yet that thou art mortal — nay my son, 
Thou canst not prove that I, who speak with 

thee, 
Am not thyself in converse with thyself, 
For nothing worthy proving can be proven, 
Nor yet disproven : wherefore thou be wise, 
Cleave ever to the sunnier side of doubt, 
And cling to Faith beyond the forms of Faith ! 
She reels not in the storm of warring words, 
She brightens at the clash of 'Yes' and 'No,' 
She sees the Best that glimmers thro' the Worst, 
She feels the Sun is hid but for a night, 
She spies the summer thro' the winter bud, 



58 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

She tastes the fruit before the blossom falls, 

She hears the lark within the songless egg, 

She finds the fountain where they wail'd * Mirage ' ! 

" What Power ? aught akin to Mind, 

The mind in me and you ? 
Or power as of the Gods gone blind 

Who see not what they do ?" 

But some in yonder city hold, my son, 

That none but Gods could build this house of ours, 

So beautiful, vast, various, so beyond 

All work of man, yet, like all work of man, 

A beauty with defect till That which knows, 

And is not known, but felt thro' what we feel 
Within ourselves is highest, shall descend 
On this half-deed, and shape it at the last 
According to the Highest in the Highest. 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 59 

" What Power but the Years that make 

And break the vase of clay, 
And stir the sleeping earth, and wake 

The bloom that fades away ? 
What rulers but the Days and Hours 

That cancel weal with woe, 
And wind the front of youth with flowers, 

And cap our age with snow ? " 

The days and hours are ever glancing by, 
And seem to flicker past thro' sun and shade, 
Or short, or long, as Pleasure leads, or Pain ; 
But with the Nameless is nor Day nor Hour ; 
Tho 5 we, thin minds, who creep from thought to 

thought 
Break into ' Thens ' and ' Whens ' the Eternal Now : 
This double seeming of the single world ! — 



60 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

My words are like the babblings in a dream 

Of nightmare, when the babblings break the dream. 

But thou be wise in this dream-world of ours, 

Nor take thy dial for thy deity, 

But make the passing shadow serve thy will. 

" The years that made the stripling wise 

Undo their work again, 
And leave him, blind of heart and eyes, 

The last and least of men ; 
Who clings to earth, and once would dare 

Hell-heat or Arctic cold, 
And now one breath of cooler air 

Would loose him from his hold ; 
His winter chills him to the root, 

He withers marrow and mind ; 
The kernel of the shrivell'd fruit 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 61 

Is jutting thro' the rind ; 
The tiger spasms tear his chest, 

The palsy wags his head ; 
The wife, the sons, who love him best 

Would fain that he were dead ; 
The griefs by which he once was wrung 

Were never worth the while " — 

Who knows ? or whether this earth-narrow life 
Be yet but yolk, and forming in the shell ? 

" The shaft of scorn that once had stung 
But wakes a dotard smile." 

The placid gleam of sunset after storm ! 

11 The statesman's brain that sway'd the past 

Is feebler than his knees ; 
The passive sailor wrecks at last 



62 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

In ever-silent seas \ 
The warrior hath forgot his arms, 

The Learned all his lore ; 
The changing market frets or charms 

The merchant's hope no more ; 
The prophet's beacon burn'd in vain, 

And now is lost in cloud ; 
The plowman passes, bent with pain, 

To mix with what he plow'd ; 
The poet whom his Age would quote 

As heir of endless fame — 
He knows not ev'n the book he wrote, 

Not even his own name. 
For man has overlived his day, 

And, darkening in the light, 
Scarce feels the senses break away 

To mix with ancient Night." 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 63 

The shell must break before the bird can fly. 

" The years that when my Youth began 

Had set the lily and rose 
By all my ways where'er they ran, 

Have ended mortal foes ; 
My rose of love for ever gone, 

My lily of truth and trust — 
They made her lily and rose in one, 

And changed her into dust. 
O rosetree planted in my grief, 

And growing, on her tomb, 
Her dust is greening in your leaf, 

Her blood is in your bloom. 
O slender lily waving there, 

And laughing back the light, 
In vain you tell me * Earth is fair ' 

When all is dark as night." 



64 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

My son, the world is dark with griefs and graves, 
So dark that men cry out against the Heavens. 
Who knows but that the darkness is in man ? 
The doors of Night may be the gates of Light ; 
For wert thou born or blind or deaf, and then 
Suddenly heal'd, how would'st thou glory in all 
The splendours and the voices of the world ! 
And we, the poor earth's dying race, and yet 
No phantoms, watching from a phantom shore 
Await the last and largest sense to make 
The phantom walls of this illusion fade, 
And show us that the world is wholly fair. 

" But vain the tears for darken'd years 

As laughter over wine, 
And vain the laughter as the tears, 

O brother, mine or thine, 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 65 

For all that laugh, and all that weep, 

And all that breathe are one 
Slight ripple on the boundless deep 

That moves, and all is gone." 

But that one ripple on the boundless deep 
Feels that the deep is boundless, and itself 
For ever changing form, but evermore 
One with the boundless motion of the deep. 

" Yet wine and laughter friends ! and set 

The lamps alight, and call 
For golden music, and forget 

The darkness of the pall." 

If utter darkness closed the day, my son 



But earth's dark forehead flings athwart the heavens 
Her shadow crown'd with stars — and yonder — out 

F 



66 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

To northward — some that never set, but pass 
From sight and night to lose themselves in day. 
I hate the black negation of the bier, 
And wish the dead, as happier than ourselves 
And higher, having climb'd one step beyond 
Our village miseries, might be borne in white 
To burial or to burning, hymn'd from hence 
With songs in praise of death, and crown'd with 
flowers ! 

" O worms and maggots of to-day 
Without their hope of wings ! " 

But louder than thy rhyme the silent Word 
Of that world-prophet in the heart of man. 

" Tho' some have gleams or so they say 
Of more than mortal things." 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 67 

To-day ? but what of yesterday ? for oft 

On me, when boy, there came what then I call'd, 

Who knew no books and no philosophies, 

In my boy-phrase 'The Passion of the Past.' 

The first gray streak of earliest summer-dawn, 

The last long stripe of waning crimson gloom, 

As if the late and early were but one — 

A height, a broken grange, a grove, a flower 

Had murmurs ' Lost and gone and lost and gone ! ' 

A breath, a whisper — some divine farewell — 

Desolate sweetness — far and far away — 

What had he loved, what had he lost, the boy ? 

I know not and I speak of what has been. 

And more, my son ! for more than once when I 
Sat all alone, revolving in myself 
The word that is the symbol of myself, 
The mortal limit of the Self was loosed, 



68 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

And past into the Nameless, as a cloud 

Melts into Heaven. I touch'd my limbs, the limbs 

Were strange not mine — and yet no shade of doubt, 

But utter clearness, and thro' loss of Self 

The gain of such large life as match'd with ours 

Were Sun to spark — unshadowable in words, 

Themselves but shadows of a shadow-world. 

" And idle gleams will come and go, 
But still the clouds remain ; " 

The clouds themselves are children of the Sun. 

"And Night and Shadow rule below 
When only Day should reign." 

And Day and Night are children of the Sun, 
And idle gleams to thee are light to me. 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 69 

Some say, the Light was father of the Night, 
And some, the Night was father of the Light. 
No night no day ! — I touch thy world again — 
No ill no good ! such counter-terms, my son, 
Are border-races, holding, each its own 
By endless war : but night enough is there 
In yon dark city : get thee back : and since 
The key to that weird casket, which for thee 
But holds a skull, is neither thine nor mine, 
But in the hand of what is more than man, 
Or in man's hand when man is more than man, 
Let be thy wail and help thy fellow men, 
And make thy gold thy vassal not thy king, 
And fling free alms into the beggar's bowl, 
And send the day into the darken'd heart j 
Nor list for guerdon in the voice of men, 
A dying echo from a falling wall ; 



70 THE ANCIENT SAGE. 

Nor care — for Hunger hath the Evil eye — 
To vex the noon with fiery gems, or fold 
Thy presence in the silk of sumptuous looms ; 
Nor roll thy viands on a luscious tongue, 
Nor drown thyself with flies in honied wine; 
Nor thou be rageful, like a handled bee, 
And lose thy life by usage of thy sting ; 
Nor harm an adder thro' the lust for harm, 
Nor make a snail's horn shrink for wantonness ; 
And more — think well ! Do - well will follow 

thought, 
And in the fatal sequence of this world 
An evil thought may soil thy children's blood ; 
But curb the beast would cast thee in the mire, 
And leave the hot swamp of voluptuousness 
A cloud between the Nameless and thyself, 
And lay thine uphill shoulder to the wheel, 



THE ANCIENT SAGE. 71 

And climb the Mount of Blessing, whence, if thou 
Look higher, then — perchance — thou mayest — be- 
yond 
A hundred ever-rising mountain lines, 
And past the range of Night and Shadow — see 
The high-heaven dawn of more than mortal day 
Strike on the Mount of Vision ! 

So, farewell. 



THE FLIGHT. 



Are you sleeping? have you forgotten? do not 

sleep, my sister dear ! 
How can you sleep ? the morning brings the day I 

hate and fear ; 
The cock has crow'd already once, he crows before 

his time ; 
Awake ! the creeping glimmer steals, the hills are 

white with rime. 

ii. 
Ah, clasp me in your arms, sister, ah, fold me to 

your breast ! 



THE FLIGHT. 73 

Ah, let me weep my fill once more, and cry myself 

to rest ! 
To rest ? to rest and wake no more were better rest 

for me, 
Than to waken every morning to that face I loathe 

to see : 



in. 

I envied your sweet slumber, all night so calm you 

lay, 
The night was calm, the morn is calm, and like 

another day ; 
But I could wish yon moaning sea would rise and 

burst the shore, 
And such a whirlwind blow these woods, as never 

blew before. 



74 THE FLIGHT. 

IV. 

For, one by one, the stars went down across the 

gleaming pane, 
And project after project rose, and all of them were 

vain; 
The blackthorn -blossom fades and falls and leaves 

the bitter sloe, 
The hope I catch at vanishes and youth is turn'd 

to woe. 



Come, speak a little comfort! all night I pray'd 

with tears, 
And yet no comfort came to me, and now the morn 

Appears, 

When he will tear me from your side, who bought 
me for his slave : 



THE FLIGHT. 75 

This father pays his debt with me, and weds me to 
my grave. 

VI. 

What father, this or mine, was he, who, on that 

summer day 
When I had fall'n from off the crag we clamber'd 

up in play, 
Found, fear'd me dead, and groan'd, and took and 

kiss'd me, and again 
He kiss'd me ; and I loved him then ; he was my 

father then. 

VII. 

No father now, the tyrant vassal of a tyrant vice ! 
The Godless Jephtha vows his child ... to one 
cast of the dice. 



76 THE FLIGHT. 

These ancient woods, this Hall at last will go — 

perhaps have gone, 
Except his own meek daughter yield her life, heart, 

soul to one — 

VIII. 

To one who knows I scorn him. O the formal 

mocking bow, 
The cruel smile, the courtly phrase that masks his 

malice now — 
But often in the sidelong eyes a gleam of all things 

ill- 
It is not Love but Hate that weds a bride against 

her will ; 

IX. 

Hate, that would pluck, from this true breast the 
locket that I wear, 



THE FLIGHT. 77 

The precious crystal into which I braided Edwin's 

hair! 
The love that keeps this heart alive beats on it 

night and day — 
One golden curl, his golden gift, before he past 

away. 



He left us weeping in the woods ; his boat was on 

the sand ; 
How slowly down the rocks he went, how loth to 

quit the land ! 
And all my life was darken'd, as I saw the white 

sail run, 
And darken, up that lane of light into the setting 

sun. 



78 THE FLIGHT. 



XI. 



How often have we watch'd the sun fade from us 

thro' the West, 
And follow Edwin to those isles, those islands of 

the Blest ! 
Is he not there? would I were there, the friend, 

the bride, the wife, 
With him, where summer never dies, with Love, 

the Sun of life ! 



XII. 

O would I were in Edwin's arms — once more — to 

feel his breath 
Upon my cheek — on Edwin's ship, with Edwin, 

ev'n in death, 



THE FLIGHT. 79 

Tho' all about the shuddering wreck the death- 
white sea should rave, 
Or if lip were laid to lip on the pillows of the wave. 

XIII. 

Shall I take him ? I kneel with him ? I swear and 

swear forsworn 
To love him most, whom most I loathe, to honour 

whom I scorn? 
The Fiend would yell, the grave would yawn, my 

mother's ghost would rise — 
To lie, to lie — in God's own house — the blackest of 

all lies ! 

xiv. 

Why — rather than that hand in mine, tho' every 
pulse would freeze, 



80 THE FLIGHT. 

I'd sooner fold an icy corpse dead of some foul 

disease : 
Wed him ? I will not wed him, let them spurn me 

from the doors, 
And I will wander till I die about the barren 

moors. 



xv. 

The dear, mad bride who stabb'd her bridegroom 

on her bridal night — 
If mad, then I am mad, but sane, if she were in 

the right. 
My father's madness makes me mad — but words 

are only words ! 
I am not mad, not yet, not quite — There ! listen 

how the birds 



THE FLIGHT. 



XVI. 



Begin to warble yonder in the budding orchard 

trees ! 
The lark has past from earth to Heaven upon the 

morning breeze ! 
How gladly, were I one of those, how early would 

I wake ! 
And yet the sorrow that I bear is sorrow for his 

sake. 

XVII. 

They love their mates, to whom they sing ; or else 

their songs, that meet 
The morning with such music, would never be so 

sweet ! 



82 THE FLIGHT. 

And tho' these fathers will not hear, the blessed 

Heavens are just, 
And Love is fire, and burns the feet would trample 

it to dust. 

XVIII. 

A door was open'd in the house — who ? who ? my 

father sleeps ! 
A stealthy foot upon the stair ! he — some one — 

this way creeps ! 
If he ? yes, he . . . lurks, listens, fears his victim 

may have fled — 
He ! where is some sharp-pointed thing ? he comes, 

and finds me dead. 

XIX. 

Not he, not yet ! and time to act — but how my 
temples burn ! 



THE FLIGHT. 83 

And idle fancies flutter me, I know not where to 

turn; 
Speak to me, sister; counsel me; this marriage 

must not be. 
You only know the love that makes the world a 

world to me ! 



xx. 

Our gentle mother, had she lived — but we were left 

alone : 
That other left us to ourselves; he cared not for 

his own ; 
So all the summer long we roam'd in these wild 

woods of ours, 
My Edwin loved to call us then 'His two wild 

woodland flowers. 7 



84 THE FLIGHT. 



XXI. 



Wild flowers blowing side by side in God's free 

light and air, 
Wild flowers of the secret woods, when Edwin 

found us there, 
Wild woods in which we roved with him, and heard 

his passionate vow, 
Wild woods in which we rove no more, if we be 

parted now ! 

XXII. 

You will not leave me thus in grief to wander forth 

forlorn ; 
We never changed a bitter word, not one since we 

were born \ 



THE FLIGHT. 85 

Our dying mother join'd our hands ; she knew this 

father well ; 
She bad us love, like souls in Heaven, and now I 

fly from Hell, 

XXIII. 

And you with me ; and we shall light upon some 

lonely shore, 
Some lodge within the waste sea-dunes, and hear 

the waters roar, 
And see the ships from out the West go dipping 

thro' the foam, 
And sunshine on that sail at last which brings our 

Edwin home. * 

XXIV. 

But look, the morning grows apace, and lights the 
old church-tower, 



86 THE FLIGHT. 

And lights the clock ! the hand points five — O me 

— it strikes the hour — 
I bide no more, I meet my fate, whatever ills betide ! 
Arise, my own true sister, come forth ! the world 

is wide. 

xxv. 
And yet my heart is ill at ease, my eyes are dim 

with dew, 
I seem to see a new-dug grave up yonder by the yew ! 
If we should never more return, but wander hand 

in hand 
With breaking hearts, without a friend, and in a 

distant land. 

XXVI. 

O sweet, they tell me that the world is hard, and 
harsh of mind, 



THE FLIGHT. 87 

But can it be so hard, so harsh, as those that should 

be kind ? 
That matters not : let come what will ; at last the 

end is sure, 
And every heart that loves with truth is equal to 

endure. 



TOMORROW. 



Her, that yer Honour was spakin' to ? Whin, yer 

Honour ? last year — 
Standin' here be the bridge, when last yer Honour 

was here ? 
An' yer Honour ye gev her the top of the mornin', 

' Tomorra ' says she. 
What did they call her, yer Honour ? They call'd 

her Molly Magee. 
An' yer Honour 's the thrue ould blood that always 

manes to be kind, 
But there's rason in all things, yer Honour, for 

Molly was out of her mind. 



TOMORROW. 89 

II. 

Shure, an' meself remimbers wan night comin' down 

be the sthrame, 
An' it seems to me now like a bit of yisther-day in 

a dhrame — 
Here where yer Honour seen her — there was but 

a slip of a moon, 
But I hard thim — Molly Magee wid her batchelor, 

Danny O'Roon — 
' You've been takin' a dhrop o' the crathur ' an' 

Danny says * Troth, an' I been 
Dhrinkin' yer health wid Shamus O'Shea at Katty's 

shebeen;* 
But I must be lavin' ye soon.' 'Ochone are ye 

goin' away?' 

'Goin' to cut the Sassenach whate' he says 'over 

the say ' — 

* Grog-shop. 



9o TOMORROW. 

' An' whin will ye meet me agin ?' an' I hard him 

* Molly asthore, 
I'll meet you agin tomorra,' says he, ' be the chapel- 
door.' 
' An' whin are ye goin' to lave me?' 'O' Monday 

mornin' ' says he ; 
'An shure thin ye'll meet me tomorra?' 'To- 

morra, tomorra, Machree ! ' 
Thin Molly's ould mother, yer Honour, that had 

no likin' for Dan, 
Call'd from her cabin an' tould her to come away 

from the man, 
An' Molly Magee kem flyin' acrass me, as light as 

a lark, 
An' Dan stood there for a minute, an' thin wint 

into the dark. 
But wirrah ! the storm that night — the tundher, an' 

rain that fell, 



TOMORROW. 91 

An' the sthrames runnin' down at the back o' the 
glin 'ud 'a dhrownded Hell. 

in. 

But airth was at pace nixt morning an' Hiven in 

its glory smiled, 
As the Holy Mother o' Glory that smiles at her 

sleepin' child — 
Ethen — she stept an the chapel -green, an' she 

turn'd herself roun' 
Wid a diamond dhrop in her eye, for Danny was 

not to be foun', 
An' many's the time that I watch'd her at mass 

lettin' down the tear, 
For the Divil a Danny was there, yer Honour, for 

forty year. 



92 TOMORROW. 

IV. 

Och, Molly Magee, wid the red o' the rose an' the 

white o' the May, 
An' yer hair as black as the night, an' yer eyes as 

bright as the day ! 
Achora, yer laste little whishper was sweet as the 

lilt of a bird ! 
Acushla, ye set me heart batin' to music wid ivery 

word ! 
An' sorra the Queen wid her sceptre in sich an 

illigant han', 
An' the fall of yer foot in the dance was as light as 

snow an the Ian', 
An' the sun kem out of a cloud whiniver ye walkt 

in the shtreet, 
An' Shamus O'Shea was yer shadda, an' laid him- 
self undher yer feet, 



TOMORROW. 93 

An' I loved ye meself wid a heart and a half, me 

darling and he 
'Ud 'a shot his own sowl dead for a kiss of ye, 

Molly Magee. 

v. 

But shure we wor betther frinds whin I crack'd his 

skull for her sake, 
An' he ped me back wid the best he could give at 

ould Donovan's wake — 
For the boys wor about her agin whin Dan didn't 

come to the fore, 
An' Shamus along wid the rest, but she put thim all 

to the door. 
An', afther, I thried her meself av the bird 'ud come 

to me call, 
But Molly, begorrah, 'ud listhen to naither at all, 

at all. 



94 TOMORROW. 

VI. 

An' her nabours an' frinds 'ud consowl an' condowl 

wid her, airly and late, 
' Your Danny,' they says, ' niver crasst over say to 

the Sassenach whate ; 
He's gone to the States, aroon, an' he's married 

another wife, 
An' ye'll niver set eyes an the face of the thraithur 

agin in life ! 
An' to dhrame of a married man, death alive, is a 

mortial'sin.' 
But Molly says 'I'd his hand-promise, an' shure 

he'll meet me agin.' 



An' afther her paarints had inter'd glory, an' both 
in wan day, 



TOMORROW. 95 

She began to spake to herself, the crathur, an 

whishper, an' say 
'Tomorra, Tomorra!' an' Father Molowny he tuk 

her in han', 
' Molly, you're manin',' he says, 'me dear, av I 

undherstan', 
That yell meet your paarints agin an' yer Danny 

O'Roon afore God 
Wid his blessed Marthyrs an' Saints;' an' she gev 

him a frindly nod, 
' Tomorra, Tomorra,' she says, an' she didn't intind 

to desave, 
But her wits wor dead, an' her hair was as white 

as the snow an a grave. 

VIII. 

Arrah now, here last month they wor diggin' the 
bog, an' they foun' 



96 TOMORROW, 

Dhrownded in black bog-wather a corp lyin' undher 
groun'. 

IX. 

Yer Honour's own agint, he says to me wanst, at 

Katty's shebeen, 
1 The Divil take all the black Ian', for a blessin' 'ud 

come wid the green ! ' 
An' where 'ud the poor man, thin, cut his bit o' 

turf for the fire ? 
But och ! bad scran to the bogs whin they swallies 

the man intire ! 
An' sorra the bog that's in Hiven wid all the light 

an' the glow, 
An' there's hate enough, shure, widout thim in the 

Divil's kitchen below. 



TOMORROW. 97 

X. 

Thim ould blind nagers in Agypt, I hard his River- 

ence say, 
Could keep their haithen kings in the flesh for the 

Jidgemint day, 
An', faix, be the piper o' Moses, they kep the cat 

an' the dog, 
But it 'ud 'a been aisier work av they lived be an 

Irish bog. 

XI. 

How-an-iver they laid this body they foun' an the 

grass 
Be the chapel-door, an 5 the people 'ud see it that 

wint into mass — 
But a frish gineration had riz, an' most of the ould 

was few, 



98 TOMORROW, 

An' I didn't know him meself, an' none of the 
parish knew. 

XII. 

But Molly kem limpin' up wid her stick, she was 

lamed iv a knee, 
Thin a slip of a gossoon call'd, ' Div ye know him, 

Molly Magee?' 
An' she stood up strait as the Queen of the world — 

she lifted her head — 
1 He said he would meet me tomorra ! ' an' dhropt 

down dead an the dead. 



Och, Molly, we thought, machree, ye would start 

back agin into life, 
Whin we laid yez, aich be aich, at yer wake like 

husban' an' wife. 



TOMORROW. 99 

Sorra the dhry eye thin but was wet for the frinds 

that was gone ! 
Sorra the silent throat but we hard it cryin' 'Ochone ! ' 
An' Shamus O'Shea that has now ten childer, 

hansome an' tall, 
Him an' his childer wor keenin' as if he had lost 

thim all. 

XIV. 

Thin his Riverence buried thim both in wan grave 

be the dead boor-tree,* 
The young man Danny O'Roon wid his ould 

woman, Molly Magee. 

xv. 

May all the flowers o' Jeroosilim blossom an 7 spring 

from the grass, 

Imbrashin' an' kissin' aich other — as ye did — over 

yer Crass ! 

* Elder-tree. 



ioo TOMORROW. 

An' the lark fly out o' the flowers wid his song to 

the Sun an' the Moon, 
An' tell thim in Hiven about Molly Magee an' her 

Danny O'Roon, 
Till Holy St. Pether gets up wid his kays an' opens 

the gate ! 
An' shure, be the Crass, that's betther nor cuttin' 

the Sassenach whate 
To be there wid the Blessed Mother, an' Saints an' 

Marthyrs galore, 
An' singin' yer ' Aves ' an' * Pathers ' for iver an' 

ivermore. 

XVI. 

An' now that I tould yer Honour whativer I hard 

an' seen, 
Yer Honour 'ill give me a thrifle to dhrink yer 

health in potheen. 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

i. 

Milk for my sweet-arts, Bess ! fur it mun be the 

time about now 
When Molly cooms in fro' the far -end close wi' 

her paails fro' the cow. 
Eh ! tha be new to the plaace — thou'rt gaapin' — 

doesn't tha see 

I calls 'em arter the fellers es once was sweet upo' 

me? 

ii. 

Naay to be sewer it be past 'er time. What 

maakes 'er sa laate ? 
Goa to the laane at the back, an' loook thruf 

Maddison's gaate ! 



102. , , THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

r ,'.••. „ n . T - 

Sweet-arts ! Molly belike may 'a lighted to-night 

upo' one. 
Sweet-arts ! thanks to the Lord that I niver not 

listen'd to noan ! 
So I sits i' my oan armchair wi' my oan kettle 

theere o' the hob, 
An' Tommy the fust, an' Tommy the second, an' 

Steevie an' Rob. 

IV. 

Rob, coom oop 'ere o' my knee. Thou sees that 

i' spite o' the men 
I 'a kep' thruf thick an' thin my two 'oonderd a- 

year to mysen ; 
Yis ! thaw tha call'd me es pretty ; es ony lass i' 

the Shere, 
An' thou be es pretty a Tabby, but Robby I seed 

thruf ya theere. 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 103 



Feyther 'ud saay I wur ugly as sin, an' I beant not 

vaain, 
But I niver wur downright hugly, thaw soom 'ud 

'a thowt ma plaain, 
An' I wasn't sa plaain i' pink ribbons, ye said I 

wur pretty i' pinks, 
An' I liked to 'ear it I did, but I beant sich a fool 

as ye thinks ; 
Ye was stroakin ma down wi' the 'air, as I be a- 

stroakin o' you, 
But whiniver I loook'd i' the glass I wur sewer that 

it couldn't be true \ 
Niver wur pretty, not I, but ye knaw'd it wur 

pleasant to 'ear, 
Thaw it warn't not me es wur pretty, but my two 

'oonderd a-year. 



104 THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

VI. 

D'ya mind the murnin' when we was a-walkin' 

togither, an' stood 
By the claay'd-oop pond, that the foalk be sa scared 

at, i' Gigglesby wood, 
Wheer the poor wench drowndid hersen, black 

Sal, es 'ed been disgraaced ? 
An' I feel'd thy arm es I stood wur a-creeapin 

about my waaist ; 
An' me es wur alius afear'd of a man's gittin' ower 

fond, 
I sidled awaay an' awaay till I plumpt foot fust i' 

the pond ; 
And, Robby, I niver 'a liked tha sa well, as I did 

that daay, 
Fur tha joompt in thysen, an' tha hoickt my feet 

wi' a flop fro' the claay. 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 105 

Ay, stick oop thy back, an' set oop thy taail, tha 

may gie ma a kiss, 
Fur I walk'd wi' tha all the way hoam an' wur niver 

sa nigh saayin' Yis. 
But wa boath was i' sich a clat we was shaamed 

to cross Gigglesby Greean, 
Fur a cat may loook at a king thou knaws but the 

cat mun be clean. 
Sa we boath on us kep out o' sight o' the winders 

o' Gigglesby Hinn — 
Naay, but the claws o' tha ! quiet ! they pricks 

clean thruf to the skin — 
An' wa boath slinkt 'oam by the brokken shed i' 

the laane at the back, 
Wheer the poodle runn'd at tha' once, an' thou 

runn'd oop o' the thack j 
An' tha squeedg'd my 'and i' the shed, fur theere 

we was forced to 'ide, 



106 THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

Fur I seed that Steevie wur coomin', and one o' 
the Tommies beside. 



VII. 

Theere now, what art'a mewin at, Steevie? for owt 

I can tell — 
Robby wur fust to be sewer, or I mowt 'a liked tha 

as well. 

VIII. 

But, Robby, I thowt o' tha all the while I wur 

chaangin' my gown, 
An' I thowt shall I chaange my staate? but, O 

Lord, upo' coomin' down — 
My bran-new carpet es fresh es a midder o' flowers 

i' Maay — 
Why 'edn't tha wiped thy shoes ? it wur clatted all 

ower wi' claay. 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 107 

An' I could 'a cried ammost, fur I seed that it 

couldn't be, 
An' Robby I gied tha a raatin that sattled thy 

coortin o' me. 
An' Molly an' me was agreed, as we was a-cleanin' 

the floor, 
That a man be a durty thing an' a trouble an' 

plague wi' indoor. 
But I rued it arter a bit, fur I stuck to tha more 

na the rest, 
But I couldn't 'a lived wi' a man an' I knaws it 

be all fur the best. 

IX. 

Naay — let ma stroak tha down till I maakes tha as 

smooth as silk, 
But if I 'ed married tha, Robby, thou'd not 'a been 

worth thy milk, 



108 THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

Thou'd niver 'a cotch'd ony mice but 'a left me the 

work to do, 
And 'a taaen to the bottle beside, so es all that I 

'ears be true ; 
But I loovs tha to maake thysen 'appy, an' soa 

purr awaay, my dear, 
Thou 'ed wellnigh purr'd ma awaay fro' my oan 

two 'oonderd a-year. 

x. 

Swearin agean, you Toms, as ye used to do twelve 

years sin' ! 
Ye niver 'eard Steevie swear 'cep' it wur at a dog 

coomin' in. 
An' boath o' ye mun be fools to be hallus a-shawin' 

your claws, 
Fur I niver cared nothink for neither — an' one o' 

ye dead ye knaws ! 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 109 

Coom giv hoaver then, weant ye? I warrant ye 

soom fine daay — 
Theere, lig down— I shall hev to gie one or tother 

awaay. 
Can't ye taake pattern by Steevie ? ye shant hev a 

drop fro' the paail. 
Steevie be right good manners bang thruf to the 

tip o' the taail. 

XL 

Robby, git down wi'tha, wilt tha ? let Steevie coom 

oop o' my knee. 
Steevie, my lad, thou 'ed very nigh been the Steevie 

fur me ! 
Robby wur fust to be sewer, 'e wur burn an' bred 

i' the 'ouse, 
But thou be es 'ansom a tabby as iver patted a 

mouse. 



no THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

XII. 

An' I beant not vaain, but I knaws I 'ed led tha a 

quieter life 
Nor her wi' the hepitaph yonder ! " A faaithful an' 

loovin' wife ! n 
An' 'cos o' thy farm by the beck, an' thy windmill 

oop o' the croft, 
Tha thowt tha would marry ma, did tha ? but that 

wur a bit ower soft, 
Thaw thou was es soaber as daay, wi' a niced red 

faace, an' es clean 
Es a shillin' fresh fro' the mint wi' a bran-new 'ead 

o' the Queean, 
An' thy farmin' es clean es thysen, fur, Steevie, tha 

kep' it sa neat 
That I niver not spied sa much as a poppy along 

wi' the wheat, 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET -ARTS. in 

An' the wool of a thistle a-flyin' an' seeadin' tha 

haated to see ; 
'Twur as bad as a battle-twig* 'ere i' my oan blue 

chaumber to me. 
Ay, roob thy whiskers agean ma, fur I could 'a taaen 

to tha well, 
But fur thy bairns, poor Steevie, a bouncin' boy an' 

a gell. 

XIII. 

An' thou was es fond o' thy bairns es I be mysen 

o' my cats, 
But I niver not wish'd fur childer, I hevn't naw 

likin' fur brats; 
Pretty anew when ya dresses 'em oop, an' they goas 

fur a walk, 

Or sits wi' their 'ands afoor 'em, an' doesn't not 

'inder the talk ! 

* Earwig. 



ii2 THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

But their bottles o' pap, an' their mucky bibs, an' 

the clats an' the clouts, 
An' their mashin' their toys to pieaces an' maakin' 

ma deaf wi' their shouts, 
An' hallus a-joompin' about ma as if they was set 

upo' springs, 
An' a haxin' ma hawkard questions, an' saayin' 

ondecent things, 
An' a-callin' ma ' hugly ' mayhap to my faace, or a 

tearin' my gown — 
Dear ! dear ! dear ! I mun part them Tommies — 

Steevie git down. 

XIV. 

Ye be wuss nor the men-tommies, you. I tell'd ya, 

na moor o' that I 
Tom, lig theere o' the cushion, an' tother Tom 'ere 

o' the mat. 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 113 



XV. 

Theere ! I ha' master'd them ! Hed I married the 

Tommies — O Lord, 
To loove an' obaay the Tommies ! I couldn't 'a 

stuck by my word. 
To be horder'd about, an' waaked, when Molly 'd 

put out the light, 
By a man coomin' in wi' a hiccup at ony hour o' 

the night ! 
An' the taable staain'd wi' 'is aale, an' the mud o' 

'is boots o' the stairs, 
An' the stink o' 'is pipe i' the 'ouse, an' the mark o' 

'is 'ead o' the chairs ! 
An' noan o' my four sweet-arts 'ud 'a let me 'a 

hed my oan waay, 
Sa I likes 'em best wi' taails when they 'evn't a 

word to saay. 



114 THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

XVI. 

An' I sits i' my oan little parlour, an' sarved by my 

oan little lass, 
W? my oan little garden outside, an' my oan bed o' 

sparrow-grass, 
An* my oan door-poorch wi 5 the woodbine an' 

jessmine a-dressin' it greean, 
An* my oan fine Jackman i' purple a roabin' the 

'ouse like a Queean. 

XVII. 

An' the little gells bobs to ma hoffens es I be abroad 

i' the laanes, 
When I goas to coomfut the poor es be down wi' 

their haaches an' their paains : 
An* a haaf-pot o' jam, or a mossel o' meat when it 

beant too dear, 



THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 115 

They maakes ma a graater Laady nor 'er i' the 

mansion theer, 
Hes 'es hallus to hax of a man how much to spare 

or to spend ; 
An' a spinster I be an' I will be, if soa please God, 

to the hend. 

XVIII. 

Mew ! mew ! — Bess wi' the milk ! what ha maade 

our Molly sa laate ? 
It should 'a been 'ere by seven, an' theere — it be 

strikin' height — 
' Cushie wur craazed fur 'er cauf ' well — I 'eard 'er 

a maakin' 'er moan, 
An' I thowt to mysen ' thank God that I hevn't naw 

cauf o' my oan.' 
Theere ! 

Set it down ! 



n6 THE SPINSTER'S SWEET-ARTS. 

Now Robby ! 
You Tommies shall waait to-night 
Till Robby an' Steevie 'es 'ed their lap — an' it 
sarves ye right 



BALIN AND BALAN.* 

Pellam the King, who held and lost with Lot 
In that first war, and had his realm restored 
But render'd tributary, fail'd of late 
To send his tribute ; wherefore Arthur call'd 
His treasurer, one of many years, and spake, 
' Go thou with him and him and bring it to us, 
Lest we should set one truer on his throne. 
Man's word is God in man.' 

His Baron said 
' We go but harken : there be two strange knights 
Who sit near Camelot at a fountain side, 
A mile beneath the forest, challenging 

* An introduction to ' Merlin and Vivien. ' 



u8 BALIN AND BALAN. 

And overthrowing every knight who comes. 
Wilt thou I undertake them as we pass, 
And send them to thee ?' 

Arthur laugh'd upon him. 
' Old friend, too old to be so young, depart, 
Delay not thou for ought, but let them sit, 
Until they find a lustier than themselves.' 

So these departed. Early, one fair dawn, 
The light-wing'd spirit of his youth return'd 
On Arthur's heart ; he arm'd himself and went, 
So coming to the fountain-side beheld 
Balin and Balan sitting statuelike, 
Brethren, to right and left the spring, that down, 
From underneath a plume of lady-fern, 
Sang, and the sand danced at the bottom of it. 
And on the right of Balin Balin's horse 
Was fast beside an alder, on the left 



BALIN AND BALAN. 1 19 

Of Balan Balan's near a poplartree. 
4 Fair Sirs,' said Arthur, 'wherefore sit ye here?' 
Balin and Balan answer'd ' For the sake 
Of glory ; we be mightier men than all 
In Arthur's court ; that also have we proved ; 
For whatsoever knight against us came 
Or I or he have easily overthrown.' 
' I too,' said Arthur, ' am of Arthur's hall, 
But rather proven in his Paynim wars 
Than famous jousts ; but see, or proven or not, 
Whether me likewise ye can overthrow.' 
And Arthur lightly smote the brethren down, 
And lightly so return'd, and no man knew. 
Then Balin rose, and Balan, and beside 
The carolling water set themselves again, 
And spake no word until the shadow turn'd ; 
When from the fringe of coppice round them burst 



120 BALIN AND BALAN. 

A spangled pursuivant, and crying ' Sirs, 
Rise, follow ! ye be sent for by the King,' 
They follow'd ; whom when Arthur seeing ask'd 
1 Tell me your names ; why sat ye by the well?' 
Balin the stillness of a minute broke 
Saying ' An unmelodious name to thee, 
Balin, " the Savage " — that addition thine — 
My brother and my better, this man here, 
Balan. I smote upon the naked skull 
A thrall of thine in open hall, my hand 
Was gauntleted, half slew him ; for I heard 
He had spoken evil of me ; thy just wrath 
Sent me a three-years' exile from thine eyes. 
I have not lived my life delightsomely : 
For I that did that violence to thy thrall, 
Had often wrought some fury on myself, 
Saving for Balan : those three kingless years 



BALIN AND BALAN. 121 

Have past — were wormwood-bitter to me. King, 
Methought that if we sat beside the well, 
And hurl'd to ground what knight soever spurr'd 
Against us, thou would'st take me gladlier back, 
And make, as ten-times worthier to be thine 
Than twenty Balins, Balan knight. I have said. 
Not so — not all. A man of thine to-day 
Abash'd us both, and brake my boast. Thy will?' 
Said Arthur ' Thou hast ever spoken truth ; 
Thy too fierce manhood would not let thee lie. 
Rise, my true knight. As children learn, be thou 
Wiser for falling ! walk with me, and move 
To music with thine Order and the King. 
Thy chair, a grief to all the brethren, stands 
Vacant, but thou retake it, mine again ! ' 

Thereafter, when Sir Balin enter'd hall, 
The Lost one Found was greeted as in Heaven 



122 BALIN AND BALAN. 

With joy that blazed itself in woodland wealth 
Of leaf, and gayest garlandage of flowers, 
Along the walls and down the board ; they sat, 
And cup clash'd cup; they drank and some one sang, 
Sweet-voiced, a song of welcome, whereupon 
Their common shout in chorus, mounting, made 
Those banners of twelve battles overhead 
Stir, as they stirr'd of old, when Arthur's host 
Proclaimed him Victor, and the day was won. 

Then Balan added to their Order lived 
A wealthier life than heretofore with these 
And Balin, till their embassage return'd. 

' Sir King ' they brought report ' we hardly found, 
So bush'd about it is with gloom, the hall 
Of him to whom ye sent us, Pellam, once 
A Christless foe of thine as ever dash'd 
Horse against horse j but seeing that thy realm 



BALIN AND BALAN. 123 

Hath prosper'd in the name of Christ, the King 
Took, as in rival heat, to holy things ; 
And finds himself descended from the Saint 
Arimathaean Joseph ; him who first 
Brought the great faith to Britain over seas ; 
He boasts his life as purer than thine own j 
Eats scarce enow to keep his pulse abeat ; 
Hath push'd aside his faithful wife, nor lets 
Or dame or damsel enter at his gates 
Lest he should be polluted. This gray King 
Show'd us a shrine wherein were wonders — yea — 
Rich arks with priceless bones of martyrdom, 
Thorns of the crown and shivers of the cross, 
And therewithal (for thus he told us) brought 
By holy Joseph hither, that same spear 
Wherewith the Roman pierced the side of Christ. 
He much amazed us ; after, when we sought 



124 BALIN AND BALAN. 

The tribute, answer'd ' I have quite foregone 
All matters of this world : Garlon, mine heir 
Of him demand it,' which this Garlon gave 
With much ado, railing at thine and thee. 

But when we left, in those deep woods we found 
A knight of thine spear-stricken from behind, 
Dead, whom we buried ; more than one of us 
Cried out on Garlon, but a woodman there 
Reported of some demon in the woods 
Was once a man, who driven by evil tongues 
From all his fellows, lived alone, and came 
To learn black magic, and to hate his kind 
With such a hate, that when he died, his soul 
Became a Fiend, which, as the man in life 
Was wounded by blind tongues he saw not whence, 
Strikes from behind. This woodman show'd the 
cave 



BALIN AND BALAN. 125 

From which he sallies, and wherein he dwelt. 
We saw the hoof-print of a horse, no more.' 

Then Arthur, ' Let who goes before me, see 
He do not fall behind me : foully slain 
And villainously ! who will hunt for me 
This demon of the woods ?' Said Balan, ' I ' ! 
So claim'd the quest and rode away, but first, 
Embracing Balin, * Good, my brother, hear ! 
Let not thy moods prevail, when I am gone 
Who used to lay them ! hold them outer fiends, 
Who leap at thee to tear thee ; shake them aside, 
Dreams ruling when wit sleeps ! yea, but to dream 
That any of these would wrong thee, wrongs thyself. 
Witness their flowery welcome. Bound are they 
To speak no evil. Truly save for fears, 
My fears for thee, so rich a fellowship 
Would make me wholly blest : thou one of them, 



126 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Be one indeed : consider them, and all 
Their bearing in their common bond of love, 
No more of hatred than in Heaven itself, 
No more of jealousy than in Paradise.' 

So Balan warn'd, and went ; Balin remain'd : 
Who — for but three brief moons had glanced away 
From being knighted till he smote the thrall, 
And faded from the presence into years 
Of exile — now would strictlier set himself 
To learn what Arthur meant by courtesy, 
Manhood, and knighthood ; wherefore hover'd 

round 
Lancelot, but when he mark'd his high sweet 

smile 
In passing, and a transitory word 
Make knight or churl or child or damsel seem 
From being smiled at happier in themselves — 



BALIN AND BALAN. 127 

Sigh'd, as a boy lame-born beneath a height, 
That glooms his valley, sighs to see the peak 
Sun-flush'd, or touch at night the northern star j 
For one from out his village lately climb'd 
And brought report of azure lands and fair, 
Far seen to left and right ; and he himself 
Hath hardly scaled with help a hundred feet 
Up from the base : so Balin marvelling oft 
How far beyond him Lancelot seem'd to move, 
Groan'd, and at times would mutter, ' These be gifts, 
Born with the blood, not learnable, divine, 
Beyond my reach. Well had I foughten — well — 
In those fierce wars, struck hard — and had I crown'd 
With my slain self the heaps of whom I slew — 
So — better ! — But this worship of the Queen, 
That honour too wherein she holds him — this, 
This was the sunshine that hath given the man 



128 BALIN AND BALAN. 

A growth, a name that branches o'er the rest, 
And strength against all odds, and what the King 
So prizes — overprizes — gentleness. 
Her likewise would I worship an I might. 
I never can be close with her, as he 
That brought her hither. Shall I pray the King 
To let me bear some token of his Queen 
Whereon to gaze, remembering her — forget 
My heats and violences ? live afresh ? 
What, if the Queen disdain'd to grant it ! nay 
Being so stately-gentle, would she make 
My darkness blackness ? and with how sweet grace 
She greeted my return ! Bold will I be — 
Some goodly cognizance of Guinevere, 
In lieu of this rough beast upon my shield, 
Langued gules, and tooth'd with grinning savagery.' 
And Arthur, when Sir Balin sought him, said 



BALIN AND BALAN. 129 

' What wilt thou bear?' Balin was bold, and ask'd 
To bear her own crown-royal upon shield, 
Whereat she smiled and turn'd her to the King, 
Who answer'd ' Thou shalt put the crown to use. 
The crown is but the shadow of the King, 
And this a shadow's shadow, let him have it, 
So this will help him of his violences ! ' 
1 No shadow ' said Sir Balin ' O my Queen, 
But light to me ! no shadow, O my King 
But golden earnest of a gentler life ! ' 

So Balin bare the crown, and all the knights 
Approved him, and the Queen, and all the world 
Made music, and he felt his being move 
In music with his Order, and the King. 

The nightingale, full-toned in middle May, 
Hath ever and anon a note so thin 
It seems another voice in other groves ; 



130 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Thus, after some quick burst of sudden wrath, 
The music in him seem'd to change, and grow 
Faint and far-off. 

And once he saw the thrall 
His passion half had gauntleted to death, 
That causer of his banishment and shame, 
Smile at him, as he deem'd, presumptuously : 
His arm half rose to strike again, but fell : 
The memory of that cognizance on shield 
Weighted it down, but in himself he moan'd : 

1 Too high this mount of Camelot for me : 
These high-set courtesies are not for me. 
Shall I not rather prove the worse for these ? 
Fierier and stormier from restraining, break 
Into some madness ev'n before the Queen?' 

Thus, as a hearth lit in a mountain home, 
And glancing on the window, when the gloom 



BALIN AND BALAN. 131 

Of twilight deepens round it, seems a flame 
That rages in the woodland far below, 
So when his moods were darken'd, court and King 
And all the kindly warmth of Arthur's hall 
Shadow'd an angry distance : yet he strove 
To learn the graces of their Table, fought 
Hard with himself, and seem'd at length in peace. 
Then chanced, one morning, that Sir Balin sat 
Close-bower'd in that garden nigh the hall. 
A walk of roses ran from door to door ; 
A walk of lilies crost it to the bower : 
And down that range of roses the great Queen 
Came with slow steps, the morning on her face; 
And all in shadow from the counter door 
Sir Lancelot as to meet her, then at once, 
As if he saw not, glanced aside, and paced 
The long white walk of lilies toward the bower. 



132 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Follow'd the Queen ; Sir Balin heard her ' Prince, 

Art thou so little loyal to thy Queen, 

As pass without good morrow to thy Queen ?' 

To whom Sir Lancelot with his eyes on earth, 

1 Fain would I still be loyal to the Queen.' 

* Yea so ' she said ' but so to pass me by — 

So loyal scarce is loyal to thyself, 

Whom all men rate the king of courtesy. 

Let be : ye stand, fair lord, as in a dream.' 

Then Lancelot with his hand among the flowers 
1 Yea — for a dream. Last night methought I saw 
That maiden Saint who stands with lily in hand 
In yonder shrine. All round her prest the dark, 
And all the light upon her silver face 
Flow'd from the spiritual lily that she held. 
Lo ! these her emblems drew mine eyes — away : 
For see, how perfect-pure ! As light a flush 



BALIN AND BALAN. 133 

As hardly tints the blossom of the quince 
Would mar their charm of stainless maidenhood. ' 

* Sweeter to me ' she said ' this garden rose 
Deep-hued and many-folded ! sweeter still 
The wild-wood hyacinth and the bloom of May. 
Prince, we have ridd'n before among the flowers 
In those fair days — not all as cool as these, 
Tho' season-earlier. Art thou sad ? or sick ? 
Our noble King will send thee his own leech — 
Sick ? or for any matter anger'd at me ? ' 

Then Lancelot lifted his large eyes ; they dwelt 
Deep-tranced on hers, and could not fall : her hue 
Changed at his gaze : so turning side by side 
They past, and Balin started from his bower. 

* Queen ? subject ? but I see not what I see. 
Damsel and lover ? hear not what I hear. 

My father hath begotten me in his wrath. 



134 BALIN AND BALAN. 

I suffer from the things before me, know, 
Learn nothing ; am not worthy to be knight \ 
A churl, a clown ! ' and in him gloom on gloom 
Deepen'd : he sharply caught his lance and shield, 
Nor stay'd to crave permission 01 the king, 
But, mad for strange adventure, dash'd away. 
He took the selfsame track as Balan, saw 
The fountain where they sat together, sigh'd 
' Was I not better there with him?' and rode 
The skyless woods, but under open blue 
Came on the hoarhead woodman at a bough 
Wearily hewing, ' Churl, thine axe ! ' he cried, 
Descended, and disjointed it at a blow : 
To whom the woodman utter'd wonderingly 
1 Lord, thou couldst lay the Devil of these woods 
If arm of flesh could lay him.' Balin cried 
' Him, or the viler devil who plays his part, 



BALIN AND BALAN. 135 

To lay that devil would lay the Devil in me.' 

1 Nay ' said the churl, l our devil is a truth, 

I saw the flash of him but yestereven. 

And some do say that our Sir Garlon too 

Hath learn'd black magic, and to ride unseen. 

Look to the cave.' But Balin answer'd him 

' Old fabler, these be fancies of the churl, 

Look to thy woodcraft,' and so leaving him, 

Now with slack rein and careless of himself, 

Now with dug spur and raving at himself, 

Now with droopt brow down the long glades he rode j 

So mark'd not on his right a cavern-chasm 

Yawn over darkness, where, nor far within 

The whole day died, but, dying, gleam'd on rocks 

Roof-pendent, sharp ; and others from the floor, 

Tusklike, arising, made that mouth of night 

Whereout the Demon issued up from Hell. 



136 BALIN AND BALAN. 

He mark'd not this, but blind and deaf to all 
Save that chain'd rage, which ever yelpt within, 
Past eastward from the falling sun. At once 
He felt the hollow-beaten mosses thud 
And tremble, and then the shadow of a spear, 
Shot from behind him, ran along the ground. 
Sideways he started from the path, and saw, 
With pointed lance as if to pierce, a shape, 
A light of armour by him flash, and pass 
And vanish in the woods ; and follow'd this, 
But all so blind in rage that unawares 
He burst his lance against a forest bough, 
Dishorsed himself, and rose again, and fled 
Far, till the castle of a King, the hall 
Of Pellam, lichen-bearded, grayly draped 
With streaming grass, appear'd, low -built but 
strong ; 



BALIN AND BALAN. 137 

The ruinous donjon as a knoll of moss, 
The battlement overtopt with ivytods, 
A home of bats, in every tower an owl. 

Then spake the men of Pellam crying * Lord, 
Why wear ye this crown-royal upon shield ? ' 
Said Balin ' For the fairest and the best 
Of ladies living gave me this to bear.' 
So stall'd his horse, and strode across the court, 
But found the greetings both of knight and King 
Faint in the low dark hall of banquet : leaves 
Laid their green faces flat against the panes, 
Sprays grated, and the canker'd boughs without 
Whined in the wood ; for all was hush'd within, 
Till when at feast Sir Garlon likewise ask'd 
1 Why wear ye that crown-royal ? ' Balin said 
1 The Queen we worship, Lancelot, I, and all, 
As fairest, best and purest, granted me 



138 BALIN AND BALAN. 

To bear it ! ' Such a sound (for Arthur's knights 
Were hated strangers in the hall) as makes 
The white swan-mother, sitting, when she hears 
A strange knee rustle thro' her secret reeds, 
Made Garlon, hissing ; then he sourly smiled. 
• Fairest I grant her : I have seen ; but best, 
Best, purest ? thou from Arthur's hall, and yet 
So simple ! hast thou eyes, or if, are these 
So far besotted that they fail to see 
This fair wife-worship cloaks a secret shame ? 
Truly, ye men of Arthur be but babes.' 

A goblet on the board by Balin, boss'd 
With holy Joseph's legend, on his right 
Stood, all of massiest bronze : one side had sea 
And ship and sail and angels blowing on it : 
And one was rough with pole and scaffoldage 
Of that low church he built at Glastonbury. 



BALIN AND BALAN. 139 

This Balin graspt, but while in act to hurl, 
Thro' memory of that token on the shield 
Relax'd his hold : ' I will be gentle ' he thought 
' And passing gentle ' caught his hand away, 
Then fiercely to Sir Garlon ' eyes have I 
That saw to-day the shadow of a spear, 
Shot from behind me, run along the ground ; 
Eyes too that long have watch'd how Lancelot 

draws 
From homage to the best and purest, might, 
Name, manhood, and a grace, but scantly thine, 
Who, sitting in thine own hall, canst endure 
To mouth so huge a foulness — to thy guest, 
Me, me of Arthur's Table. Felon talk ! 
Let be ! no more ! ' 

But not the less by night 
The scorn of Garlon, poisoning all his rest, 



140 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Stung him in dreams. At length, and dim thro' 

leaves 
Blinkt the white morn, sprays grated, and old boughs 
Whined in the wood. He rose, descended, met 
The scorner in the castle court, and fain, 
For hate and loathing, would have past him by \ 
But when Sir Garlon utter'd mocking-wise \ 
' What, wear ye still that same crown-scandalous?' 
His countenance blacken'd, and his forehead veins 
Bloated, and branch'd \ and tearing out of sheath 
The brand, Sir Balin with a fiery ' Ha ! 
So thou be shadow, here I make thee ghost/ 
Hard upon helm smote him, and the blade flew 
Splintering in six, and clinkt upon the stones. 
Then Garlon, reeling slowly backward, fell, 
And Balin by the banneret of his helm 
Dragg'd him, and struck, but from the castle a cry 



BALIN AND BALAN. 141 

Sounded across the court, and — men-at-arms, 
A score with pointed lances, making at him — 
He dash'd the pummel at the foremost face, 
Beneath a low door dipt, and made his feet 
Wings thro' a glimmering gallery, till he mark'd 
The portal of King Pellam's chapel wide 
And inward to the wall ; he stept behind ; 
Thence in a moment heard them pass like wolves 
Howling ; but while he stared about the shrine, 
In which he scarce could spy the Christ for Saints, 
Beheld before a golden altar lie 

I The longest lance his eyes had ever seen, 
Point-painted red ; and seizing thereupon 
Push'd thro' an open casement down, lean'd on it, 
Leapt in a semicircle, and lit on earth ; 
Then hand at ear, and harkening from what side 
The blindfold rummage buried in the walls 



142 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Might echo, ran the counter path, and found 

His charger, mounted on him and away. 

An arrow whizz'd to the right, one to the left, 

One overhead ; and Pellam's feeble cry 

' Stay, stay him ! he defileth heavenly things 

With earthly uses ' — made him quickly dive 

Beneath the boughs, and race thro' many a mile 

Of dense and open, till his goodly horse, 

Arising wearily at a fallen oak, 

Stumbled headlong, and cast him face to ground. 

Half-wroth he had not ended, but all glad, 
Knightlike, to find his charger yet unlamed, 
Sir Balin drew the shield from off his neck, 
Stared at the priceless cognizance, and thought 
' 1 have shamed thee so that now thou shamest me, 
Thee will I bear no more/ high on a branch 
Hung it, and turn'd aside into the woods, 



BALIN AND BALAN. 143 

And there in gloom cast himself all along, 
Moaning c My violences, my violences ! ' 

But now the wholesome music of the wood 
Was dumb'd by one from out the hall of Mark, 
A damsel-errant, warbling, as she rode 
The woodland alleys, Vivien, with her Squire. 

* The fire of Heaven has kill'd the barren cold, 
And kindled all the plain and all the wold. 
The new leaf ever pushes off the old. 
The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell. 

Old priest, who mumble worship in your quire — 
Old monk and nun, ye scorn the world's desire, 
Yet in your frosty cells ye feel the fire ! 
The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell. 

The fire of Heaven is on the dusty ways. 
The wayside blossoms open to the blaze. 
The whole wood-world is one full peal of praise 



144 BALIN AND BALAN. 

The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell. 

The fire of Heaven is lord of all things good, 
And starve not thou this fire within thy blood, 
But follow Vivien thro' the fiery flood ! 
The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell ! ' 

Then turning to her Squire ' This fire of Heaven, 
This old sun-worship, boy, will rise again, 
And beat the cross to earth, and break the King 
And all his Table.' 

Then they reach'd a glade, 
Where under one long lane of cloudless air 
Before another wood, the royal crown 
Sparkled, and swaying upon a restless elm 
Drew the vague glance of Vivien, and her Squire ; 
Amazed were these; 'Lo there' she cried — 'a 

crown — 
Borne by some high lord-prince of Arthur's hall, 



BALIN AND BALAN. 145 

And there a horse ! the rider ? where is he ? 
See, yonder lies one dead within the wood. 
Not dead ; he stirs ! — but sleeping. I will speak. 
Hail, royal knight, we break on thy sweet rest, 
Not, doubtless, all unearn'd by noble deeds. 
But bounden art thou, if from Arthur's hall, 
To help the weak. Behold, I fly from shame, 
A lustful King, who sought to win my love 
Thro' evil ways : the knight, with whom I rode, 
Hath suffer'd misadventure, and my squire 
Hath in him small defence ; but thou, Sir Prince, 
Wilt surely guide me to the warrior King, 
Arthur the blameless, pure as any maid, 
To get me shelter for my maidenhood. 
I charge thee by that crown upon thy shield, 
And by the great Queen's name, arise and hence.' 
And Balin rose, ' Thither no more ! nor Prince 

L 



146 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Nor knight am I, but one that hath defamed 
The cognizance she gave me : here I dwell 
Savage among the savage woods, here die — 
Die : let the wolves' black maws ensepulchre 
Their brother beast, whose anger was his lord. 

me, that such a name as Guinevere's, 
Which our high Lancelot hath so lifted up, 
And been thereby uplifted, should thro' me, 
My violence, and my villainy, come to shame.' 

Thereat she suddenly laugh'd and shrill, anon 
Sigh'd all as suddenly. Said Balin to her 
' Is this thy courtesy — to mock me, ha ? 
Hence, for I will not with thee.' Again she sigh'd 
' Pardon, sweet lord ! we maidens often laugh 
When sick at heart, when rather we should weep. 

1 knew thee wrong'd. I brake upon thy rest, 
And now full loth am I to break thy dream, 



BALIN AND BALAN. 147 

But thou art man, and canst abide a truth, 

Tho' bitter. Hither, boy — and mark me well. 

Dost thou remember at Caerleon once — 

A year ago — nay, then I love thee not — 

Ay, thou rememberest well — one summer dawn — 

By the great tower — Caerleon upon Usk — 

Nay, truly we were hidden : this fair lord, 

The flower of all their vestal knighthood, knelt 

In amorous homage — knelt — what else ? — O ay 

Knelt, and drew down from out his night-black hair 

And mumbled that white hand whose ring'd caress 

Had wander'd from her own King's golden head, 

And lost itself in darkness, till she cried — 

I thought the great tower would crash down on 

both— 
" Rise, my sweet King, and kiss me on the lips, 
Thou art my King." This lad, whose lightest word 



148 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Is mere white truth in simple nakedness, 
Saw them embrace : he reddens, cannot speak, 
So bashful, he ! but all the maiden Saints, 
The deathless mother-maidenhood of Heaven 
Cry out upon her. Up then, ride with me ! 
Talk not of shame ! thou canst not, an thou would'st, 
Do these more shame than these have done them- 
selves.' 

She lied with ease ; but horror-stricken he, 
Remembering that dark bower at Camelot, 
Breathed in a dismal whisper 'It is truth.' 

Sunnily she smiled ' And even in this lone wood 
Sweet lord, ye do right well to whisper this. 
Fools prate, and perish traitors. Woods have 

tongues, 
As walls have ears : but thou shalt go with me, 
And we will speak at first exceeding low. 



BALIN AND BALAN. 149 

Meet is it the good King be not deceived. 
See now, I set thee high on vantage ground, 
From whence to watch the time, and eagle-like 
Stoop at thy will on Lancelot and the Queen.' 
She ceased ; his evil spirit upon him leapt, 
He ground his teeth together, sprang with a yell, 
Tore from the branch, and cast on earth, the shield, 
Drove his maiFd heel athwart the royal crown, 
Stampt all into defacement, hurl'd it from him 
Among the forest weeds, and cursed the tale, 
The told-of, and the teller. 

That weird yell, 
Unearthlier than all shriek of bird or beast, 
ThrilFd thro' the woods \ and Balan lurking there 
(His quest was unaccomplished) heard and thought 
1 The scream of that Wood-devil I came to quell ! ' 
Thennearing 'Lo ! he hath slain some brother-knight, 



150 BALIN AND BALAN. 

And tramples on the goodly shield to show 
His loathing of our Order and the Queen. 
My quest, meseems, is here. Or devil or man 
Guard thou thine head.' Sir Balin spake not word, 
But snatch'd a sudden buckler from the Squire, 
And vaulted on his horse, and so they crash'd 
In onset, and King Pellam's holy spear, 
Reputed to be red with sinless blood, 
Redden'd at once with sinful, for the point 
Across the maiden shield of Balan prick'd 
The hauberk to the flesh ; and Balin's horse 
Was wearied to the death, and, when they clash'd, 
Rolling back upon Balin, crush'd the man 
Inward, and either fell, and swoon'd away. 

Then to her Squire mutter'd the damsel ' Fools ! 
This fellow hath wrought some foulness with his 
Queen : 



BALIN AND BALAN. 151 

Else never had he borne her crown, nor raved 

And thus foam'd over at a rival name : 

But thou, Sir Chick, that scarce hast broken shell, 

Art yet half-yolk, not even come to down — 

Who never sawest Caerleon upon Usk — 

And yet hast often pleaded for my love — 

See what I see, be thou where I have been, 

Or else Sir Chick — dismount and loose their 

casques 
I fain would know what manner of men they be.' 
And when the Squire had loosed them, ' Goodly ! — 

look! 
They might have cropt the myriad flower of May, 
And butt each other here, like brainless bulls, 
Dead for one heifer V 

Then the gentle Squire 
' I hold them happy, so they died for love : 



152 BALIN AND BALAN. 

And, Vivien, tho' ye beat me like your dog, 
I too could die, as now I live, for thee.' 

* Live on, Sir Boy,' she cried. ' I better prize 
The living dog than the dead lion : away ! 
I cannot brook to gaze upon the dead.' 
Then leapt her palfrey o'er the fallen oak, 
And bounding forward 'Leave them to the wolves.' 

But when their foreheads felt the cooling air, 
Balin first woke, and seeing that true face, 
Familiar up from cradle-time, so wan, 
Crawl'd slowly with low moans to where he lay, 
And on his dying brother cast himself 
Dying j and he lifted faint eyes ; he felt 
One near him ; all at once they found the world, 
Staring wild-wide ; then with a childlike wail, 
And drawing down the dim disastrous brow 
That o'er him hung, he kiss'd it, moan'd and spake; 



BALIN AND BALAN. 153 

* O Balin, Balin, I that fain had died 
To save thy life, have brought thee to thy death. 
Why had ye not the shield I knew ? and why 
Trampled ye thus on that which bare the Crown ?' 

Then Balin told him brokenly, and in gasps, 
All that had chanced, and Balan moan'd again. 

' Brother, I dwelt a day in Pellam's hall : 
This Garlon mock'd me, but I heeded not. 
And one said " Eat in peace ! a liar is he, 
And hates thee for the tribute !" this good knight 
Told me, that twice a wanton damsel came, 
And sought for Garlon at the castle-gates, 
Whom Pellam drove away with holy heat. 
I well believe this damsel, and the one 
Who stood beside thee even now, the same. 
" She dwells among the woods " he said " and meets 
And dallies with him in the Mouth of Hell.' 



154 BALIN AND BALAN. 

Foul are their lives ; foul are their lips ; they lied. 
Pure as our own true Mother is our Queen.' 
' brother ' answer'd Balin ' Woe is me ! 
My madness all thy life has been thy doom, 
Thy curse, and darken'd all thy day ; and now 
The night has come. I scarce can see thee now. 
Goodnight ! for we shall never bid again 
Goodmorrow — Dark my doom was here, and dark 
It will be there. I see thee now no more. 
I would not mine again should darken thine, 
Goodnight, true brother.' 

Balan answer'd low 
' Goodnight, true brother here ! goodmorrow there ! 
We two were born together, and we die 
Together by one doom : ' and while he spoke 
Closed his death-drowsing eyes, and slept the sleep 
With Balin, either lock'd in either's arm. 



PROLOGUE 
TO GENERAL HAMLEY. 

Our birches yellowing and from each 

The light leaf falling fast, 
While squirrels from our fiery beech 

Were bearing off the mast, 
You came, and look'd and loved the view 

Long-known and loved by me, 
Green Sussex fading into blue 

With one gray glimpse of sea ; 
And, gazing from this height alone, 

We spoke of what had been 



156 PROLOGUE 

Most marvellous in the wars your own 

Crimean eyes had seen ; 
And now — like old-world inns that take 

Some warrior for a sign 
That therewithin a guest may make 

True cheer with honest wine — 
Because you heard the lines I read 

Nor utter'd word of blame, 
I dare without your leave to head 

These rhymings with your name, 
Who know you but as one of those 

I fain would meet again, 
Yet know you, as your England knows 

That you and all your men 
Were soldiers to her heart's desire, 

When, in the vanish'd year, 
You saw the league-long rampart-fire 



TO GENERAL HAMLEY. 157 

Flare from Tel-el-Kebir 
Thro' darkness, and the foe was driven, 

And Wolseley overthrew 
Arabi, and the stars in heaven 

Paled, and the glory grew. 



THE CHARGE OF THE HEAVY BRIGADE 
AT BALACLAVA. 

October 25, 1854. 
1. 

The charge of the gallant three hundred, the Heavy 
Brigade ! 

Down the hill, down the hill, thousands of Russians, 

Thousands of horsemen, drew to the valley — and 
stay'd ; 

For Scarlett and Scarlett's three hundred were rid- 
ing by 

When the points of the Russian lances arose in the 
sky; 



CHARGE OF THE HEAVY BRIGADE, 159 
And he call'd 'Left wheel into line!' and they 

wheel'd and obey'd. 
Then he look'd at the host that had halted he knew 

not why, 
And he turn'd half round, and he bad his trumpeter 

sound 
To the charge, and he rode on ahead, as he waved 

his blade 
To the gallant three hundred whose glory will never 

die — 
'Follow,' and up the hill, up the hill, up the 

hill, 
Follow'd the Heavy Brigade. 

11. 

The trumpet, the gallop, the charge, and the might 
of the fight ! 



160 CHARGE OF THE HEA VY BRIGADE. 

Thousands of horsemen had gather'd there on the 

height, 
With a wing push'd out to the left, and a wing to 

the right, 
And who shall escape if they close ? but he dash'd 

up alone 
Thro' the great gray slope of men, 
Sway'd his sabre, and held his own 
Like an Englishman there and then ; 
All in a moment follow'd with force 
Three that were next in their fiery course, 
Wedged themselves in between horse and horse, 
Fought for their lives in the narrow gap they had 

made — 
Four amid thousands ! and up the hill, up the hill, 
Gallopt the gallant three hundred, the Heavy 

Brigade. 



CHARGE OF THE HEAVY BRIGADE. 161 

III. 

Fell like a cannonshot, 

Burst like a thunderbolt, 

Crash'd like a hurricane, 

Broke thro' the mass from below, 

Drove thro' the midst of the foe, 

Plunged up and down, to and fro, 

Rode flashing blow upon blow, 

Brave Inniskillens and Greys 

Whirling their sabres in circles of light ! 

And some of us, all in amaze, 

Who were held for a while from the fight, 

And were only standing at gaze, 

When the dark-muffled Russian crowd 

Folded its wings from the left and the right, 

And roll'd them around like a cloud, — 

O mad for the charge and the battle were we, 



162 CHARGE OF THE HEAVY BRIGADE. 

When our own good redcoats sank from sight, 
Like drops of blood in a dark-gray sea, 
And we turn'd to each other, whispering, all dismay'd, 
'Lost are the gallant three hundred of Scarlett's 
Brigade ! ' 

IV. 

1 Lost one and all ' were the words 
Mutter'd in our dismay ; 
But they rode like Victors and Lords 
Thro' the forest of lances and swords 
In the heart of the Russian hordes, 
They rode, or they stood at bay — 
Struck with the sword-hand and slew, 
Down with the bridle-hand drew 
The foe from the saddle and threw 
Underfoot there in the fray — 
Ranged like a storm or stood like a rock 



CHARGE OF THE HEA FY BRIGADE. 163 

In the wave of a stormy day ; 

Till suddenly shock upon shock 

Stagger'd the mass from without, 

Drove it in wild disarray, 

For our men gallopt up with a cheer and a shout, 

And the foeman surged, and waver'd, and reel'd 

Up the hill, up the hill, up the hill, out of the field, 

And over the brow and away. 

v. 
Glory to each and to all, and the charge that they 

made ! 
Glory to all the three hundred, and all the Brigade ! 

Note. — The ' three hundred ' of the ■ Heavy Brigade ' who 
made this famous charge were the Scots Greys and the 2nd 
squadron of Inniskillings ; the remainder of the ' Heavy 
Brigade ' subsequently dashing up to their support. 

The ' three ' were Scarlett's aide-de-camp, Elliot, and the 
trumpeter and Shegog the orderly, who had been close 
behind him. 



EPILOGUE. 

Irene. 
Not this way will you set your name 
A star among the stars. 

Poet. 
What way ? 

Irene. 
You praise when you should blame 
The barbarism of wars. 
A juster epoch has begun. 

Poet. 
Yet tho' this cheek be gray, 
And that bright hair the modern sun, 



EPILOGUE. 165 

Those eyes the blue to-day, 
You wrong me, passionate little friend. 

I would that wars should cease, 
I would the globe from end to end 

Might sow and reap in peace, 
And some new Spirit o'erbear the old, 

Or Trade re-frain the Powers 
From war with kindly links of gold, 

Or Love with wreaths of flowers. 
Slav, Teuton, Kelt, I count them all 

My friends and brother souls, 
With all the peoples, great and small, 

That wheel between the poles. 
But since, our mortal shadow, 111 

To waste this earth began — 
Perchance from some abuse of Will 

In worlds before the man 



i66 EPILOGUE. 

Involving ours — he needs must fight 

To make true peace his own, 
He needs must combat might with might, 

Or Might would rule alone ; 
And who loves War for War's own sake 

Is fool, or crazed, or worse \ 
But let the patriot-soldier take 

His meed of fame in verse ; 
Nay — tho' that realm were in the wrong 

For which her warriors bleed, 
It still were right to crown with song 

The warrior's noble deed — 
A crown the Singer hopes may last, 

For so the deed endures ; 
But Song will vanish in the Vast ; 

And that large phrase of yours 
' A Star among the stars,' my dear, 



EPILOGUE. 167 

Is girlish talk at best ; 
For dare we dally with the sphere 

As he did half in jest, 
Old Horace ? ' I will strike ' said he 

' The stars with head sublime,' 
But scarce could see, as now we see, 

The man in Space and Time, 
So drew perchance a happier lot 

Than ours, who rhyme to-day. 
The fires that arch this dusky dot — 

Yon myriad-worlded way — 
The vast sun-clusters' gather'd blaze, 

World-isles in lonely skies, 
Whole heavens within themselves, amaze 

Our brief humanities ; 
And so does Earth ; for Homer's fame, 

Tho' carved in harder stone — 



1 68 EPILOGUE. 

The falling drop will make his name 
As mortal as my own. 

Irene. 

No! 

Poet. 
Let it live then — ay, till when ? 

Earth passes, all is lost 
In what they prophesy, our wise men, 

Sun-flame or sunless frost, 
And deed and song alike are swept 

Away, and all in vain 
As far as man can see, except 

The man himself remain j 
And tho', in this lean age forlorn, 

Too many a voice may cry 
That man can have no after-morn, 

Not yet of these am I. 



EPILOGUE. 169 

The man remains, and whatsoe'er 

He wrought of good or brave 
Will mould him thro' the cycle-year 

That dawns behind the grave. 



And here the Singer for his Art 

Not all in vain may plead 
* The song that nerves a nation's heart, 

Is in itself a deed.' 



TO VIRGIL. 

WRITTEN AT THE REQUEST OF THE MANTUANS FOR 
THE NINETEENTH CENTENARY OF VIRGIL'S DEATH. 

I. 

Roman Virgil, thou that singest 

Ilion's lofty temples robed in fire, 

Ilion falling, Rome arising, 

wars, and filial faith, and Dido's pyre ; 

ii. 

Landscape-lover, lord of language 

more than he that sang the Works and Days, 
All the chosen coin of fancy 

flashing out from many a golden phrase ; 



TO VIRGIL. 171 

III. 

Thou that singest wheat and woodland, 

tilth and vineyard, hive and horse and herd ; 
All the charm of all the Muses 

often flowering in a lonely word ; 

IV. 

Poet of the happy Tityrus 

piping underneath his beechen bowers ; 
Poet of the poet-satyr 

whom the laughing shepherd bound with 
flowers ; 

v. 

Chanter of the Pollio, glorying 

in the blissful years again to be, 

Summers of the snakeless meadow, 

unlaborious earth and oarless sea ; 



172 TO VIRGIL. 

VI. 
Thou that seest Universal 

Nature moved by Universal Mind ; 
Thou majestic in thy sadness 

at the doubtful doom of human kind \ 

VII. 

Light among the vanished ages ; 

star that gildest yet this phantom shore ; 
Golden branch amid the shadows, 

kings and realms that pass to rise no more ; 

VIII. 

Now thy Forum roars no longer, 

fallen every purple Caesar's dome — 

Tho' thine ocean-roll of rhythm 

sound for ever of Imperial Rome — 



TO VIRGIL. 173 

IX. 

Now the Rome of slaves hath perish'd, 

and the Rome of freemen holds her place, 
I, from out the Northern Island 

sunder'd once from all the human race, 

x. 

I salute thee, Mantovano, 

I that loved thee since my day began, 
Wielder of the stateliest measure 

ever moulded by the lips of man. 



THE DEAD PROPHET. 



Dead ! 

And the Muses cried with a stormy cry 
1 Send them no more, for evermore. 

Let the people die.' 

ii. 
Dead! 

1 Is it he then brought so low ?' 

And a careless people flock'd from the fields 

With a purse to pay for the show. 



THE DEAD PROPHET. 175 

III. 
Dead, who had served his time, 

Was one of the people's kings, 
Had labour'd in lifting them out of slime, 

And showing them, souls have wings ! 

IV. 

Dumb on the winter heath he lay. 

His friends had stript him bare, 
And roll'd his nakedness everyway 

That all the crowd might stare. 

v. 
A storm-worn signpost not to be read, 

And a tree with a moulder' d nest 
On its barkless bones, stood stark by the dead ; 

And behind him, low in the West, 



176 THE DEAD PROPHET. 

VI. 
With shifting ladders of shadow and light, 

And blurr'd in colour and form, 
The sun hung over the gates of Night, 

And glared at a coming storm. 

VII. 

Then glided a vulturous Beldam forth, 
That on dumb death had thriven ; 

They call'd her ' Reverence ' here upon earth, 
And ' The Curse of the Prophet ' in Heaven. 

VIII. 

She knelt — ' We worship him ' — all but wept — 

* So great so noble was he !' 
She clear'd her sight, she arose, she swept 

The dust of earth from her knee. 



THE DEAD PROPHET, 177 

IX. 

* Great ! for he spoke and the people heard, 
And his eloquence caught like a flame 

From zone to zone of the world, till his Word 
Had won him a noble name. 

x. 

Noble ! he sung, and the sweet sound ran 

Thro' palace and cottage door, 
For he touch'd on the whole sad planet of man, 

The kings and the rich and the poor ; 

XI. 

And he sung not' alone of an old sun set, 
But a sun coming up in his youth ! 

Great and noble — O yes — but yet — 
For man is a lover of Truth, 

N 



178 THE DEAD PROPHET. 

XII. 
And bound to follow, wherever she go 

Stark-naked, and up or down, 
Thro' her high hill-passes of stainless snow, 

Or the foulest sewer of the town — 

XIII. 

Noble and great — O ay — but then, 
Tho' a prophet should have his due, 

Was he noblier-fashion'd than other men ? 
Shall we see to it, I and you ? 

XIV. 

For since he would sit on a Prophet's seat, 
As a lord of the Human soul, 

We needs must scan him from head to feet 
Were it but for a wart or a mole ?' 



THE DEAD PROPHET. 179 

XV. 
His wife and his child stood by him in tears, 

But she — she push'd them aside. 
* Tho' a name may last for a thousand years, 

Yet a truth is a truth,' she cried. 

XVI. 

And she that had haunted his pathway still, 

Had often truckled and cower'd 
When he rose in his wrath, and had yielded her will 

To the master, as overpower'd, 

XVII. 

She tumbled his helpless corpse about. 

' Small blemish upon the skin ! 
But I think we know what is fair without 

Is often as foul within.' 



180 THE DEAD PROPHET. 

XVIII. 
She crouch' d, she tore him part from part, 

And out of his body she drew 
The red ' Blood-eagle '* of liver and heart ; 

She held them up to the view ; 

XIX. 

She gabbled, as she groped in the dead, 
And all the people were pleased ; 

' See, what a little heart/ she said, 
1 And the liver is half-diseased ! - 

xx. 

She tore the Prophet after death, 

And the people paid her well. 
Lightnings flicker'd along the heath ; 

One shriek'd 'The fires of Hell !' 

* Old Viking term for lungs, liver, etc. , when torn by the 
conqueror out of the body of the conquered. 



EARLY SPRING. 



Once more the Heavenly Power 
Makes all things new, 

And domes the red-plow'd hills 
With loving blue ; 

The blackbirds have their wills, 
The throstles too. 



Opens a door in Heaven ; 
From skies of glass 



182 EARLY SPRING. 

A Jacob's ladder falls 
On greening grass, 

And o'er the mountain-walls 
Young angels pass. 

in. 
Before them fleets the shower, 

And burst the buds, 
And shine the level lands, 

And flash the floods ; 
The stars are from their hands 

Flung thro' the woods, 

IV. 

The woods with living airs 

How softly fann'd, 
Light airs from where the deep, 

All down the sand, 



EARL Y SPRING. 183 

Is breathing in his sleep, 
Heard by the land. 

v. 
O follow, leaping blood, 

The season's lure ! 
O heart, look down and up 

Serene, secure, 
Warm as the crocus cup, 

Like snowdrops, pure ! 

VI. 

Past, Future glimpse and fade 

Thro' some slight spell, 
A gleam from yonder vale, 

Some far blue fell, 
And sympathies, how frail, 

In sound and smell ! 



184 EARL Y SPRING. 

VII. 
Till at thy chuckled note, 

Thou twinkling bird, 
The fairy fancies range, 

And, lightly stirr'd, 
Ring little bells of change 

From word to word. 

VIII. 

For now the Heavenly Power 
Makes all things new, 

And thaws the cold, and fills 
The flower with dew ; 

The blackbirds have their wills, 
The poets too. 



PREFATORY POEM TO MY BROTHER'S 
SONNETS. 

Midnight, June 30, 1879. 

1. 

Midnight — in no midsummer tune 
The breakers lash the shores : 
The cuckoo of a joyless June 
Is calling out of doors : 

And thou hast vanish'd from thine own 
To that which looks like rest, 
True brother, only to be known 
By those who love thee best. 



186 MIDNIGHT. 

II. 
Midnight — and joyless June gone by, 
And from the deluged park 
The cuckoo of a worse July 
Is calling thro' the dark : 

But thou art silent underground, 
And o'er thee streams the rain, 
True poet, surely to be found 
When Truth is found again. 

in. 
And, now to these unsummer'd skies 
The summer bird is still, 
Far off a phantom cuckoo cries 
From out a phantom hill ; 



MIDNIGHT. 187 

And thro' this midnight breaks the sun 
Of sixty years away, 
The light of days when life begun, 
The days that seem to-day, 

When all my griefs were shared with thee, 
As all my hopes were thine — 
As all thou wert was one with me, 
May all thou art be mine ! 



'FRATER AVE ATQUE VALE.' 

Row us out from Desenzano, to your Sirmione 

row ! 
So they row'd, and there we landed — ' O venusta 

Sirmio I' 
There to me thro' all the groves of olive in the 

summer glow, 
There beneath the Roman ruin where the purple 

flowers grow, 
Came that ' Ave atque Vale ' of the Poet's hopeless 

woe, 
Tenderest of Roman poets nineteen-hundred years 

ago, 



1 FRATER A VE ATQUE VALE. ' 189 

' Frater Ave atque Vale ' — as we wander'd to and 

fro 
Gazing at the Lydian laughter of the Garda Lake 

below 
Sweet Catullus's all-but-island, olive-silvery Sirmio ! 



HELEN'S TOWER.* 

Helen's Tower, here I stand, 
Dominant over sea and land. 
Son's love built me, and I hold 
Mother's love engrav'n in gold. 
Love is in and out of time, 
I am mortal stone and lime. 
Would my granite girth were strong 
As either love, to last as long ! 
I should wear my crown entire 
To and thro' the Doomsday fire, 
And be found of angel eyes 
In earth's recurring Paradise. 

Written at the request of my friend, Lord DurTerin. 



EPITAPH ON LORD STRATFORD DE 
REDCLIFFE. 

In Westminster Abbey. 

Thou third great Canning, stand among our best 
And noblest, now thy long day's work hath 
ceased, 

Here silent in our Minster of the West 

Who wert the voice of England in the East. 



EPITAPH ON GENERAL GORDON. 
For a Cenotaph. 

Warrior of God, man's friend, not laid below, 
But somewhere dead far in the waste Soudan, 

Thou livest in all hearts, for all men know 

This earth has borne no simpler, nobler man. 



EPITAPH ON CAXTON. 

In St. Margaret's, Westminster. 

Fiat Lux (his motto). 

Thy prayer was ' Light — more Light — while Time 

shall last!' 
Thou sawest a glory growing on the night, 
But not the shadows which that light would cast, 
Till shadows vanish in the Light of Light. 



TO THE DUKE OF ARGYLL. 

O Patriot Statesman, be thou wise to know 
The limits of resistance, and the bounds 
Determining concession ; still be bold 
Not only to slight praise but suffer scorn ; 
And be thy heart a fortress to maintain 
The day against the moment, and the year 
Against the day ; thy voice, a music heard 
Thro' all the yells and counter-yells of feud 
And faction, and thy will, a power to make 
This ever-changing world of circumstance, 
In changing, chime with never-changing Law. 



HANDS ALL ROUND. 

First pledge our Queen this solemn night, 

Then drink to England, every guest ; 
That man's the best Cosmopolite 

Who loves his native country best. 
May freedom's oak for ever live 

With stronger life from day to day ; 
That man's the best Conservative 

Who lops the moulder'd branch away. 
Hands all round ! 

God the traitor's hope confound ! 
To this great cause of Freedom drink, my friends, 

And the great name of England, round and 
round. 



196 HANDS ALL ROUND. 

To all the loyal hearts who long 

To keep our English Empire whole ! 
To all our noble sons, the strong 

New England of the Southern Pole ! 
To England under Indian skies, 

To those dark millions of her realm ! 
To Canada whom we love and prize, 

Whatever statesman hold the helm. 
Hands all round ! 

God the traitor's hope confound ! 
To this great name of England drink, my friends, 

And all her glorious empire, round and 
round. 

To all our statesmen so they be 

True leaders of the land's desire ! 
To both our Houses, may they see 



HANDS ALL ROUND. 197 

Beyond the borough and the shire ! 
We sail'd wherever ship could sail, 

We founded many a mighty state j 
Pray God our greatness may not fail 

Through craven fears of being great. 
Hands all round ! 

God the traitor's hope confound ! 
To this great cause of Freedom drink, my friends, 

And the great name of England, round and 
round. 



FREEDOM. 



O thou so fair in summers gone, 
While yet thy fresh and virgin soul 

Inform'd the pillar'd Parthenon, 
The glittering Capitol ; 

ii. 

So fair in southern sunshine bathed, 
But scarce of such majestic mien 

As here with forehead vapour-swathed 
In meadows ever green ; 



FREEDOM. 199 

III. 
For thou — when Athens reign'd and Rome, 

Thy glorious eyes were dimm'd with pain 
To mark in many a freeman's home 

The slave, the scourge, the chain ; 

IV. 

O follower of the Vision, still 

In motion to the distant gleam, 
Howe'er blind force and brainless will 

May jar thy golden dream 

v. 

Of Knowledge fusing class with class, 

Of civic Hate no more to be, 
Of Love to leaven all the mass, 

Till every Soul be free j 



d FREEDOM. 

VI. 
Who yet, like Nature, wouldst not mar 

By changes all too fierce and fast 
This order of Her Human Star, 

This heritage of the past ; 

VII. 

O scorner of the party cry 

That wanders from the public good, 
Thou — when the nations rear on high 

Their idol smear'd with blood, 

VIII. 

And when they roll their idol down — 
Of saner worship sanely proud j 

Thou loather of the lawless crown 
As of the lawless crowd ; 



FREEDOM. 2C 

IX. 
How long thine ever-growing mind 

Hath still'd the blast and strown the wave, 
Tho' some of late would raise a wind 

To sing thee to thy grave, 



Men loud against all forms of power — 

Unfurnish'd brows, tempestuous tongues- 
Expecting all things in an hour — 
Brass mouths and iron lungs ! 



TO H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRICE. 

Two Suns of Love make day of human life, 
Which else with all its pains, and griefs, and deaths, 
Were utter darkness — one, the Sun of dawn 
That brightens thro' the Mother's tender eyes, 
And warms the child's awakening world — and one 
The later-rising Sun of spousal Love, 
Which from her household orbit draws the child 
To move in other spheres. The Mother weeps 
At that white funeral of the single life, 
Her maiden daughter's marriage ; and her tears 
Are half of pleasure, half of pain — the child 
Is happy — ev'n in leaving her ! but Thou, 



TO H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRICE. 203 

True daughter, whose all-faithful, filial eyes 
Have seen the loneliness of earthly thrones, 
Wilt neither quit the widow'd Crown, nor let 
This later light of Love have risen in vain, 
But moving thro' the Mother's home, between 
The two that love thee, lead a summer life, 
Sway'd by each Love, and swaying to each Love, 
Like some conjectured planet in mid heaven 
Between two Suns, and drawing down from both 
The light and genial warmth of double day. 



Old poets foster'd under friendlier skies, 

Old Virgil who would write ten lines, they say, 
At dawn, and lavish all the golden day 

To make them wealthier in his readers' eyes ; 

And you, old popular Horace, you the wise 
Adviser of the nine-years-ponder'd lay, 
And you, that wear a wreath of sweeter bay, 

Catullus, whose dead songster never dies ; 

If, glancing downward on the kindly sphere 

That once had roll'd you round and round the Sun, 
You see your Art still shrined in human shelves, 

You should be jubilant that you flourish'd here 
Before the Love of Letters, overdone, 

Had swampt the sacred poets with themselves. 



Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh, f 



THIS BOOK IS DUE ON THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW 


AN INITIAL FINE OF 25 CENTS 

WILL BE ASSESSED FOR FAILURE TO RETURN 
THIS BOOK ON THE DATE DUE. THE PENALTY 
WILL INCREASE TO 50 CENTS ON THE FOURTH 
DAY AND TO $1.00 ON THE SEVENTH DAY 
OVERDUE. 


MA 
























19 






















































LD 21-100m-12,'43 (8796s) 



Tan 



<S~ 



M 9526 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 








,-^-' 









\ 






^r. 









-"■.NV^^ 



X^^. 






,\^^ 






--■., 



^> 









/^^ 



%,^^ 



v\> 






<. 



fp'.s 



% 






^•^^-j.. 



'<^^ 







^^c^ 







'►IT TO 27 VANOeWAUf^ &T 

m 




ed 1887 by George Munro— Entered at the Post Office at New York at second class rates— lan ir., i; 



THE KING OF STORY PAPERS. 



THE 

NEW YORK FIRESIDE COMPANION. 

A PAPER FOR THE HOME CIRCLE. 

PUEE, BRI&HT AND INTERESTING. 



THE FIRESIDE COMPANION numbers among its contributors the 
best of living fiction writers. Its Detective Stories are the most absorbing 
ever published, and its specialties are features peculiar to this journal. 

A Fresh Sermon by Rev. T. De Witt Talmage is 
Published in Every Number. 



THE FIRESIDE COMPANION is the most interesting weekly paper 
published in the United States, embracing in its contents the best Stories, 
the best Sketches, the best Humorous Matter, Random Talks, Fashion 
Articles, and Answers to Correspondents, etc. No expense is spared to 
get the best matter. 

Among the contributors to The Fireside Companion are Mary E. 
Bryan, Lucy Randall Comfort, Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller, Laura Jean 
Libbey, "Old Sleuth," Charlotte M. Braeme, author of "Dora Thorne," 
Mary C. Freston, Annabel Dwight, Clyde Raymond, Kate A. Jordan, 
Louise J. Brooks, Charlotte M. Stanley, etc. 



TERMS:— The New York Fireside Companion will be sent for one 
year, on receipt of $3: two copies for $5. Getters-up of clubs can after- 
ward add single copies at $2.50 each. We will be responsible for remit- 
tances sent in Registered Letters or by Post-office Money Orders. Postage 
free. Specimen copies sent free. 

Address GEORGE MUNRO, 

P. O. Box 3751 . MUNRO'S PUBLISHING HOUSE, 

17 to 27 Vande water St., and 45 to 53 Rose St., New York. 



LOCKSLEY HALL 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER 



ETC 



BY 



ALFRED 
LORD TENNYSON 



/ 



P.L. D.C.L. 




FEB 7 1887y/i 



NEW YORK: 
GEORGE MUlN^RO, PUBLISHER 

17 TO 27 Vandewatkr Street. 



N-o 



n 



^1 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

LOCKSLEY HALL SIXTY YEARS AFTER 9 

THE FLEET 33 

OPENING OF THE INDIAN AND COLONIAL EXHIBITION BY 

THE QUEEN 35 

THE PROMISE OF MAY 41 



10 LOCKvSLEY HALL 



Curse himl'^ curse your fellow-victim? call him dotard 
in your rage? 

Eyes that lured a doting boyhood well might fool a do- 
tard's age. 



Jilted for a wealthier! wealthier? yet perhaps she was 

not wise; 
I remember how you kissed the miniature Avith those 

sweet eyes. 

In the hall there hangs a painting — Amy's arms about 

my neck — 
Happy children in a sunbeam sitting on the ribs of 

wreck. 

In my life there was a picture, she that clasp'd my neck 

had flown; 
I was left within the shadow sitting on the wreck 

alone. 

Yours has been a slighter ailment, will you sicken for her 

sake? 
You, not you! your modern amourist is of easier, eartli- 

lier make. 

Amy loved me. Amy fail'd me. Amy was a timid 

child; 

But your Judith — but your worldling — she had never 

driven me wild. 



SIXTY YEAKS AFTEK. 11 

She that holds the diamond necklace dearer than the 

golden ring, 
She that finds a winter sunset fairer than a morn of 

Spring. 

She that in her heart is brooding on his briefer lease of 
life. 

While she vows '^ till death shall part us," she the would- 
be-widow wife. 

She the worldling born of worldlings — father, mother — 

be content, 
Ev'n the homely farm can teach us there is something in 

descent. 

Yonder in that chapel, slowly sinking now into the 

ground. 
Lies the warrior, my forefather, with his feet upon the 

hound. 

Crossed ! for once he saiFd the sea to crush the Moslem in 

his pride; 
Dead the warrior, dead his glory, dead the cause in which 

he died. 

Yet how often I and Amy in the moldering aisle have 

stood. 
Gazing for one pensive moment on that founder of our 

blood. 



12 LOCKSLEY HALL 

There again I stood to-day, and where of old we knelt in 

prayer. 
Close beneath the casement crimson with the shield of 

Locksley — there. 

All in white Italian marble, looking still as if she 

smiled. 
Lies my Amy dead in child-birth, dead the mother, dead 

the child. 

Dead — and sixty years ago, and dead her aged husband 

now, 
I this old white-headed dreamer stooped and kissed her 

marble brow. 

Gone the fires of youth, the follies, furies, curses, pas- 
sionate tears. 

Gone like fires and floods and earthquakes of the planet's 
dawning years. 

Fires that shook me once, but now to silent ashes fall'n 

away. 
Cold upon the dead volcano sleeps the gleam of dying 

day. 

Gone the tyrant of my youth, and mute below the chancel 

stones, 
All his virtues — I forgive them — black in white above 

his bones. 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 18 

Gone the comrades of my bivouac, some in fight against 

the foe. 
Some thro^ age and slow diseases, gone as all on earth 

will go. 

Gone with whom for forty years my life in golden se- 

quer^'^ ran. 
She with all the charm of woman, she with all the 

breadth of man. 

Strong in will and rich in wisdom, Edith, loyal, lowly, 

sweet. 
Feminine to her inmost heart, and feminine to her tender 

feet. 

Very woman of very woman, nurse of ailing body and 

mind. 
She that linked again the broken chain that bound me to 

my kind. 

Here to-day was Amy with me, while I wandered down 

the coast. 
Near us Edith^s holy shadow, smiling at the slighter 

ghost. 

Gone our sailor son thy father, Leonard early lost at 

sea; 
Thou alone, my boy, of Amy's kin and mine art left to 

me. 



14 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Gone thy tender-natured mother, wearying to be left 

alone. 
Pining for the stronger heart that once had beat beside 

her own. 

Truth, for Truth is Truth, he worshiped, being true as 
he was brave; 

Good, for Good is Good, he followed, yet he looked be- 
yond the grave. 

Wiser there than you, that crowning barren Death as 

lord of all, 
Deem this overtragic drama's closing curtain is the 

pall! 

Beautiful was death in him who saw the death but kept 

the deck, 
Saving women and their babes, and sinking with the 

sinking wreck. 

Gone forever! Ever? no — for since our dying race 

began, 
Ever, ever, and forever was the leading light of 

man. 

Those tliat in barbarian burials killed the slave, and slew 

the wife, 
Eelt ^\■itlun themselves the sacred passion of tlie second 

life. 



SIXTY YEAKS AFTER. 15 

Indian warriors dream of ampler hunting-grounds beyond 

the night; 
Ev'n the black Australian dying hopes he shall return, a 

white. 

Truth for truth, and good for good! The Good, the 
True, the Pure, the Just; 

Take the charm '^Forever" from them, and they crum- 
ble into dust. 

Gone the cry of *^ Forward, Forward,'' lost within a 

growing gloom; 
Lost, or only heard in silence from the silence of a 

tomb. 

Half the marvels of my morning, triumphs over time 

and space. 
Staled by frequence, shrunk by usage into commonest 

commonplace! 

'Forward," rang the voices then, and of the many mine 
was one. 
Let us hush this cry of *' Forward'' till ten thousand 
years have gone. 

Far among the vanish'd races, old Assyrian kings would 
flay 

Captives whom they caught in battle— iron-hearted vic- 
tors they. 



16 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Ages after, while in Asia, he that led the wild Mo- 
guls, 

Timur built his ghastly tower of eighty thousand human, 
skulls. 



Then, and here in Edward's time, an age of noblest En- 
glish names. 

Christian conquerors took and flung the conquer'd Chris- 
tian into flames. 

Love your enemy, bless your haters, said the Greatest of 

the great; 
Christian love among the Churches looked the twin of 

heathen hate. 

From the golden alms of Blessing man had coined him- 
self a curse : 

Rome of C^sar, Rome of Peter, which was crueller? 
which was worse? 

France had shown a light to all men, preached a Gosj^el, 

all men^s good; 
Celtic Demos rose a demon, shrieked and slaked the light 

with blood. 

Hoiie was ever on her mountain, watching till the day 
begun 

Crowned with sunlight— over darkness— from the still 
unrisen sun. 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 17 

Have we grown at last beyond the passion of the primal 
clan ? 
" Kill your enemy, for you hate him," still, " your enemy " 
was a man. 

Have we sunk below them? peasants maim the helpless 

horse, and drive 
Innocent cattle under thatch, and burn the kindlier 

brutes alive. 

Brutes, the brutes are not your wrongers — burned at mid- 
night, found at morn. 

Twisted hard in mortal agony with their offspring, born- 
unborn. 

Clinging to the silent Mother! Are we devils? are we 

men? 
Sweet St. Francis of Assisi, would that he were here 

again. 

He that in his Catholic wholeness used to call the very 
flowers 

Sisters, brothers — and the beasts — whose pains are hard- 
ly less than ours! 

Chaos, Cosmos! Cosmos, Chaos! who can tell how all 
will end! 

Read the wide world^s annals, you, and take their wis- 
dom for your friend. 



18 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Hope the best, but hold the Present fatal daughter of 

the Past, 
Shape your heart to front the hour, but dream not that 

the hour will last. 

Ay, if dynamite and revolver leave you courage to be 

wise : 
When was age so crammed with menace? madness? 

written, spoken lies? 

Envy wears the mask of Love, and, laughing sober fact 
to scorn. 

Cries to Weakest as to Strongest, " Ye are equals, equal- 
born. " 

Equal-born? yes, if yonder hill be level with the 

flat. 
Charm us. Orator, till the Lion look no larger than the 

Cat. 

Till the Cat thro' that mirage of overheated language 

loom 
Larger than the Lion, — Demos end in working its own 

doom. 

Russia bursts our Indian barrier, shall we fight her? shall 

we yield? 
Pause, before you sound the trumpet, hear the voices 

from the field. 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 19 

Those three hundred millions under one Imperial scepter 
now. 

Shall we hold them? shall we lose them? take the suf- 
frage of the plow. 

Nay, but these would feel and follow Truth if only you 

and you, 
Rivals of realm-ruining party, when you speak were 

wholly true. 

Plowmen, Shepherds, have I found, and more than once, 

and still could find. 
Sons of God, and kings of men in utter nobleness of 

mind. 

Truthful, trustful, looking upward to the practiced 

hustings-liar; 
So the Higher wields the Lower, while the Lower is the 

Higher. 

Here and there a cotter's babe is royal-born by right di- 
vine; 

Here and there my lord is lower than his oxen or his 
swine. 

Chaos, Cosmos! Cosmos, Chaos! once again the sickening 

game; 
Freedom, free to slay herself, and dying while they shout 

her name. 



20 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Step by step we gained a freedom known to Europe, 

known to all; 
Step by step we rose to greatness, — thro' the tonguesters 

we may fall. 

You that woo the Voices — tell them " old experience is 

a fool/' 
Teach your flattered kings that only those who can not 

read can rule. 

Pluck the mighty from their seat, but set no meek ones 

in their place; 
Pillory wisdom in your markets, pelt your offal at her 



Tumble Nature heel o'er head, and, yelling with the yell- 
ing street. 

Set the feet above the brain and swear the brain is in the 
feet. 

Bring the old dark ages back without the faith, without 

the hope. 
Break the State, the Church, the Throne, and roll their 

ruins down the slope. 

Authors — atheist, essayist, noveKst, realist, rhymster, 

play your part. 
Paint the mortal shame of nature with the living hues of 

Art 



SIXTY TEARS AFTER. ^1 

Rip your brothers' vices open, strip your own foul pas- 
sions bare; 

Down with Reticence, down with Reverence— forward- 
naked — let them stare. 

Feed the budding rose of boyhood with the drainage of 

your sewer; 
Send the drain into the fountain, lest the stream should 

issue pure. 

Set the maiden fancies wallowing in the troughs of 

Zolaism, — 
Forward, forward, ay and backward, downward too into 

the abysm. 

Do your best to charm the worst, to lower the rising 

race of men; 
Have we risen from out the beast, then back into the 

beast again? 

Only '' dust to dust " for me that sicken at your lawless 

din, 
Dust in wholesome old-world dust before the newer 

world begin. 

Heated am I? you — you wonder— well, it scarce becomes 

mine age — 
Patience! let the dying actor mouth his last upon the 

stage. 



22 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Cries of unprogiessive dotage ere the dotard fall 



)? 

Noises of a current narrowing, not the music of a 
deep? 

Ay, for doubtless I am old, and think gray thoughts, for 

I am gray : 
After all the stormy changes shall we find a changeless 

May? 

After madness, after massacre. Jacobinism and Jac- 
querie, 
Some diviner force to guide us thro' the days I shall not 

Sep.? 



When the schemes and all the systems. Kingdoms and 

Republics fall. 
Something kindlier, higher, holier — all for each and each 

for all? 

All the full-brain, half -brain races, led by Justice, Love, 

and Truth; 
All the millions one at length, with all the visions of my 

youth? 

All diseases quenched by Science, no man halt, or deaf, 

or blind; 
Stronger ever born of weaker, lustier body, larger 

mind? 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 23 

Earth at last a warless world, a single race, a single 

tongue, 
I have seen her far away — for is not Earth as yet so 

young?— 

Every tiger madness muzzled, every serpent passion 

kilFd, 
Every grim ravine a garden, every blazing desert 

tiird. 

Robed in universal harvest up to either pole she 

smiles. 
Universal ocean softly washing all her warless 



Warless? when her tens are thousands, and her thous- 
ands millions, then — 

All her harvest all too narrow — who can fancy warless 
men? 

Warless? war will die out late then. Will it ever? late or 

soon? 
Can it, till this outworn earth be dead as yon dead world 

the moon? 

Dead the new astronomy calls her. ... On this day and 

at this hour, 
In this gap between the sand-hills, whence you see the 

Locksley tower. 



24 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Here we met, our latest meeting — Amy — sixty years 

ago— 

She and I — the moon was falling greenish thro' a rosy 

glow. 

Just above the gate-way tower, and even where you see 

her now — 
Here we stood and clasped each other, swore the seeming 

deathless vow. . . , 

Dead, but how her living glory lights the hall, the dune, 

the grass! 
Yet the moonlight is the sunlight, and the sun himself 
will pass. 

Venus near her! smiling downward at this earthlier earth 

of ours. 
Closer on the Sun, perhaps a world of never-fading 

flowers. 

Hesper, whom the poet call'd the Bringer home of all 

good things. 
All good things may move in Hesper, perfect peoples, 

perfect kings. 

Hesper — Venus — were we native to that splendor or in 

Mars, 
We should see the Globe we groan in, fairest of their 

evening stars. 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 35 

Could we dream of wars and carnage, craft and madness, 

lust and spite. 
Roaring London, raving Paris, in that point of peaceful 

Ught? 

Might we not in glancing heavenward on a star so silver- 
fair. 

Yearn, and clasp the hands and murmur, " Would to 
God that we were there?" 



Forward, backward, backward, forward, in the immeas- 
urable sea, 

Sway'd by vaster ebbs and flows than can be known to 
you or me. 

All the suns — are these but symbols of innumerable 

man, 
Man or Mind that sees a shadow of the planner or the 

plan? 

Is there evil but on earth? or pain in every peopled 
sphere? 

Well be grateful for the sounding watchword, " Evolu- 
tion " here. 



Evolution ever climbing after some ideal good, 
And Reversion ever dragging Evolution in the 
mud. 



2i) LOCKSLEY HALL 

What aie men that He should heed ns? cried the king of 

sacred song; 
Insects of an hour, that hourly work their brother insect 

wrong. 

While the silent Heavens roll, and Suns along their fiery 

way. 
All their planets whirling round them, flash a million 

miles a day. 

Many an Jj]on molded earth before her highest, man, 

was born, 
Many an ^on too may pass when earth is manless and 

forlorn. 

Earth so huge, and yet so bounded — pools of salt, and 

plots of land — 
Shallow skin of green and azure — chains of mountain, 

grains of sand! 

Only That which made us, meant us to be mightier by 

and by. 
Set the sphere of all the boundless Heavens within the 

human eye. 

Sent the shadow of Himself, the boundless, thro' the 

human soul. 
Boundless inward, in the atom, boundless outward, m the 

Whole. 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 27 

Here is Locksley Hall, my grandson, here the lion- 
guarded gate. 

Not to-night in Locksley Hall — to-morrow — ^you, you 
come so late. 

Wrecked — your train — or all but wrecked? a shattered 

wheel? a vicious boy! 
Good, this forward, you that preach it, is it well to wish 

you joy? 

Is it well that while we range with Science, glorying in 

the Time, 
City children soak and blacken soul and sense in city 

shme? 

There among the glooming alleys Progress halts on pal- 
sied feet. 

Crime and hunger cast our maidens by the thousand on 
the street. 

There the Master scrimps his haggard seamstress of her 

daily bread. 
There a single sordid attic holds the living and the 

dead. 

There the smoldering fire of fever creeps across the rotted 

floor. 
And the crowded couch of incest in the warrens of the 

poor. 



28 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Nay, your pardon, cry your '' forward/' yours are hope 

and youth, but I— 
Eighty winters leave the dog too lame to follow with the 

cry, 

Lame and old and past his time, and passing now into 

the night; 
Yet I would the rising race were half as eager for the 

light. 

Light the fading gleam of Even? light the glimmer of 

the dawn? 
Aged eyes may take the growing glimmer for the gleam 

withdrawn. 

Far away beyond her myriad coming changes earth will 

be 
Something other than the wildest modern guess of you 

and me. 

Earth may reach her earthly worst, or if she gain her 

earthly best. 
Would she find her human offspring this ideal man at 

rest? 

Forward, then, but still remember how the course of 
Time will swerve. 

Crook and turn upon itself in many a backward stream- 
ing curve. 



SIXTY YEAES AFTER. ^y 

Not the Hall to-niglit, my grandson! Death and Silence 

hold their own. 
Leave the Master in the first dark hour of his last sleep 

alone. 

Worthier soul was he than I am, sound and honest, rus- 
tic Squire, 

Kindly landlord, boon companion—youthful jealousy is 
a liar. 

Cast the poison from your bosom, oust the madness from 

your brain. 
Let the trampled serpent show you that you have not 

lived in vain. 

Youthful! youth and age are scholars yet but in the lower 

school. 
Nor is he the wisest man who never proved himself a 

fool. 

Yonder lies our young sea-village— Art and Grace are 

less and less: 
Science grows and Beauty dwindles — roofs of slated liide- 

ousness! 

There is one old Hostel left us where they swing the 

Locksley shield. 
Till the peasant cow shall butt the '' Lion passant " from 

his field. 



30 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Poor old Heraldry, poor old History, poor old Poetry, 

passing hence. 
In the common deluge drowning old political common 

sense! 

Poor old voice of eighty crying after voices that have 

fled! 
All I loved are vanished voices, all my steps are on the 

dead. 

All the world is ghost to me, and as the phantom dis- 
appears, 

Forward far and far from here ig all the hope of eighty 
years. 



In this Hostel — I remember — I repent it o'er his 

grave — 
Like a clown — by chance he met me — I refused the hand 

he gave. 

From that casement where the trailer mantles all the 

moldering bricks — 
I was then in early boyhood, Edith but a child of 

six — 

While I sheltered in this archway from a day of driving 

showers — 
Peeped the winsome face of Edith like a flower among 

the flowers. 



SIXTY YEARS AFTER. 31 

Here to-night! the Hall to-morrow, when they toll the 

Chapel bell! 
Shall I hear in one dark room a wailing, '* I have loved 

thee well?'' 

Then a peal that shakes the portal — one has come to 

claim his bride. 
Her that shrunk, and put me from her, shrieked, and 

started from my side — 

Silent echoes! you, my Leonard, use and not abuse your 

day. 
Move among your people, know them, follow him who 

led the way. 

Strove for sixty widow'd years to help his homelier 

brother men. 
Served the poor, and built the cottage, raised the school, 

and drained the fen. 

Hears he now the Voice that wrong'd him? who shall 

swear it can not be? 
Earth would never touch her worst, were one in fifty 

such as he. 

Ere she gain her Heavenly-best, a God must mingle with 

the game: 
Nay, there may be those about us whom we neither see 

nor name. 



32 LOCKSLEY HALL 

Felt within us as ourselves, the Powers of Good, the 

Powers of 111, 
Strewing balm, or shedding poison in the fountains of 

the Will. 

Follow you the Star that lights a desert pathway, yours 

or mine. 
Forward, till you see the highest Human Nature is 

divine. 

Follow Light, and do the Right — for man can half con- 
trol his doom — 

Till you find the deathless Angel seated in the vacant 
tomb. 

Forward, let the stormy moment fly and mingle with the 
Past. 

I that loathed, have come to love him. Love will con- 
quer at the last. 

Gone at eighty, mine own age, and I and you will bear 
the pall; 

Then I leave thee Lord and Master, latest Lord of Locks- 
ley Hall. 



THE FLEET.* 



I. 
You, you, if you shall fail to understand 

What England is, and what her all-in-all. 
On you will come the curse of all the land. 
Should this old England fall 
Which Nelson left so great. 

ir. 
His isle, the mightiest Ocean-power on earth. 

Our own fair isle, the lord of every sea — 
His fuller franchise — what would that be worth — 
Her ancient fame of Free — 
Were she ... a fallen state? 

* The speaker said that '* he should like to be assured that other 
outlying portions of the Empire, the Crown colonies, and im- 
portant coaling stations were being as promptly and as thoroughly 
fortified as the various capitals of the self-governing colonies, lie 
was credibly informed that this was not so. It was impossible, 
also' not to feel some degree of anxiety about the efficacy of pres- 
ent provision to defend and protect, by means of swift, well-armed 
cruisers, the immense mercantile fleet of the Empire. A third 
source of anxiety, so far as the colonies were concerned, was the ap- 
l)arently insufficient provision for the rapid manufacture of arma- 
ments and their prompt dispatch when ordered to their colonial des- 

2 (33) ■ 



34 THE FLEET. 

III. 

Her dauntless army scatter^, and so small. 
Her island-myriads fed from alien lands — 

The fleet of England is her all-in-all ; 
Her fleet is in your hands. 
And in her fleet her Fate. 

IV. 

You, you, that have the ordering of her fleet. 
If you should only compass her disgrace. 

When all men starve, the wild mob's million feet 
Will kick you from your place, 
But then too late, too late. 

tination. Hence the necessity for manufacturing appliances equal 
to the requirements, not of Great Britain alone, but of the whole 
Empire. But the key-stone of the whole was the necessity for an 
overwhelmingly powerful fleet and efficient defense for all necessary 
coaling stations. This was as essential for the colonies as for Great 
Britain. It was the one condition for the continuance of the Em- 
pire. All that Continental Powers did with respect to armies 
England should effect with her navy. It was essentially a defen- 
sive force, and could be moved rapidly from point to point, but it 
should be equal to all that was expected from it. It was to 
strengthen the fleet that colonists would first readily tax themselves, 
because they realized how essential a powerful fleet was to the safety 
not only of that extensive commerce sailing in every sea, but ulti- 
timately to the security of the distant portions of the Empire. -Who 
could estimate the loss involved in even a brief period of disaster to 
the Imperial Navy? Any amount of money timely expended in 
preparation would be quite insignificant when compared with the 
possible calamity he had refered to/'— Extract from Sir Graham 
Berry's Speech at the Colonial Institute, Wi November ISSQ. 



Opening of the Indian and Colonial Exhibition 
by the Queen. 



I. 

Welcome, welcome with one voice! 
In your welfare we rejoice, 
Sons and brothers that have sent. 
From isle and cape and continent. 
Produce of your field and flood. 
Mount and mine, and primal wood; 
Works of subtle brain and hand. 
And splendors of the morning land. 
Gifts from every British zone; 
Britons, hold your own! 

II. 
May we find, as ages run. 
The mother featured in the son; 
And may yours forever be 
That old strength and constancy 
Which has made your fathers great 
In our ancient island State, 
And wherever her flag fly. 
Glorying between sui and sky. 
Makes the might of Britain known; 
Britons, hold your own ! 

(35) 



36 OPEN^ING OF THE EXHIBITION BY THE QUEEN* 

III. 

Britain fought her sous of yore — 
Britain failed; and never more, 
Careless of our growing kin, 
Shall we sin our fathers* sin, 
Men that in a narrower day — 
Unprophetic rulers they — 
Drove from out the mother's nest 
That young eagle of the West 
To forage for herself alone; 
Britons, hold your own! 

IV. 

Sharers of our glorious past. 
Brothers, must we part at last? 
Shall we not thro' good and ill 
Cleave to one another still? 
Britain's myriad voices call, 
" Sons, be welded each and all. 
Into one imperial whole. 
One with Britain, heart and soul! 
One life, one flag, one fleet, one Throne !*' 
Britons, hold your own! 



THE PROMISE OF MAY, 



" A surface man of theories, true to none.' 



DRAMATIS PERSONS. 

Farmer Dobson. 

Mr. Philip Edgar {afterward Mr. Harold), 
Farmer Steer {T>ob..^ and ^\ a' s Father), 
Mr. Wilson {a School-master). 

HiGGINS 

James 

Dan Smith 

Jackson 

Allen 

Dora Steer. 

Eva Steer. 

Sally Allen 

MiLLY VFarm Servants. 

Farm Servants, Laborers, etc. 



Farm Lahoren 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 



ACT. I. 

Scene. — Before Farm-house. 

Farming men and Women. Farming Men carrying forms, etc., 
Women carrying baskets of knives and forks, etc. 

1st Farming Man. 
Be thou a-gawin^ to the long barn? 

2d Farming Man. 
Ay, to be sewer! Be thou? 

1st Farming Man. 

Why, 0^ coorse, fur it be the owd man^s birthdaay. He 
be heighty this very daay, and 'e telled all on us to be i' 
the long barn by one o'clock, fur he'll gie us a big dinner, 
and haafe th' parish '11 be theer, an' Miss Dora, an' Miss 
Eva, an' all ! 

2d Farming Man. 

Miss Dora be coomed back, then? 

(41) 



42 the promise of may. 

1st- Farming Mais". 

Ay, haafe an hour ago. She be in theer now. {Point- 
ing to house. ) Owd Steer wur afeiird she wouldn^t be back 
i' time to keep his birthdaay, and he wur in a tew about it 
all the murnin'; and he sent me wi' the gig to Littlechester 
to fetch 'er; and 'er an' the owd man they fell a-kissin' o' 
one another like two sweet'arts i' the poorch as soou as he 
clapt eyes of 'er. 

2d Farming Majs". 
Foalks says he likes Miss Eva the best. 

1st Farmiis^g Man. 

Kaay, I knaws nowt o' what foalks says, an' I caares 
nowt neither. Foalks doesn't hallus knaw thessens; but 
sewer I be, they be two o' the purtiest gels ye can see of a 
summer murnin'. 

2d Farming Man. 
Bean't Miss Eva gone off a bit of 'er good looks o' laate? 

1st Farming Man. 
Noli, not a bit. 

2d Farming Man. 

Why coom awaay, then, to the long barn. 

[Exeunt'\ 

Dora looks out of vjindow. Enter Dobson. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 43 

Dora (singing.) 
The town lay still in the low sunlight, 
The hen cluckt late by the white farm gate, 
The maid to her dairy came in from the cow^ 
The stock-dove coo'd at the fall of night, 
The blossom had open'd on every bongh; 

joy for the promise of May, of May, 

joy for the promise of May. 

{Nodding at Dobsok.) Fm coming down, Mr. Dob- 
son. I haven't seen Eva yet. Is she anywhere in the 
garden? 

DOBSON. 

Noa, Miss. I hadn't seed 'er neither. 

Dora {enters singing, ) 
But a red fire woke in the heart of the town, 
And a fox from the glen ran away with the hen. 
And a cat to the cream, and a rat to the cheese; 
And the stock-dove coo'd, till a kite dropt down, 
And a salt wind burnt the blossoming trees; 
grief for the promise of May, of May, 
' grief for the promise of May. 

I don't know why I sing that song; I don't love it. 

DOBSON-. 

Blessings on your pretty voice. Miss Dora. Wheer did 
they lam ye that? 

Dora. 
In Cumberland, Mr. Dobson. 



44 THE PKOMISE OF MAT. 

DOBSOlf. 

An' how did ye leave the owd uncle i' Coomberland? 

Dora. 
Getting better, Mr. Dobson. But he'll never be the 
same man again. 

Dobson. 
An' how d'ye find the owd man 'ere? 

Dora. 
As well as ever, I came back to keep his birthday. 

Dobso:n^. 
Well, I be coomed to keep his birthdaay an' all. The 
owd man be heigh ty to-daiiy, be ant he? 

Dora. 
Yes, Mr. Dobson. And the day's bright like a friend, 
but the wind east like an enemy. Help me to move this 
bench for him into the sun. (They move bench,) No, 
not that way — here, under the apple-tree. Thank you. 
Look how full of rosy blossom it is. [Pointing to aj^ple- 
tree. 

DOBSOIf. 

Theer be redder blossoms nor them, Miss Dora. 

Dora. 
Wliere do they blow, Mr. Dobson? 

Under your eyes. Mi.ss Doiu, 



THE pro:mise of may. 45 

Dora. 
Do they? 

DOBSON. 

And your eyes be as blue as 

Dora. 
What, Mr. Dobson? A butcher's frock? 

DOBSON. 

Noa, Miss Dora: as blue as 

Dora. 
Bluebell, harebell, speedwell, bluebottle, succory, for- 
get-me-not? 

Dobson. 
Noa, Miss Dora; as blue as - 

Dora. 
The sky? or the sea on a blue day? 

Dobson. 
Naay then. I mean'd they be as blue as violets. 

Dora. 
Are they? 

Dobson. 

Theer ye goas agean, Miss, niver believing owt I says to 
ye — hallus a-fobbing ma off, tho' ye knaws I love ye. I 
warrants ye'll think moor o' this young Squire Edgar as 
ha' coomed among us — the Lord knaws how — yell think 
more on 'is little finger than hall my hand at the haltar. 



4:6 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOEA. 

Perhaps, Master Dobson. I can't tell, for I have never 
seen him. Bat my sister wrote that he was mighty pleas- 
ant, and had no pride in him. 

Dobson. 
He^ll be arter you now. Miss Dora. 

Dora. 
Will he? How can I tell? 

Dobson. 
He' J been arter Miss Eva, haan't he? 

Dora. 
Not that I know. 

Dobson. 
Didn't I spy 'em a-sitting i' the woodbine harbor to- 
gither? 

Dora. 
What of that? Eva told me that he was taking her like- 
ness. He's an artist. 

Dobson. 
What's a hartist? Idoant believe he^s iver a 'eart under 
his waistcoat. And I tells ye what. Miss Dora: he's no 
respect for the Queen, or the parson, or the justice o' peace, 
or owt. I ha' heard 'im a-gawin' on 'ud make your 'air- 
God bless it! — stan' on end. And wuss nor that. When 
theer wur a meeting o' farmers at Littlechester t'other 
daay, and they was all a-crying out at th^ bad times, he 



THE PK03II3E C'F MAY. 47 

cooms up, and he calls out among our oiin men, ^'The land 
belongs to the people!" 

Dora. 
And what did you say to that? 

DOBSON. 

Well, I says, s'pose my pig's the land, and you say it be- 
longs to the parish, and theer be a thousand i' the parisli, 
taiikin' in the women and children; and s'pose I kills my 
pig, and gi'es it among 'em, why there wudn't be a dmner 
for nawbody, and I should ha' lost the pig. 

Dora. 
And what did he say to that? 

DOBSON. 

Nowt — what could he saay? But I taakes 'im fur a bad 
lot and a burn fool, and I haiites the very sight on him. 

Dora. 
{Loohing at Dobson".) Master Dobson, you are a comeiy 
man to look at. 

DOBSON^. 

I thank you for that, Miss Dora, oiiyhow. 

Dora. 
Ay, but you turn right ugly when you're in an ill temper; 
and I promise you that if you forget yourself in your be- 
havior to this gentleman, my father's friend, I will never 
change word with you again. 



48 THE PKOMISE OF MAY. 

(Enter Farmin^g Ma-^ from barn). 
Farmiitg Mak. 

Miss, the farming men 'ull hev their dinner i^ the long 

barn, and tlie master \id be straiinge an^ pleased if you VI 

step in fust, and see that all be right and reglar fur ■'em 

afore he coom. 

[Exit 

Dora. 

I go. Master Dobson, did you hear what I said? 

DOBSON. 

Yeas, yeas! I'll not meddle wi' 'im if he doan't meddle 
m' mea. (Exit Dora.) Coomly, says she. I niver 
thowt o' mysen i' that waiiy; but if she'd taake to ma i' 
that waay, or ony waiiy, Fd slaiive out my life fur 'er. 
" Coomly to look at,'' says she— but she said it spiteful 
like. To look at — yeas, '' coomly;" and she mayn't be so 
fur out theer. But if that be nowt to she, then it be nowt 
tome. (Looking of stage,) School-master! Why if Steer 
han't haxed school-master to dinner, thaw 'e knaws I was 
hallus agean heving school-master i' the parish! fur him 
as be handy wi' a book bean't but haafe a hand at a pitcli- 
fork. 

Filter AViLSON. 

AVell, AVilson. I seed that one cow o' thine i' the pin- 
fokl agean as I wur a-coomin' 'ere. 

WiLSOK. 

Very likely, Mr. Dobson. She zvill break fence. I can't 
keep her in order. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 49* 

DOBSOK. 

An^ if tha can't ke?p thy one cow i' border, how cau tha 
keep all thy scholards i' horder? But let that goa by. What 
dost a knaw o" this Mr. Hedgar as be a-lodgin' wi' ye? I 
coom'd ujDon ^im t'other daay lookin' at the coontry, then 
a-scrattin' upon a bit o' paiiper, then a-lookin' agean; and 
I taaked 'im fur soom sort of a land-surveyor — but a bean'r. 

Wilson". 
He's a Somersetshire man, and a very civil spoken gen- 
tleman. 

DOBSON. 

Gentleman! What be he a-doing here ten mile an' moor 
fro' a raitil? We laays out o' the waiiy fur gentlefoalk alto- 
gither — leiistwaays they niver cooms 'ere but fur the trout 
i' our beck, fur they be kuaw'd as far as Littlechester^ 
But 'e doan't fish neither. 

Wilson. 

Well, it's no sin in a gentleman to fish. 

DOBSON. 

Noil, but I haates 'im. 

WiLsoiq^. 
Better step out of his road, then, for he's walking to us^ 
with a book in his hand. 

DOBSON. 

An' I haates books an' all, fur they puts foalk off the 
owd waays. 



50 THE PEOMISE OF MAY. 

Entei' Edgak, reading— not seeing Dobson and Wilsoj^. 
V Edgak. 

This author, with his charm of simple style 

And close dialectic^, all but proving man 

An automatic series of sensations, 

Has often numbed me into apathy 

Against the unpleasant jolts of this rough road 

That breaks oif short into the abysses — made me 

A Quietist taking all things easily. 

DOBSON. 

(Aside,) There mun be summut wrong theer, Wilson, 
fur I doan't understan' it. 

Wilson. 
{Aside,) Nor I either, Mr. Dobson. 

DOBSON. 

{Scornfully.) An' thou doan't understan' it neither— 
and thou school-master an' all. 

Edgae. 

What can a man, then, live for but sensations. 
Pleasant ones? men of old would undergo 
Unpleasant for the sake of pleasant ones 
Hereafter, like the Moslem beauties waiting 
To clasp their lovers by the golden gates. 
For me, whose cheerless Houris after death 
Are Night and Silence, pleasant ones — the while — 
If possible, here! to crop the flower and pass. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 51 

DOBSO]N". 

Well, I never ^eilrd the likes o' that afoor. 

WlLSOK. • 

(Aside.) But I have, Mr. Dobson. It's the old Scripture 
text, ^^Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." I'm 
sorry for it, for, tho' he never comes to church, I thought 
better of him. 

Edgak. 

^^ What are we," says the blind old man in Lear? 

^' As flies to the Gods; they kill us for their sporf 

DOBSOI^. 

(Aside.) Then the old man i' Lear should be shaamed 
of hissen, but noiln o' the parishes goas by that naame 'ere- 
abouts. 

Edgar. 
The Gods! but they, the shadows of ourselves, 
Have past forever. It is Xature kills. 
And not for her sport either. 8he knows nothing. 
Man only knows, the worse for him ! for why 
Can not he take his pastime like the flies? 
And if my pleasure breed another's pain. 
Well — is not that the coarse of Nature too. 
From the dim dawn of Being— her main law 
Whereby she grows in beauty — that her flies 
Must massacre each other? this poor Nature! 

DOBSOK. 

Natur! Natnr! Well, it be i' my natur to knock 'im o^ 
the 'eiid now; but I weiint. 



-52 the promise of may. 

Edgar. 
A Quietist taking all things easily — why — 
Have I \Men dipping into this, again 
To steel myself against the leaving her? 
( Closes hook, seeing WiLSOiS". ) 
Oood-day! 

Wilson". 
Good-day, sir. 

(DoBSON looks hard at Edgar.) 

Edgar. 
( To DoBSON. ) Have I the pleasure, f riead, of knowing 
you? 

DOBSON^. 

Dobson. 

Edgar. 
Good-day, then, Dobson. [Exit. 

DOBSON. 

'' Good-daiiy then, Dobson I" Civil-spoken indeed I Why, 
Wilson, tha ^eard ^im thysen — the feller couldn^t find a 
Mister in his mouth fur me, as farms five hoonderd haacre. 

AViLSOif. 
You never find one for me, Mr. Dobson. 

Dobson. 

Noii, fur thou be nobbut school-master; but I taakes 'im 
fur a Lunuun swindler, and a burn fool. 



TH E r I am i se o f m a y. o 3 

Wilson. 
He can hardly be both, and he pays me regular every 
Saturday. 

Dob SON. 
Yeas; but I halites 'im. 

Ente7' Steer, Farm Men and Women. 

Steer. 
{Goes and sits under apple-tree.) Hev' ouy o' ye seen 
Eva? 

DOBSON. 

Noa, Mr. Stgpr. ^ 

Steer. 

Well, I reckons they^U hev^ a fine cider-crop to-year if 
the blossom ^owds. Good-murnin^ neighbors, and the 
sail me to you, my men. I taiikes it kindly of all o' you 
that you be coomed — what^s the newspaiiper word, Wilson? 
— celebrate — to celebrate my birthdaiiy i' this fashion. 
Niver man 'ed better friends, and T will saay niver master 
'ed better men : fur thaw I may ha' fallen out wi' ye some- 
times, the fault, mebbe, wur as much mine as yours; and, 
thaw I says it mysen, niver men 'ed a better master — and I 
knaws what men be, and what masters be, fur I wur nobbut 
a laiiborer, and now I be a landlord — burn a plowman, and 
now, as far as money goiis^ I be a gentleman, thaw I beiin't 
naw scholard, fur I 'edn't naw time to mailke mysen a 
scholard while I wur mailkin' mysen a gentleman, but I ha 
tailen good care to turn oat boiith my darters right down 
fine laiidies. 



54 THE PEOMISE OF MAY. 

DOBSON. 

An^ soa they be. 

1st Farming Man. 
Soa they be ! soil they be ! 

2d Farming Man. 
The Lord bless boath on ^em! 

3d Farming Man. 
An* the sail me to you, Master. 

4th Farming Man. 
And long life to boath on *em. An* the saame to you. 
Master Steer, likewise. 

Steer. 
Thank ye! 

Enter Eva. 

Wheer *asta been? 

Eva. 
{Timidly.) Many happy returns of the day, father. 

Steer. 

They can't be many, my dear, but I *oapes theyll be 
*appy. 

DOBSON. 

Why, tha looks haiile anew to last to a hoonderd. 

Steer. 
An* why shouldn't I last to a hoonderd? Haiile! why 
shouldn't I be haiile? fur thaw I be heighty this very daily. 



THE I'KOMISE OF MAY. 55 

I niver 'es sa much as one piii^s prick of paain; an' I can 
taiike my glass along wi' the youngest, fur I niver touched 
a drop of owt till my oiin wedding-daay, an* then I wur 
turned huppads o' sixty. Why shouldn't I he haale? I 
ha* plowed the ten-aiicre — it be mine now — afoor ony o' ye 
wur burn — ye all knaws the ten-aiicre — I mun ha' plowed 
it moor nor a hoonderd times; hallus hup at sunrise, and 
I'd drive the plow straiiit as a line right i' the faace o' the 
sun, then back agetin, a-follering myoanshadder — then 
hup ageiin i' the faace o' the sun. Eh! how the sun 'ud 
shine, and the larks 'ud sing i' them daays, and the smell 
o' the mou'd an' all. Eh! if I could ha' gone on wi' the 
plowin' nobbut the smell o' the mou'd 'ud ha' maade ma 
live as long as Jeruselem. 

Eva. 
Methuselah, father. . 

Steer. 

Ay, lass, but when thou be as owd as me thou'll put one 
word fur another as I does. 

DOBSOK. 

But, Steer, thaw thou be haale anew I seed tha a-limpm' 
up just now wi' the roomatics i' the knee. 

Steer. 

Roomatics! Noa; I laame't my knee last night running 
arter a thief. Bean't there house-breakers down i' Little- 
chester, Dobson — doan't ye hear of ony? 



56 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOBSON. 

Ay, that there be. Immanuel Goldsmith's was broke into 
o' Monday night, and ower a hoonderd pounds worth o' 
rings stolen. 

Steer. 

So I thowt, and I heard the winder — that's the winder at 
the end o' the passage, that goas by thy chaumber. ( Turn- 
ing to Eva. ) Why, lass, what maakes tha sa red ? Did 
'e get into thy chaumber? 

Eva. 
Father! 

Steer. 
Well, I runned arter thief i' the dark, and fell agean 
coal-scuttle and my kneeii gev waay, or I'd ha' cotched 'im, 
but afoor I coomed up he got thruff the winder agean. 

Eva. 
Got thro' the window again? 

Steer. 
Ay, but he left the mark of 'is foot i' the flower-bed; 
now theer be noiin o' my men, thinks I to niysen, 'nd ha' 
done it 'cep' it were Dan Smith, fur T cotched 'im once 
a-stealin' coals, an' I sent fur 'im, an' I measured his foot 
wi' the mark i' the bed, but it wouldn't fit — seaams to me 
the mark wur maiide by a Lunnun boot. {Looks at Eva.) 
Why, now, what maakes tha sa white? 

Eva. 

Eright, father! 



the promise of may. 57 

Steer. 
Maake thysen eiisy. Til hev the winder naailecl up, and 
put Towser under it. 

Eva. 

(Clasping her hands.) No, no, father! Towser '11 tear 
him all to pieces. 

Steer. 
Let him keep awaay, then; but coom, cooni! let's be gaw- 
in. They ha' broached a barrel of aale i' the long barn, 
and the fiddler be theer, and the lads and lasses 'ull hev a 
dance. 

Eva. 
(Aside.) Dance! small heart have I to dance. I should 
seem to be dancing upon a grave. 

Steer. 
Wheer be Mr. Edgar? about the premises? 

DOBSOK. 

Hallus about the premises! 

Steer. 

So much the better, so much the better, I likes 'im, and 
Eva likes 'im. Eva can do owt wi' 'im; look for 'im, Eva, 
and bring 'im to the barn. He 'ant naw pride in 'im, and 
we'll git 'im to speechify for us arter dinner. 

Eva. 
Yes, father! \_Exit 



58 the promise of may. 

Steer. 
Coom along then, all the rest o^ ye ! Church-warden be 
a-coomin, thaw me and ^ini we niver Agrees about the tithe; 
and Parson mebbe, thaw he niver mended that gap i^ the 
glebe fence as I telled ^im; and Blacksmith, thaw he niver 
shoes a herse to my likings; and Baaker, thaw I sticks to 
hoam-maade — but all on ^em welcome, all on ^em welcome; 
and l\e hed the long barn cleared out of all the machines, 
and the sacks, and the taiiters, and the mangles, and theer 
^11 be room anew for all o^ ye. Foller me. 

All. 

Yeas, yeas! Three cheers for Mr. Steer! 

[All exeunt except DoBSON into ham. 

Enter Edgar. 

DoBSON {who is going, turns). 

Squire! — if so be you be a squire. 

Edgar. 
Dobbins, I think. 

DOBSON. 

Dobbins, you thinks; and I thinks ye wears a Lunnun 
boot. 

Edgar. 
Well? 

DOBSON. 

And I thinks Pd like to taake the measure o^ your foot. 

Edgar. 
Ay, if you'd like to measure your own length upon the 
grass. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 59 

DOBSON. 

Coom, coom, that's a good im. Why, I could throw 
four o' ye; but I promised one of the Misses I wouldn't 
.meddle wi ye, and I weiint. 

[Exit into barn. 

Edgar. 

Jealous of me with Eva! Is it so? 

AVell, tho' I grudge the pretty jewel, that I 

Have worn, to such a clod, yet that might be 

The best way out of it, if the child could keep 

Her counsel. I am sure I wish her happy. 

But I must free myself from this entanglement. 

I have all my life before me — so has she — 

Give her a month or two, and her affections 

Will flower toward the light in some new face. 

Still I am half afraid to meet her now. 

She will urge marriage on me. I hate tears. 

Marriage is but an old tradition. I hate 

Traditions, ever since my narrow fath<Br, 

After my frolic with his tenant's girl, 

Made younger elder son, violated the whole 

T'radition of our land, and left his heir. 

Born, happily, with some sense of art, to live 

By brush and pencil. By and by, when Thought 

Comes down among the crowd, and man perceives that 

The lost gleam of an after-life but leaves him 

A beast of prey in the dark, why then the crowd 

May wreak my wrongs upon my wrongers. Marriage! 

That fine, fat, hooked-nosed uncle of mine, old Harold, 



60 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

Who leaves me all his laud at Littlechester, 
He, too, would oust me from his will, if I 
Made such a marriage. And marriage in itself — 
The storm is hard at hand will sweep away 
Thrones, churches, ranks, traditions, customs, mar- 
riage 
One of the feeblest! Then the man, the woman, 
Following their best affinities, will each 
Bid their old bond farewell with smiles, not tears; 
Good wishes, not reproaches; with no fear 
Of the world^s gossij^ing clamor, and no need 
Of veiling their desires. 

Conventionalism, 
Who shrieks by day at what she does by night, 
Would call this vice; but one timers vice may be 
The virtue of another; and Vice and Virtue 
Are but two masks of self; and what hereafter 
Shall mark out Vice from Virtue in the gulf 
Of never-dawning darkness? 

Enter Eva. 

My sweet Eva, 
Where have you lain in ambush all the morning? 
They say your sister, Dora, has returned, 
And that should make you happy, if you love her! 
But you look troubled. 

Eva. 

Oh, I love her so, 
I was afraid of her, and I hid myself. 
We never kept a secret from each other; 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 61 

She would have seen at once into my trouble^ 
And ask^d me what I could not answer. Oh^ Philip, 
Father heard you last night. Our savage mastiff, 
That all but killed the beggar, will be placed 
Beneath the window, Philip. 

Edgar. 

Savage, is he? 
What matters? Come, give me your hand and kiss^ 

me 
This beautiful May morning. 

Eva. 

The most beautiful 
May we have had for many years! 

Edgar. 

And here- 
Is the most beautiful morning of this May. 
Nay, yoii must smile upon me ! There — you make 
The May and morning still more beautiful, 
You, the most beautiful blossom of the May. 

Eva. 
Dear Philip, all the world is beautiful 
If we were happy, and could chime in with it. 

Edgar. 
True; for the senses, love, are for the world; 
That for the senses. 

Eva. 

Yes. 



02 the peomise of may. 

Edgar. 

And when the man. 
The child of evolution, flings aside 
His swaddling-bands, the morals of the tribe. 
He, following his own instincts as his God, 
Will enter on the larger golden age; 
No pleasure then tabooed : for when the tide 
Of full democracy has overwhelmed 
This Old world, from that flood will rise the New, 
Like the Love-goddess with no bridal-veil, 
King, trinket of the Church, but naked Nature 
In all her loveliness. 

Eva. 

What are you saying? 

Edgar. 
That if we did not strain to make ourselves 
Better and higher than Nature, we might be 
As happy as the bees there at their honey 
In these sweet blossoms. 

Eva. 

Yes; how sweet they smell! 

Edgar. 
There! let me break some off for you. 

[Breaking branch off, 

Eva. 

My thanks. 
But, look, how wasteful of the blossom you are ! 
One, two, three, four, five, six — you have robbed poor 
father 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 63 

Of ten good apples. Oh, I forgot to tell you 
' He wishes you to dine along with us, 

And speak for him after — you that are so clever! 

Edgar. 
I grieve I can not; but, indeed — 

Eva. 

What is it? 

Edgar. 
Well, business, I must leave you, love, to-day. 

Eva. 
Leave me, to-day! And when will you return? 

Edgar. 
I can not tell precisely; but — 

Eva. 

But what? 
Edgar. 
I trust, my dear, we shall be always friends. 

Eva. 
After all that has gone between us —friends! 
What, only friends? [Drops branch, 

Edgar. 

All that has gone between us 
Should surely make us friends. 

Eva. 

But keep us lovers. 



«34 the promise of may. 

Edgar. 
Child, do you love me now? 

Eva. 

Yes, now and ever. 

Edgar. 
Then you should wish us both to love forever. 
But, if you loill bind love to one forever, 
Altho^ at first he take his bonds for flowers. 
As years go on, he feels them press upon him, 
Begins to flutter in them, and at last 
Breaks thro^ them, and so flies away forever; 
While, had you left him free use of his wings, 
Who knows that he had ever dreamed of flying? 

Eva. 

But all that sounds so wicked and so strange; 
•' Till death ns part " — those are the only words. 
The true ones — nay, and those not true enough, 
For they that love do not believe that death 
Will part them. Why do you jest with me, and try 
To frighten me? Tho^ you are a gentleman, 
I but a farmer's daughter — 

Edgar. 

Tut! you talk 
Old feudalism. When the great Democracy 
Makes a new world 

Eva. 

And if you be not jesting. 
Neither the old world, nor the new, nor father, 
Sister, nor you, shall ever see me more. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 66 

Edgar {moved). 
Then — (aside) Shall I say it? — (aloud) fly with me to- 
day, 

Eva. 
No! Philip, Philip, if you do not marry me, 
I shall go mad for utter shame and die. 

Edgar. 
Then, if we needs must be conventional. 
When shall your parish-parson bawl our bans 
Before your gaping clowns? 

Eva. 

Not in our church— 

I think I scarce could hold my head up there. 

Is there no other way? 

Edgar. 

Yes, if you cared 
To fee an overopulent superstition, 
Then they would grant you what they call a license 
To marry. Do you wish it? 

Eva. 

Do I wish it? 

Edgar. 
In London. 

Eva. 
You will write to me? 

Edgar. 

I will. 



the pkomise op may. 

Eva. 
And I will fly to you thro' the night, the storm- 
Yes, tho' the fire should run along the ground. 
As once it did in Egypt. Oh, you see, 
I was just out of school, I had no mother — 
My sister far away — and you, a gentleman. 
Told me to trust you : yes, in everything — 
That was the only trite love; and I trusted — 
Oh, yes, indeed, I would have died for you. 
How could you — Oh, how could you? — nay^ how 

could I? 
But now you will set all right again, and I 
Shall not be made the laughter of the village. 
And poor old father not die miserable. 

DoKA {singing in the distance.) 
^' joy for the promise of May, of May, 
joy for the promise of May." 

Edgak. 
Speak not so loudly; that must be your sister. 
You never told her, then, of what has passed 
Between us. 

Eva. 
Never! 

Edgar. 

Do not till I bid you. 

Eva. 

No, Philip, no. [ Turns away» 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 6? 

Edgar (moved.) 

How gracefully there she stands 
Weeping — the little Niobe! What! we prize 
The statue or the picture all the more 
When we have made them ours ! Is she less lovable, 
Less lovely, being wholly mine? To stay — 
Follow my art among these quiet fields. 
Live with these honest folk — 

And play the fool! 
No! she that gave herself to me so easily 
Will yield herself as easily to another. 

Eva. 
Did you speak, Philip? 

Edgar. 

Nothing more, farewell. 
[ They embrace, 

Dora (coming nearer, ) 

^' grief for the promise of May, of May, 
grief for the promise of May. " 

Edgar (still embracing her, ) 
Keep up your heart until we meet again. 

Eya. 
If that should break before we meet again? 

Edgar. 
Break! nay, but call for Philip when you will, 
And he returns. 



68 the peomise of may. 

Eva. 
Heaven hears you, Philip Edgar I 

Edgar {moved). 
And he would hear you even from the grave. 
Heaven curse him if he come not at your call ! 

[Exit 

Enter Dora. 

Dora. 
Well, Eva! 

Eva. 
Oh, Dora, Dora, how long you have been away from 
home! Oh, how often I have wished for you! It seemed 
to me that we were parted forever. 

Dora. 
Forever, you foolish child! What^s come over you ? We 
parted like the brook yonder about the alder island, to come 
together again in a moment and to go on together again^ 
till one of us be married. But where is this Mr. Edgar 
whom you praised so in your first letters? You haven't 
even mentioned him in your last. 

Eva. 
He has gone to London. 

Dora. 

Ay, child, you look thin and pale. Is it for his absence? 
Have you fancied yourself in love with him.^ That's all 
nonsense, you know, such a baby as you are. But you 
shall tell me all about it. 



the promise of may. 69 

Eva. 

Not now — presently. Yes, I have been in trouble, but I 
am happy — I think, quite happy now. 

Dora {taking Evan's hand). 

Come, then, and make them happy in the long barn, for 
father is in his glory, and there is a piece of beef like a 
house-side, and a plum-pudding as big as the round hay- 
stack. But see, they are coming out for the dance already. 
Well, my child, let us join them. 

JEnter all from, lam laughing. Eva sits reluctantly under 
apple-tree. Steer enters smoking, sits iy Eva. 

Dance, 



70 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 



ACT II. 

Five years have elapsed between Acts I. and II. 

Scene. — A meadoio. On one side a imtliway going over a 
rustic bridge. At hack the farm-house among trees. 
In the distance a church spire. 

DoBSOK and Dora. 

DOBSON. 

So the owd uncle i^ Coomberland be dead. Miss Dora, 
bean't he? 

Dora. 
Yes, Mr. Dobson, I\e been attending on his death-bed 
and his burial. 

Dobson. 
It be five year sin' ye went afoor to him, and it seems to 
me nobbut t'other day. Hesn't he left ye nowt.^ 

Dora. 
No, Mr. Dobson. 

Dobson. 
But he were mighty fond o' ye, warn't he? 

Dora. 
Fonder of poor Eva — like everybody else. 

Dobson {handing Dora hasket of roses). 
Not like me, Miss Dora; and I ha' browt these roses to 
ye— I forgits what they calls 'em, but I hallus gi'ed soom 



THE PKOMISE OF MAT. 71 

on ^em to Miss Eva at this time o^ year. Will ye taake ^em? 
fur Miss Eva, she set the bush by my dairy winder afoor 
she went to school at Littlechester — so I alius browt soom 
on ^em to her; and now she be gone, will ye taake ^em^ 
Miss Dora? 

DOKA. 

I thank you. They tell me that yesterday you men- 
tioned her name too suddenly before my father. See that 
you do not do so again! 

DOBSON". 

Noa; I knaws a deal better now. I seed how the owd 
man wur vext. 

DOEA. 

I take them, then, for Eva^s sake. 

[Takes lashet, places some in her dress» 

DOBSOK. 

Eva^s saiike. Yeas. Poor gel, poor gel ! I can^t abear 
to think on ^er now, fur I'd ha' done owt fur 'er my sen; an* 
ony o' Steer's men, an' ony o' my men 'ud ha' done owt fur 
'er, an' all the parish 'ud ha' done owt fur 'er, fur we was 
all on us proud on 'er, an' them theer be soom of her oan 
roses, an' she wur as sweet as ony on 'em — the Lord bless 
'er — 'er oan sen; an' weant ye taake 'em now. Miss Dora, 
fur 'er saake an' fur my saake an' all? 

Dora. 
Do you want them back again? 

DOBSOK. 

iNoa, noa ! Keep 'em. But I bed a word to saay to ye^ 



72 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 



Dora. 



Why, Farmer, you should be in the hayfield looking after 
your men; you couldn't have more splendid weather. 

DOBSON. 

I be a-going theer; but I thowt I'd bring tha them roses 
fust. The weather's well anew, but the glass be a bit 
shaaky. S'iver weVe led moast on it. 

Dora. 
Ay! but you must not be too sudden with it either, as 
you were last year, when you put it in green, and your 
stack caught fire. 

DOBSON". 

I were insured, Miss, an' I lost nowt by it. But I weant 
be too sudden wi' it; and I feel sewer. Miss Dora, that I ha' 
been noan too sudden wi' you, fur I ha' sarved for ye well 
nigh as long as the man sarved for 'is sweet'art i' Scriptur'. 
Weant ye gi'e me a kind answer at last? 

Dora. 
I have no thought of marriage, my friend. We have 
been in such grief these five years, not only on my sister's 
account, but the ill success of the farm, and the debts, and 
my father's breaking down, and his blindness. How could 
I think of leaving him? 

DOBSON. 

Eh, but I be well to do; and if ye would nobbut hev me, 
I would tajike the owd blind man to my oan fireside* 
You should hev him alius wi' ye. 



the promise of may. 73 

Dora. 
You are generous, but it can not be. I can not love you; 
nay, I think I never can be brought to love any man. It 
seems to me that I hate men, ever since my sister left 
us. Oh, see here. {Fulls out a letter. ) I wear it next to 
my heart. Poor sister, I had it five years ago. ^' Dearest 
Dora, — I have lost myself, and am lost forever to you 
and my poor father. I thought Mr. Edgar the best of 
men, and he has proved himself the worst. Seek not for 
me, or you may find me at the bottom of the river. — 
Eva.'' 

DOBSON. 

Be that my fault? 

'Dora. 
Ko; but how should I, with this grief still at my hearty 
take to the milking of your cows, the fatting of your 
calves, the making of your butter, and the managing of 
your poultry? 

DOBSOl^. 

Naity, but I hev an owd woman as 'ud see to all that; 
and you should sit i' your oan parlor quite like a laady, 
ye should! 

Dora. 

It can not be. 

DOBSON. 

And plaiiy the pianner, if ye liked, all daay long, like a 
lajidy, ye should an' all. 

Dora. 
It can not be. 



74 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOBSON. 

And I would loove tha moor nor ony gentleman 'ud 
loove tha. 

Dora. 

No, no; it can not be. 

DOBSOi^. 

And p^raps ye hears ^at I soomtimes taakes a drop too 
much; but that be all along o^ you, Miss, because ye weiint 
hev me; but, if ye would, I could put all that o^ one side 
easy anew. 

Dora. 
Can not you understand plain words, Mr. Dobson? I 
tell you it can not be. 

Dobson. 
Eh, lass! Thy feyther eddicated his darters to marry 
gentlefoalk, and see what^s coomed on it. 

Dora. 
That is enough, Farmer Dobson. You have shown me 
that, though fortune had born yon into the estate of a 
gentleman, you would still have been Farmer Dobson. You 
had better attend to your hayfield. Good-afternoon. 

[Exit. 

Dobson. 

" Farmer Dobson!" Well, I be Farmer Dobson; but I 

thinks Farmer Dobson's dog 'ud ha^ knaw'd better nor to 

cast her sister's misfortin inter ^er teeth arter she'd been 

ii-reaadin' me the letter wi' ""er voice a-shaakin^ and the 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 75 

drop in 'er eye. Theer she goas! Shall I f oiler 'er and ax 
^er to maake it up? Noa, not yet. Let ^er cool upon it; 
I likes ^er all the better fur taiikin^ me down, like a laady, 
as she be. Farmer Dobson! I be Farmer Dobson, sewer 
anew; but if iver I cooms upo^ Gentleman Hedgar agean, 
and doan^t laay my cart-whip athurt ^is shoulders, why 
then I bean^t Farmer Dobson, but summun else — blaame't 
if I bean^! 

Enter Hay-makers loith a load of hay. 

The last on it, eh? 

1st Hay-maker. 
Yeas. 

DOBSON". 

Hoiim wi' it, then. {Exit surlily. 

1st Hay-maker. 
Well, it be the last load hoam. 

2d Hay-maker. 
Yeas, an^ owd Dobson should be glad on it. What 
maiikes 'im alius sa glum? 

Sally Allen. 
Glum! he be wus nor glum. He coom^d up to me yister- 
daily in the haayfield, when mea and my sweetVt was a- 
workin^ along o^ one side wi' one another, and he sent ^im 
awaily to toother end o' the field; and when 1 axed ^im why, 
he tolled me ^at sweet^arts niver worked well togither; and 
I tolled 'hn 'at sweet'arts alius worked best togither; and 
then he called me a rude nail me, and I can't abide 'im. 



76 the promise of may. 

James. 
Why, lass, doan^t tha knaw he be sweet upo' Dora Steer, 
.^nd she weant sa much as look at 'im? And wheniver 'e 
sees two sweet'arts togither like thou and me, Sally, he be 
fit to bust hissen wi' spites and jalousies. 

Sally. 
Let 'im bust hissen, then, for owt 1 cares. 

1st Hay-maker. 

Well but, as I said afoor, it be the last load hoam; do 
thou and thy sweet^art sing us hoiim to supper — '* The 
Last Load Hoam." 

All. 
Ay! ^^ The Last Load Hoam.'' 

So)ig. 

What did ye do, and what did ye saay, 

Wi' the wild white rose, and the woodbine sa gaay. 

An' the midders all mow'd, and the sky sa blue — 

What did ye saiiy, and what did ye do. 

When ye thowt there were nawbody watchin' o'you. 

And you and your Sally was forkin' the haiiy. 

At the end of the da ay. 

For the last load hoam? 

What did we do, and what did we saiiy, 
Wi' the brier sa green, and the wilier sa graiiy. 
An' the midders all mow'd, and the sky sa blue — 
Do yon think I be a^awin' to tell it to you, 



THE PROMISE OF MAY, 77 

What we mowt saay, and what we mowt do. 
When me and my Sally was forkin^ the haay, 

At the end of the daay. 

For the last load hoiim? 

But what did ye saay, and what did ye do, 
Wi' the bmtterflies out, and the swallers at plaay. 
An' the midders all mow'd, and the sky sa blue? 
Why, coom then^ owd feller, I'll tell it to you; 
For me and my Sally we sweiir'd to be true. 
To be true to each other, let 'appen what maay, 

Till the end of the daity 

And the last load hoam. 

All. 
Well sungi 

James. 
Fanny be the naame i' the song, but I swopt it fur she. 

[Pointmg to Sally. 

Sally. 
Let ma aloan afoor foalk, wilt tha? 

1st Hay^-maker. 
Ye shall sing that agean to-night, fur owd Dobson '11 gi'e 
018 a bit o' suiD^Der. 

Sally. 
I weant goa to owd Dobson; he wur rude to me i' tha 
liaayfield, and he'll be iiide to me ageitn to-night. Owd 
Steer's gotten all his grass down and wants a hand, and I'll 
goa to him. 



78 the peomise of may. 

1st Hay-maker. 
Owd Steer gi^es nubbut cowd tea to Hs men, and owd 
Dobson gi'es beer. 

Sally. 
But I^d like owd Steer^s cowd tea better nor Dobson 's 
beer. Good-bye. [Going. 

. James. 
Gi^e us a buss fust, lass. 

Sally. 
I teird tha to let ma aloan! 

James. 
Why, wasn^t thou and me a-bussin^ o' one another toother 
side 0^ the haay-cock, when owd Dobson coom^d upo' us? I 
can't let tha aloan if I would, Sally. 

[ Offering to hiss hen 

Sally. 
Git along wi' ye, do! [ExiL 

• [All laugh; exeunt singing. 
" To be true to each other, let 'appen what maay. 
Till the end o' the daiiy 
An' the last loiid hoiim. " 

Enter Harold. 
Harold. 
Not Harold! '' Philip Edgar, Philip Edgar!'' 
Her phantom call'd me by the name she loved. 
I told her I should hear her from the grave. 
Ay! yonder is her casement. I remember 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 79 

Her bright face beaming star-like down upon me 
Thro* that rich cloud of blossom. Since I left her 
Here weeping, I have ranged the world, and sat 
Thro* every sensual course of that full feast 
That leaves but emptiness. 

lSo7ig. 
'^To be true to each other, let *appen what maay. 
To the end o* the daay 
An* the last load hoam. " 

Harold. 
Poor Eva! my God, if man be only 
A willy-nilly current of sensations — 
iBeaction needs must follow revel — yet — 
Why feel remorse, he, knowing that he must have 
Moved in the iron grooves of Destiny? 
iRemorse then is a part of Destiny, 
Nature a liar, making us feel guilty 
Of her own faults. 

My grandfather — of him 
They say, that women — 

this mortal house,. 
Which we are born into, is haunted by 
The ghosts of the dead passions of dead men; 
And these take flesh again with our own flesh. 
And bring us to confusion. 

He was only 
A poor philosopher who called the mind 
Of children a blank page, a tahiila rasa. 
There, there, is written in invisible inks 



80 THE PROMISE OF MAY» 

** Lust, Prodigality, Covetousness, Craft, 
Cowardice, Murder ^^ — and the heat and fire 
Of life will bring them out, and black enough^ 
So the child grow to manhood : better death 
With our first wail than life — 

Song (further off.) 

" Till the end o' the daily 
An^ the last load hoiim, 
Loiid hoiim/' 

This bridge again! {Stejjs on the hridge,) 

How often have I stood 
With Eva here! The brook among its flowers! 
Forget-me-not, meadow-sweet, willow-herb. 
I had some smattering of science then. 
Taught her the learned names, anatomized 
The flowers for her — and now I only wish 
This pool were deep enough, that I might plunge 
And lose myself forever. 

Enter Dan Smith {singing). 
Gee oop! whoii! Gee oop! whoa! 
Scizzars an^ Pumpy was good uns to goa 
Thruf slush an' squad 
When roads was bad. 
But hallus \id stop at the Vine-an'-the-Hop^ 
Fur bojlth on 'em knaw'd as well as mysen 
That beer be as good fur 'erses as men. 
Gee oop! whoa! Gee oop! whoii! 
Scizzars an' Pumpy was good uns to goa* 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 81 

The beer^s gotten oop into my 'ead. Stiver I mun git 
along back to the farm, fur she telFcl ma to taake the cart 
to Littlechester. 

Eyiter Dora. 
Half an hour late! why are you loitering here? Away 
with you at once. [Exit Dan Smith* 

(Seeing Harold on bridge.) 
Some madman, is it, 
Gesticulating there upon the bridge? 
I am half afraid to pass. 

Harold. 

Sometimes I wonder, 
When man has surely learnt at last that all 
His old-world faith, the blossom of his youth. 
Has faded, falling fruitless — whether then 
All of us, all at once, may not be seized 
"With some fierce passion, not so much for Death 
As against Life, all, all, into the dark — 
No more! — and science now could drug and balm us 
Back into nescience with as little pain 
As it is to fall asleep. 

This beggarly life, 
This poor, flat, hedged-in field — no distance — this 
Hollow Pandora-box, 

With all the pleasures flown, not even Hope 
Left at the bottom ! 

Superstitious fool. 
What brought me here? To see her grave? her ghost? 
Her ghost is everyway about me here. 



82 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

Dora (coming forwar'd). 
Allow me, sir, to pass you. 

Harold. 

Eva! 

Dora. 

Eva! 

Harold. 
What are you? Where do you come from? 

Dora. 

From the farm 
Here, close at hand. 

Harold. 

Are you — you are — that Dora, 
The sister. I have heard of you. The likeness 
Is very striking. 

Dora. 
You knew Eva, then? 

Harold. 

Yes — I was thinking of her when — yes, 
Many years back, and never since have met 
Her equal for pure innocence of nature, 
And loveliness of feature. 

Dora. 

No, nor I. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 83 

Harold. 
Except, indeed, I have found it once again 
In your own self. 

Dora. 
You flatter me. Dear Eva 
Was always thought the prettier. 

Harold. 

And her charm 
Of voice is also yours; and I was brooding 
Upon a great unhappiness when you spoke. 

Dora. 
Indeed, you seemed in trouble, sir. 

Harold. 

And you 

Seem my good angel who may help me from it. 

Dora {aside). 
How worn he looks, poor man! who is it, I wonder? 
How can Ihelp him? {Aloud.) Might I ask your 
name? 

Harold. 
Harold. 

Dora. 
I never heard her mention you. 

Harold. 
I met her at first at a farm in Cumberland — 
Her uncle V 

Dora. 

She wa.-: there vjx years ago. 



si the promise of may. 

Harold. 
Aud if she never mentioned me^, perhaps 
The painful circumstances which I heard — 
I will not vex you by repeating them — 
Only last week at Littlechester, drove me 
From out her memory. She has disappeared 
They told me, from the farm — and darker news. 

Dora. 
She has disappeared, poor darling, from the world — 
Left but one dreadful line to say, that we 
Should find her in the river; and we dragged 
The Littlechester River all in vain: 
Have sorrowed for her all these years in vain. 
And my poor father, utterly broken down 
By losing her — she was his favorite child — 
Has let his farm, all his affairs, I fear. 
But for the slender help that I can give, 
Fall into ruin. Ah! that villain, Edgar, 
If he should ever show his face among us. 
Our men and boys would hoot him, stone him, hunt 

him 
With pitchforks off the farm, for all of them 
Loved her, and she was worthy of all love. 

Harold. 
They say, we should forgive our enemies. 

Dora. 
Ay, if the wretch were dead I might forgive him; 
We know not whether he be dead or living. 



the promise of may. 85 

Harold. 
What Edgar? 

Dora. 
Philip Edgar of Toft Hall 
In Somerset. Perhaps you know him? 

Harold. 

Slightly. 

(Aside.) Ay, for how slightly have I known myself. 

Dora. 
This Edgar, then, is living? 

Harold. 

Living? well — 

One Philip Edgar of Toft Hall in Somerset 
Is lately dead. 

Dora. 
Dead! — is there more than one? 

Harold. 
Nay— now— not one, (aside) for I am Philip Harold. 

Dora. 
That one, is he then — dead! 

Harold. 

(Aside.) My father's death, 
Let her believe it mine; this, for the moment, 
Will leave me a free field. 

Dora. 

Dead! and this world 
Is brighter for his absence as that other 
Is darker for his presence. 



the pkomise of may. 

Harold. 

Is not this 
To speak too pitilessly of the dead? 

Dora. 
My five-years^ anger can not die at once, 
Not all at once with death and him. I trust 
I shall forgive him — hy and by — not now. 
sir, you seem to have a heart; if you 
Had seen us that wild morning when we found 
Her bed unslept in, storm and shower lashing 
Her casement, her poor spaniel wailing for her. 
That desolate letter, blotted with her tears. 
Which told us we should never see her more — 
Our old nurse crying as if for her own child. 
My father stricken with his first paralysis, 
And then with blindness — had you been one of us 
And seen all this, then you would know it is not 
So easy' to forgive — even the dead. 

Harold. 
But sure am I that of your gentleness 
You will forgive him. She, you mourn for, seemed 
A miracle of gentleness — would not blur 
A moth's wing by the touching; would not crush 
The fly that drew her blood; and, were she living, 
Would not — if penitent— have denied him her 
Forgiveness. And perhaps the man himself, 
When hearing of that piteous death, has suffered 
More than we know. But wherefore waste your heart 
In looking on a chill and changeless Past? 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 87 

Iron will fuse, and marble melt; the Past 

Remains the Past. But you are young, and— pardon 

me — 
As lovely as your sister. AVho can tell 
What golden hours, with what full hands, may be 
Waiting you in the distance? Might I call 
Upon your father — I have seen the world — 
And cheer his blindness with a traveler's tales? 

Dora. 
Call if you will, and when you will. I can not 
Well answer for my father; but if you 
Can tell me anything of our sweet Eva 
When in her brighter girlhood, I at least 
Will bid you welcome, and will listen to you. 
Now I must go. 

Harold. 
But give me first your hand; 
I do not dare, like an old friend, to shake it. 
I kiss it as a prelude to that privilege 
When you shall know me better. 

Dora. 

(Aside.) How beautiful 
His manners are, and how unlike the farmers! 
You are staying here? 

Harold. 

Yes, at the way-side inn 
Close by that alder-island in your brook, 
''The Angler's Home." 



88 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOEA. 

Are yoit one? 

Harold. 

No, but I 
Take some delight in sketching, and the country- 
Has many charms, altho^ the inhabitants 
Seem semi-barbarous. 

Dora. 

I am glad it pleases you; 
Yet I, born here, not only love the country. 
But its inhabitants too; and you, I doubt not. 
Would take to them as kindly, if you cared 
To live some time among them. 

Harold. 

If I did. 
Then at least one of its inhabitants 
Might have more charm for me than all the country, 

Dora. 
That one, then, should be grateful for your preference, 

Harold. 

I can not tell, tho' standing in her presence. 
(Aside.) She colors! 

Dora. 

Sir! 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 89 

Harold. 

Be not afraid of me 
For these are no conventional flourishes. 
I do most earnestly assure you that 
Your likeness — [Shouts and cries ivWiout. 

Dora. 
What was that? my poor blind father — 

Enter Farming Man. 
Farming Man. 
Miss Dora, Dan Smith's cart hes runned ower a laady i' 
the holler laane, and they ha' ta'en the body up inter your 
chaumber, and they be all a-callin' for ye. 

Dora. 
The body! — Heavens! I come! 

Harold. 

But you are trembling. 
Allow me to go with you to the farm. [Exeunt. 

Enter Dobson. 

DOBSON. 

What feller wur it as 'a' been a-talkin' fur haafe an hour 
wi' my Dora? {Lookmg after him.) Seeams I ommost 
knaws the back on 'im — drest like a gentleman, too. 
Damn all gentlemen, says I! I should ha' thowt they'd 
bed anew of gentlefoalk, as I telled 'er to-daay when she 
fell foul upo' me. 

Minds ma o' sumniun. I could swear to that: but that 



00 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

be all one, fur I haiites 'im afoor I knaws what^e be. 
I'iieerl he turns round. Philip Hedgar o' Soonierfeetl 
Philip Hedgar o' Soomerset! — Noa — yeas — thaw the feller's 
gone and maiide such a litter of his faace. 

Eh lad, if it be thou, 111 Philij^ tha! a-plaayin' the 
saiime gaiime wi' my Dora — 111 Soomerset tha. 

I'd like to drag Im thruff the herse-pond, and she to be 
a-lookin' at it. I'd like to leather Im black and blue, and 
she to be a-laughin' at it. I'd like to fell 'im as dead as a 
bullock ! ( CUncMng his fist. ) 

But what 'ud she saiiy to that? She telled me once not 
to meddle wi' 'im, and now she be fallen out wi' ma, and I 
can't coom at 'er. 

It mun be Jiim. Noa ! Fur she'd niver 'a been talkin' 
liaiife an hour wi' the divil 'at killed her oan sister, or she 
bean't Dora Steer. 

Yeas! Fur she niver knawed 'is faace when 'e wur 'ere 
afoor; but I'll maake 'er knaw! I'll maiike 'er knaw! 

Enter Harold. 
Naay, but I mun git out on 'is waay now, or I shall be 
tlie death on 'im. [Exit. 

Harold. 
How the clown glared at me ! that Dobbins, is it, 
With whom I used to jar? but can he trace me 
Thro' five years' absence, and my change of name. 
The tan of southern summers and the beard? 
I may as well avoid him. 

Lady-like ! 
Lily-like in her stateliness and sweetness! 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 91 

How came she by it? — a daughter of the fields. 
This Dora! 

She gave her hand, unask^l, at the farm-gate; 
I almost think she half -returned the pressure 
Of mine. What, I that held the orange-blossom 
Dark as the yew? but may not those, who march 
Before their age, turn back at times, and make 
Courtesy to custom? and now the stronger motive. 
Misnamed free-will — the crowd would call it con- 
science — 
Moves me — to what? I am dreaming; for the past 
Looked thro' the present, Eva's eyes thro' hers — 
A spell upon me ! Surely I loved Eva 
More than I knew! or is it but the past 
That brightens in retiring? Oh, last night. 
Tired, pacing my new lands at Littlechester, 
I dozed upon the bridge, and the black river 
Flow'd thro' my dreams — if dreams they were. She rose 
From the foul flood and pointed toward the farm, 
And her cry rang to me across the years, 
I call you, Philip Edgar, Philip Edgar! 
Come, you will set all right again, and father 
Will not die miserable. " I could make his age 
A comfort to him — so be more at peace 
With mine own self. Some of my former friends 
Would find my logic faulty; let them. Color 
Flows thro' my life again, and I have lighted 
On a new pleasure. Anyhow we must 
Move in the line of least resistance when 
The stronger motive rules. 



92 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

But she hates Edgar. 
May not this Dobbins, or some other, spy 
Edgar in Harold? Well, then, I must make her 
Love Harold first, and then she will forgive 
Edgar for Harold^s sake. She said herself 
She would forgive him, by and by, not now — 
For her own sake then, if not for mine — not now — 
But by and by. 

Enter Dobsoi?- behind, 

DOBSON". 

By and by — eh, lad, dost a knaw this paaper? Ye drop- 
ped it upo' the road. '^ Philip Edgar, Esq.^^ Ay, you be 
a pretty squire. I ha^ fun' ye out, I hev. Eh, lad, dosta 
knaw what tha means wi' by and by? Fur if ye be goin' to 
sarve our Dora as ye sarved our Eva — then, by and by, if 
she weant listen to me when I be a-tryin' to saave 'er — if 
she weant — look to thysen, for, by the Lord, I'd think na 
moor o' maakin' an end o' tha nor a carrion craw — noa — 
thaw they hanged ma at 'Size fur it. 

Harold. 
Dobbins, I think! 

DOBSON. 

I bejin't Dobbins. 

Harold. 
Nor am I Edgar, my good fellow. 

DOBSON. 

Tha lies! What hasta been saiiyin' to my Dora? 



the promise of may. 93 

Harold. 
I have been telling her of the death of one Philip Edgar 
of Toft Hall, Somerset. 

DOBSOl^. 

Tha lies! 

Harold ( pulling out a neivspaper). 
Well, my man, it seems that you can read. Look there 
— under the deaths. 

DOBSON. 

'' 0' the 17th, Philip Edgar, o' Toft Hall, Soomerset." 
How coom thou to be sa like 'im, then? 

Harold. 
Naturally enough; for T am closely related to the dead 
man^s family. 

DOBSON-. 

An ^ow coom thou by the letter to ^im? 

Harold. 
Naturally again; for as I used to transact all his busi- 
ness for him, I had to look over his letters. Now then, 
see these {takes out letters). Half a score of them, all di- 
rected to me — Harold. 

DOBSON". 

'Arold! 'Arold! ^Arold, so they be. 

Harold. 
My name is Harold! Good-day, Dobbins! [Exit, 



94 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOBSON. 

^Arold! The feller's clean daazed, an^ maazed, an' 
maated, an' muddled ma. Dead! It mun be true, fur it 
wur i' print as black as owt. Naay, but '' Good-daay, 
Dobbins. " Why, that were the very twang on 'im. Eh, 
lad, but whether thou be Hedgar, or Hedgar's business 
man, thou hesn't naw business 'ere wi' my Dora, as I 
knows on, an' whether thou calls thysen Hedgar or Har- 
old, if thou stick to she I'll stick to thee — stick to tha 
like a weasel to a rabbit, I will. Ay! and I'd like to 
shoot tha like a rabbit and all. "Good-daay, Dobbins." 
Dang tha! 



THE PEOMISE OF MAY. 95 



ACT III. 

ScEKE. — A room in Steer's House. Door leading int(p 
bedroom at the lach. 

Dora {ringing a handiell), 
Milly! 

E7iter Milly. 
Milly. 
The little ^ymn? Yeas, Miss; but I were so ta'en up wi^ 
leadin' the owd man about all the blessed murnin' 'at I 
ha' nobbut lamed my sen haafe on it. 

'^ man, forgive thy mortal foe, 
Nor ever strike him blow for blow; 
For all the souls on earth that live 
To be forgiven must forgive. 
Forgive him seventy times and seven: 
For all the blessed souls in Heaven 
Are both f orgivers and forgiven. " 

But I'll git the book agean, and larn mysen the rest, and 
saay it to ye afoor dark; ye ringed fur that. Miss, didn't ye? 

Dora. 
No, Milly; but if the farming men be come for their 
wages, to send them up to me. 

Milly. 
Yeas, Miss. [Exit 



96 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

Dora {sitting at desk counting money). 
Enough at any rate for the present. {Enter Farming 
Men. ) Goocl-afternoon, my friends. I am sorry Mr. Steer 
still continues too unwell to attend to you, but the school- 
master looked to the paying you your wages when I was 
iiway, didn't he? 

Men. 
Yeas; and thanks to ye. 

Dora. 
Some of our workmen have left us, but he sent me an 
alphabetical list of those that remain; so, Allen, I may as 
well begin with you. 

Allen {ivith his hand to his ear). 
Half abitical ! Taake one o' the young ones fust. Miss, 
fur I be a bit deaf, and I wur hallus scaared by a big word; 
least waays, I should be wi' a lawyer. 

Dora. 
I spoke of your names, Allen, as they are arranged here 
{shows booh) — according to their first letters. 

Allen. 
Letters! Yeas, I sees now. Them be what they lams 
the childer' at school, but I were burn afoor schoolin'-time. 

Dora. 
But, Allen, tho' you can't read, you could whitewash 
that cottage of yours where your grandson had the fever. 

Allen. 
I'll hev it done o' Monday. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 97 



Dora. 



Else if the fever spread, the parish will have to thank 
you for it. 

Allen. 
Meii? why, it be the LorcVs doin^ noan o' mine; d'ye 
think I'd gi^e ^em the fever? But 1 thanks ye all the 
saame. Miss. ( 7\(.ke8 money. ) 

Dora [calling out names.) 
Higgins, Jackson, Luscombe, Nokes, Oldham, Skip- 
worth! {All tal^e money.) Did you find that you worked 
at all the worse upon the cold tea than you would have 
done upon the beer? 

HiGGIKS. 

Noa, Miss; we worked naw wuss upo^ the cowd tea; but 
we^d ha' worked better uj)o' the beer. 

Dora. 
Come, come, you worked well enough, and I am much 
obliged to all of you. There^s for you, and you, and you. 
Count the money and see if it's all right. 

Mek. 
All right, miss; and thank ye kindly. 

^Exeunt Luscombe, Nokes, Oldham, 
Skipworth. 

Dora. 

Dan Smith, my father and I forgave you stealing our 
coals. [Dan Smith advances to Dora. 

4 



98 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

Dan Smith (beUoiving.) 
Whoy, lor, Miss! that wur sa long back, and the walls 
sa thin, and the winders brokken, and the weather sa cowd, 
and my missus a-gittin' ower 'er lyin^-in. 

Dora. 
Didn't I say that we had forgiven you? But, Dai: 
Smith, they tell me that you — and you have six children— 
spent all your last Saturday's wages at the ale-house; that 
you were stupid drunk all Sunday, and so ill in conse- 
quence all Monday, that you did not come into the hay- 
field. Why should I pay you your full wages? 

Dan Smith. 
I be ready to taake the pledge. 

Dora. 

And as ready to break it again. Besides, it was you that 
were driving the cart — and I fear you were tipsy then, too 
— when you lamed the lady in the hollow lane. 

Dak Smith {helloioing). 

O lor. Miss! noil, noa, noii! Ye sees the holler laiine be 

hallus so dark i' the arternoon, and wheere the big esh- 

tree cuts athurt it, it gi'es a turn like, and 'ow should 

I see to laiime the laiidy, and mea coomin'' alang pretty 

sharp an' all? 

Dora. 

Well, there are your wages; the next time you waste 
them at a pot-house you get no more from me. {Exit 
Dan Smith. ) Sally Allen, you worked for Mr. Dobson, 
didn't you? 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 99 

Sally {advancing). 
Yeiis, Miss; but he wur so rough wi' ma, I couldn't 
abide 'im. 

Dora. 
Why should he be rough with you? You are as good as 
a man in the haylield. What^s become of your brother? 

Sally. 
'Listed for a soJidger, Miss, i' the Queen's Real Hard 
Tillery. 

Dora. 
And your sweetheart — when are you and he to be mar- 
ried? 

Sally. 
At Michaelmas, Miss, please God. 

Dora. 
You are an honest pair. I will come to your wedding. 

Sally. 
An' I thanks ye fur that. Miss, moor nor fur the waiige. 

( Qoing — returns, ) 
'A cotched ma about the waaist. Miss, when 'e wur 'ere 
afoor, an' axed ma to be 'is little sweet'art, an' soa I knaw'd 
'im when I seed 'im ageiin, an' I telled feyther on 'im. 

Dora. 
What is all this, Allen? 

Allen. 
Why, Miss Dora, mea an' my maatel ^, we wants 

to hev' three words wi'ye. ' 



100 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

HiGGINS. 

That be ^im, and mea. Miss. 

Jackson. 

An'' me a. Miss. 

Allej^. 

An^ we weant mention naw naames^ we^d as lief talk o' 
the Divil afoor ye as ^im^, fur they says the master goas 
clean off his 'ead when he 'ears the naame on 'im; but us 
three, arter Sally'd. telled us on 'im, we fun' 'im out a-walkin' 
i' West Field wi' a white 'at, nine o'clock, upo' Tuesday 
murnin', and all on us, wi' your leave, we wants to leather 
'im. 

DOKA. 

Who? 

Allen^. 
Him as did the mischief here, five years sin\ 

Dora. 
Mr. Edgar? 

Allek. 
Theer, Miss I You ha' nailmed 'im — not me. 

Dora. 

He's dead, man — dead; gone to his account — dead and 
buried. 

Allen. 

I bean't sa sewer o' that, fur 8ally knaw'd 'im; now 
then? 



the promise of may. 101 

Dora. 
Yes; it was in the Somersetshire papers. 

Allen. 
Then yon mun be his brother, an' we'll leather Hm, 

JJOEA. 

I never heard that he had a brother. Some foolish mis- 
take of Sally's; but what! would you beat a man for his 
brother's fault? That were a wild Justice indeed. Let by- 
gones be by-gones. Go home! Good-night! {All exeunt.) 
I have once more paid them all. The work of the farm 
will go on still, but for how long? We are almost at 
the bottom of the well; little more to be drawn from it 
— and what then? Encumbered as we are, who would lend 
us anything? We shall have to sell all the land, which 
Father, for a whole life, has been getting together, again, 
and that, I am sure, would be the death of him. What 
am I to do? Farmer Dobson, were I to marry him, has 
promised to keep our heads above water; and the man has 
doubtless a good heart, and a true and lasting love for me; 
yet — though I can be sorry for him — as the good Sally says, 
'^ I can't abide him " — almost brutal, and matched with my 
Harold is like a hedge thistle by a garden rose. But then, 
he, too — will he ever be of one faith with his wife? which 
is my dream of a true .marriage. Can I fancy him kneel- 
ing with me, and uttering the same prayer; standing up 
side by side with me, and singing the same hymn? I fear 
not. Have I done wisely, then, in accepting him? But 
may not a girl's love-dream have too much romance in it to 
be realized all at once, or altogether, or anywhere but in 



102 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

heaven? And yet I had once a vision of a pure and perfect 
marriage, where the man and the woman, only differing as 
the stronger and the weaker, should walk hand in hand to- 
gether down this valley of tears, as they call it so truly, to 
the grave at the bottom, and lie down there together in the 
darkness which would seem but for a moment, to be 
wakened again together by the light of the resurrection, 
and no more partings forever and forever. ( Walks up and 
doiun. She smgs. ) 

*' happy lark, that warblest high 
Above thy lowly nest, 
brook, that brawlest merrily by 
Thro' fields that once were blest, 

tower spiring to the sky, 

graves in daisies dressed, 
Love and Life, how weary am I, 

And how I long for resf 

'Jliere, there, I am a fool! Tears! I have sometimes been 
moved to tears by a chapter of fine writing in a novel; but 
what have I to do with tears now? All depends on me — 
Father, this poor girl, the farm, everything; and they both 
love me — I am all in all to both; and' he loves me too, I 
am quite sure of that. Courage, courage! and all will go 
well. {Goes to hedroom door; opens it.) How dark your 
room is! Let me bring you in here where there is still 
full daylight. {Brings Eva forivard.) Why, you look 
better. 



the promise of may. 103 

Eva. 

And I feel so much better that I trust I may be able by 
and by to help you in the business of the farm; but I must 
not be known yet. Has any one found me out, Dora? 

DOBA. 

Oh, no; you kept your veil too close for that when they 
carried you in; since then, no one has seen you but my- 
self. 

Eva. 

Yes — ^this Milly. 

Dora. 
Poor blind Father^s little guide, Milly, who came to us 
three years after you were gone, how should she know you? 
But now that you have been brought to us as it were from 
the grave, dearest Eva, and have been here so long, will 
you not speak with father to-day? 

Eva. 

Do you think that I may? No, not yet. I am not equal 
to it yet. 

Dora. 
Why? Do you still suffer from your fall in the hollow 
lane? 

Eva. 

Bruised ; but no bones broken. 

Dora. 
I have always told Father that the huge old ash-tree 
there would cause an accident some day; but he would 



104 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

never cut it down, because one of the Steers had planted it 
there in former times. 

Eva. 

If it had killed one of the Steers there the other day., it 
might have been better for her, for him, and for you. 

Dora. 
Come, come, keep a good heart! Better for me! That^s 
good. How better for me? 

Eva. 
You tell me you have a lover. Will he not fly from you 
if he learn the story of my shame and that 1 am still living? 

Dora. 

No ; I am sure that when we are married he will be will- 
ing that you and Father should live with us; for, indeed, he 
tells me that he met you once in the old times, and was 
much taken with you, my dear. 

Eva. 
Taken with me; who was he? Have you told him I am 

here? 

Dora. 

No; do you wish it? 

Eva. 
See, Dora; you yourself are ashamed of me (weeps), and 
I do not wonder at it. 

Dora. 
But I should wonder at myself if it were so. Have we 
not been all in all to one another from the time when we 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 105 

first peeped into the bird's nest, waded in the brook, ran 
after the butterflies, and prattled to each other tnat we 
would marry fine gentlemen, and played at being fine 
ladies? 

Eva. 
That last was my father ''s fault, poor man. And this 
lover of yours — this Mr. Harold—is a gentleman? 

Dora. 
That he is, from head to foot. I do believe I lost my 
heart to him the very first time we met^ and I love him so 
much — ■ 

Eva. 
Poor Dora! 

Dora. 
That I dare not tell him how much I love him. 

Eva. 
Better not. Has he offered you marriage, this gentle- 
man? 

Dora. 

Could I love him else? 

Eva. 

And are you quite sure that after marriage this gentle- 
man will not be ashamed of his poor farmer's daughter 
among the ladies in his drawing-room? 

Dora. 
Shamed of me in a drawing-room! Wasn't Miss A'^ava- 
f^our, our school-mistress at Littlechester, a lady born? 



] 



106 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

Were not our fellow-pupils all ladies? Wasn't dear 
mother herself at least by one side a lady? Can't I speak 
like a lady; pen a letter like a lady; talk a little French 
like a lady; play a little like a lady? Can't a girl when 
she loves her husband, and he her, make herself anything 
he wishes her to be? Shamed of me in a drawing-room, 
indeed! See here! '' I hope your Lordship is quite re- 
covered of your gout?" {Courtesies.) ^'^ Will your Lady- 
ship ride to cover to-day? {Courtesies.) I can recommend 
our Voltigeur. " *^ I am sorry that we could not attend 
your Grace's party on the 10th!" {Courtesies.) There, I 
am glad my nonsense has made you smile! 

Eva. 
I have heard that "your Lordship," and "your Lady- 
ship," and " your Grace" are all growing old-fashioned! 

DOEA. 

But the love of sister for sister can never be old-fash- 
ioned. I have been unwilling to trouble you with ques- 
tions, but you seem somewhat better to-day. We found a 
letter in your bedroom torn into bits. I couldn't make 
it out. What was it? 

Eva. 
From him ! from him ! He said we had been most happy 
together, and he trusted that some time we should meet 
again, for he had not forgotten his promise to come when 
I called him. But that was a mockery, you know, for he 
gave me no address, and there was no word of marriage; 
and, Dora, he signed himself " Yours gratefully " — 
fancy, Dora, "gratefully!" " Yours gratefully!" 



the promise of may. 107 

Dora. 
Infamous wretch ! ( A side. ) Shall I tell her he is dead? 
No; she is still too feebleo 

Eva. 
Hark ! Dora^, some one is coming. I can not and I will 
not see anybody. 

DOEA. 

It is only Milly. 

Filter Milly ivifh basket of roses. 

Dora. 
Well, Milly, why do you come in so roughly? The sick 
lady here might have been asleep. 

Milly. 
Please, Miss, Mr. Dobson telled me to saay he's browt 
some of Miss Eva's roses for the sick laady to smell on, 

Dora. 
Take them, dear. Say that the sick lady thanks him! Is 
he here? 

Milly. 
Yeas, Miss; and he wants to speak to ye particular. 

Dora. 
Tell him I can not leave the sick lady just yet. 

Milly. 
Yeas, Miss; but he says he wants to tell ye summut very 
particular. 



108 the promise of may. 

Dora. 
Not to-day. What are you staying for? 

MiLLY. 

Why, Miss, I be afeard I shall set him a-swearing like 
onythink. 

Dora. 

And what harm will that do you, so that you do not copy 
his bad manners? Godchild. (^.«Y Milly.) But, Eva, 
why did you write " Seek me at the bottom of the river ?^' 

Eva. 
Why? because I meant it! — that dreadful night! that 
lonely walk to Littlechester, the ]"ain beatijig in my face all 
the way, dead midnight when I came upon the bridge; the 
river, black, slimy, swirling under me in the lamp-light, 
by the rotten wharfs — but I was so mad, that I mounted 
upon the parapet — 

Dora. 
You make me shudder! 

Eva. 

To fling myself over, when T heard a voice, ^^ Girl, what 
are you doing there ?^' It was a Sister of Mercy, come 
from the death-bed of a pauper, who had died in his misery 
blessing God, and the Sister took me to her house, and bit 
by bit — for she promised secrecy — I told her all. 

Dora, 
And what then? 



the promise of may. 109 

Eva. 

She would have persuaded me to come back here, but I 
couldn't. Then she got me a place as nursery governess, 
and when the children grew too old for me, and I asked 
her once more to help me, once more she said, "Go 
liome;" but I hadn't the heart or face to do it. And then 
— what would Father say? I sunk so low that I went into 
service — the drudge of a lodging-house — and when the mis- 
tress died, and I appealed to the Sister again, her answer — 
1 think I have it about me — yes, there it is! 

Dora {reads). 
'^ My dear Child, — I can do no more for you. I have 
done wrong in keeping your secret; your Father must be 
now in extreme old age. Go back to him and ask his for- 
giveness before he dies. — Sister Agatha. " Sister Agatha 
is right. Don't you long for Father's forgiveness? 

Eva. 
I would almost die to have it! 

Dora. 
And he may die before he gives it; may drop off any 
day, any hoar. You must see him at once. ( Rings hell. 
Enter Milly.) Milly, my dear, how did you leave Mr. 
Steer? 

Milly. 
He's been a-moanin' and a-groanin' in 's sleep, but I 
thinks he be wakkenin' oop. 

Dora. 
Tell him that I and the lady here wish to see him. You 
see she is lamed, and can not go down to him. 



110 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

MiLLY. 

Yeiis, Miss, I will. [^Exit Milly. 

Dora. 

I ought to prepare you. You must not expect to find 
our Father as he was five years ago. He is much altered; 
but I trust that your return — for you know, my dear, you 
were always his favorite — will give him, as they say, a new 
lease of life. 

Eya {clinging to Dora.) 
Oh, Dora, Dora! 

Enter Steer, led ly Milly. 
Steer. 
Hes the cow cawved? 

Dora. 
No, Father 

Steer. 
Be the colt deiid? 

Dora. 
No, Father. 

Steer. 
He wur sa bellows'd out wi^ the wind this murnin', 'at I 

teird 'em to gallop 'ioi. Be he deiid? 

• 

Dora 
Not that I know. 

Steer. 
What hasta sent fur me, then, fur? 



•IHE PROMISE OF .MA\. ill 

DoEA (taking Steer^s arm). 
Well, Father, I have a surprise for you. 

Steer. 
I ha* niver been surprised but once i* my life, and I 
went blind upon it. 

J3oRA. 
Eva has come home. 

Steer. 
Hoam? fro* the bottom o* the river? 

Dora. 
No, Father, that was a mistake. She's here again. 

Steer. 

The Steers was all gentlefoalks i* the owd times, an* 
I worked early an* laiite to maiike *em all gentlefoalks 
ageiin. The land belonged to the Steers i* the owd times, 
an* it belongs to the Steers agean: I bowt it back ageiin; 
but I couldn't buy my darter back ageiin when she lost 
hersen, could I? I eddicated boiith on *em to marry 
gentlemen, an* one on *em went an* lost hersen i* the 
river. 

Dora. 

No, Father, she*s here. 

Steer. 
Here! she moiint coom here. What would her mother 
saiiy? If it be her ghoiist, we mun abide it. We can*t 
keep a ghoiist out. 



112 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

Eva {falling at his feet) 
forgive me! forgive me! 

Steer. 
"Who said that? Take me awaay, little gell. It be one 

o^ my bad daays. 

[Exit Steer led by Milly. 

Dora (smoothing Eva's forehead.) 
Be not so cast down, my sweet Eva. You heard him say 
it was one of his bad days. He will be sure to know you 
to=morrow. 

Eva. 
It is almost the last of my bad days, I think. I am very 
faint. I must lie down. Give me your arm. Lead me 
back again. 

[LoKA tahes Eva into inner room. 

Enter Milly. 
Milly. 
Miss Dora! Miss Dora! 

Dora {returning and leaving the bedroom door ajar. ) 
Quiet! quiet! What is it? 

Milly. 
Mr. 'Arold, miss. 

Dora. 
Below? 

Milly. 

Yeiis, miss. He be saayin' a word to the owd man- but 
he'll coom up if ye lets 'im. 



the pho.misk uf may. 113 

Dora. 
Tell him, then, that Tm waiting for him. 

MiLLY. 

Yeas, Miss. 

\Exit. Dora nts pensively and zvaits. 

Enter Harold. 
You are pale, my Dora! but the ruddiest cheek 
That ever charm'd the plowman of your wolds 
Might wish its rose a lily, could it look 
But half as lovely. I was speaking with 
Your father, asking his consent — you wished me— 
That we should marry : he would answer nothing, 
I could make nothing of him; but, my flower. 
You look so weary and so worn! What is it 
Has put you out of heart? 

Dora. 

It puts me in heart 
Again to see you; but indeed the state 
Of my poor father puts me out of heart. 
Is yours yet living? 

Harold. 
No— I told you. 

Dora. 

When? 

Harold. 

Confusion!— Ah, well, well! the state we all 
Must come to in our spring-and-winter world 



114 THE FKOMISE OF MAY. 

If we live long enougli! and poor Steer looks 
The very type of Age in a picture, bow'd 
To the earth he came from, to the grave he goes to. 
Beneath the burden of years. 

DOEA. 

More like the picture 
Of Christian in my " Pilgrim's Progress '^ here, 
Bow'd to the dust beneath the burden of sin. 



Sin! What sin? 



Hakold. 

Dora. 
Not his own. 

Harold. 



That nursery tale 



Still read, then? 



Dora. 

Yes; our carters and our shepherds 



Still find comfort there. 

Harold. 

Carters and shepherds! 

Dora. 
Scorn! I hate scorn. A soul with no religion — 
My mother used to say that such a one 
Was without rudder, anchor, compass — might be 
Blown ever3rway with every gust and wreck 
On any rock; and tho' you are good and gentle. 
Yet if thro' any want — 



the promise of may. 115 

Harold. 

Of this religion? 
Child, read a little history, you will find 
The common brotherhood of man has been 
Wrong\l by the cruelties of his religions 
More than could ever have happened thro' the want 
Of any or all of them. 

Dora. 

— But, O dear friend. 
If thro' the want of any — I mean the true one — 
And pardon me for saying it — you should ever 
Be tempted into doing what might seem 
Not altogether worthy of you, I think 
That I should break my heart, for you have taught me 
To love you. 

Harold. 
What is this? some one been stirring 
Against me? he, your rustic amourist. 
The polish'd Damon of your pastoral here, 
This Dobson of your idyl? 

Dora. 

No, Sir, no! 

Did you not tell me he was crazed with jealousy. 
Had threatened ev'n your life, and would say anything? 
Did 1 not promise not to listen to him. 
Not ev'n to see the man? 

Harold. 

Good; then what is it 

That makes you talk so dolefully? 



116 the promise of may. 

Dora. 

I told you — 
My father. Well, indeed, a friend just now. 
One that has been much wrong^l, whose griefs ai*e 

mine. 
Was warning me that if a gentleman 
Should wed a farmer^s daughter, he would be 
Sooner or later shamed of her among 
The ladies, born his equals. 

Harold. 

More fool he! 
AVhat I that have been eall'd a Socialist, 
A C*ommunist, a NihiJist — what you will! 

Dora. 
What are ail these? 

Harold. 

Utopian idiotcies. 
They did not last three Junes. Such rampant weeds 
Strangle each other, die, and make the soil 
For Cc^sars, Oromwells, and Napoleons 
1^0 root their power in. I have freed myself 
From all such dreams, and some will say because 
I have inherited my Uncle. Let them. 
But — shamed of you, my Empress! I should prize 
The pearl of Beauty, even if I found it 
Dark with the soot of slums. 

Dora. 

But I can tell you. 
We Steers are of old blood, tho' we be fallen. 



THE PRO.MISK OF MAY. 11* 

See there our shield. {Foi?itmg to arms on mantel- 
piece.) For I have heard the Steers 
Had land in Saxon times; and your own name 
Of Harold sounds so English and so old 
I am sure you must be proud of it. 

Haeold. 

Not I! 

As yet I scarcely feel it mine. I took it 

For some thi-ee thousand acres. I have land now 

And wealth, and lay both at your feet. 

Dora. 

And what was 
Your name before? 

Harold. 
Come, come, my girl, enough 
Of this strange talk. I love you, and you me. 
True, I have held opinions, hold some still. 
Which you would scarce approve of; for all that, 
I am a man not prone to jealousies. 
Caprices, humors, moods; but very ready 
To make allowances, and mighty slow 
To feel offenses. Nay, I do believe 
1 could forgive — well, almost anything — 
And that more freely than your formal priest. 
Because I know more fully than he can 
What poor earth-worms are all and each of us. 
Here crawling in this boundless Nature. Dora, 
If marriage ever brought a woman happiness, 
1 doubt not I can make you happy. 



118 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOKA. 

You make me 
Happy already. 

Harold. 

And I never said 
As mucli before to any woman living. 

Dora. 

" No? 

Harold. 
No! by this true kiss, you are the first 
I ever have loved truly. [ They hiss each other, 

Eva (ivith a loild cry, ) 

Philip Edgar! 

Harold. 

The phantom cry! You — did yoii hear a cry? 

Dora. 

She must be crying out '' Edgar " in her sleep. 

Harold. 
Who must be crying out ^' Edgar '' in her sleep? 

Dora. 
Your pardon for a minute. She must be waked. 

Harold. 
Who must be waked? 

Dora. 

I am not deaf; you fright me. 
What ails you? 



the promise oe may. 119 

Harold. 
Speak. 

DOEA. 

You know her, Eva. 

Harold. 

Eva! 
[Eva opens the door and stands in the entry. 



She! 



Eva. 
Make her happy, then, and I forgive you. 

[^Falls dead. 

Dora. 
Happy! What? Edgar? Is it so? Can it be? 
They told me so. Yes, yes! I see it all now. 

she has fainted. Sister, Eva, sister! 
He is yours again — he will love you again; 

1 give him back to you again. Look up! 

One word, or do but smile! Sweet, do you hear me? 
[Puts her hand on Eva^s heart. 
There, there, the heart, God! — the poor young 

heart 
Broken at last — all still — and nothing left 
To live for. \_Falls on iody of her sister. 

Harold. 
Living . . . dead . . . She said " all still. 
Nothing to live for.^^ 

She —she knows me — now . . . 

{A paiose.) 



120 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

She knew me from the first, she juggled with me^ 
She hid this sister, told me she was dead— 
I have wasted pity on her— not dead now— 
No! acting, playing on me, both of them. 
They drag the river for her! no, not they! 
Playing on me — not dead now— a swoon — a scene- 
Yet — how she made her wail as for the dead ! 

Enter Milly. 

MiLLY. 

Please, Mister ^Arold— 

Harold (rotcghly.) 
Well? 

Milly. 

The owd man^s coomVl ageiin to 'issen, an^ wants 
To hev a word wi^ ye about the marriage. 



The what? 



Harold. 

Milly. 
The marriage. 

Harold. 

The marriage? 

Milly. 

Yeas, the marriage. 
Granny says marriages be maade i' 'eaven. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 121 

Harold. 

She lies! They are made in Hell. Child, can't you 

see? 
Tell them to fly for a dootoi*. 

MiLLY. 

law— yeas. Sir! 
ril run fur 'im mysen. 

Harold. 

All silent there. 
Yes, death-like! Dead? I dare not look: if dead, 
Were it best to steal away, to spare myself, 
And her too, pain, pain, pain? 

My curse on all 
This world of mud, on all its idiot gleams 
Of pleasure, all the foul fatalities 
That blast our natural passions into pains! 

Enter Dobson. 

DoBSOiir. 

You, Master Hedgar, Harold, or whativer 
They calls ye, for I warrants that ye goas 
By haafe a scoor o' naames — out o' the chaumber. 

[Dragging him past the body. 

Harold. 

Not that way, man! Curse on your brutaJ SLiengib! 
I can not pass that way. 



122 THE PROMISE OF MAY. 

DOBSON. 

Out o' the chaumber! 
I'll mash tha into nowt. 

Harold. 

The mere wild beast! 

DOBSON. 

Out o' the chaumber, dang tha! 

Harold. 

Lout, churl, clown! 

[ While they are shouting and struggling Dora 
rises and comes hetxoeen them. 

Dora {to Dobson). 
Peace, let him be : it is the chamber of Death ! 
Sir, you are tenfold more a gentleman, 
A hundred times more worth a woman's love. 
Than this, this — but I waste no words upon him : 
His wickedness is like my wretchedness — 
Beyond all language. 

{To Harold.) 

You — you see her there! 
Only fifteen when first you came on her. 
And then the sweetest flower of all the wolds, 
So lovely in the promise of her May, 
So winsome in her grace and gayety. 
So loved by all the village people here. 
So happy in herself and in her home — 



THE FIIOMISE OF MAY. 133 

DoBSOi^ {agitated). 

Theer, theer! ha^ done. I can^t abeiir to see her. 

[Exit. 

Dora. 

A child, and all as trustful as a child! 
Five years of shame and suffering broke the heart 
That only beat for you; and he, the father. 
Thro' that dishonor which you brought uj)on us, 
Has lost his health, his eyesight; even his mind. 

Hakold {covering his face. ) 
Enough! 

DOEA. 

It seem\l so; only there was left 
A second daughter, and to her you came 
Veiling one sin to act another. 

Harold. 

No! 
You wrong me there! hear, hear me! I wish'd, if 
you — [Pause a. 

Dora. 
If I— 

Harold. 

Could love me, could be brought to love me 
As I loved you — 

Dora. 
What then? 



134 the promise of may. 

Harold. 

I wish'd, I hoped. 
To make, to make — 

Dora. 

What did you hope to make? 

Harold. 

'Twere best to make an end of my lost life. 
Dora, Dora! 

Dora. 

What did yon hope to make? 

Harold. 
Make^ make I I can not find the word — forgive it — 
Amends. 

Dora. 
For what? to whom? 

Harold. 

To him, to you! 
[Falling at her feet. 

Dora. 
To him ! to me! 

No, not wdth all your wealth, 
Your land, your life! Out in the fiercest storm 
That ever made earth tremble — he, nor I — 
The shelter of your roof — not for one moment — 
Nothing from you ! 
Sunk in the deepest pit of pauperism. 



THE PROMISE OF MAY. 125 

Pusli'd from all doors as if we bore the plague. 
Smitten with fever in the open field, 
J^aid famine-stricken at the gates of Death — 
Nothing from you ! 

But she there — her last word 
Forgave — and I forgive you. If you ever 
Forgive yourself, you are even lower and baser 
Than even I can well believe you. Go! 

\^He lies at Iter feet. Curtain falls. 



ADVERTISEMENTS. 



THE BEST 




tARLlNt 



No Lady, Married or Sin- 
gle, Rich, or Poor, House- 
keeping or Boarding, "will 
be without it after testing 
its utility. 

Sold by all first -class 
Grocers, but be-ware of 
worthless imitations. 



GLUTISM SUPPOSITORIES 

CURE COI^J^XIPAIIO.^ ArVl> 1»II.ES. 

60 Cents by Mail. Circulars Free. 

HEALTH FOOD CO., 

4tli Avenue a.iid lOtli ^t., I^. Y. 



CANDY 
CANDY 



Send $1, $2, $3 or $5 for a sample retail box by 
Express, of 

THE BEST CANDIES IN AMERICA, 

put up in elegant boxes, and strictly pure. Suit- 
able for presents. Express charges light. Refer 
to all Chicago. Try it once. 

If preferred, fine candy at 25c., 40c., and 60c. 
per pound; the best in the land for the 
money. Address 

C F. OIJ^iXHER, 

Confectioner, 

CHICAGO. 



WHAT IS SAPOLIO? 



It is a solid, 
handsome cake 
of scouring soap, 
w h i c h has no 
qual for all cleaning purposes except the laundry. To use it is to value it. 
What will Sapolio do? WhJ^ it will clean paint, make oil-cloths bright, and 
give the floors, tallies and shelves a. new appearance. 
It will take the grease off the dishes and off the pots and pans. 
You can scour the knives and forks with it, and make the tin things shine 
brightly. The w^ash-l)a8in, the bath-tub. even the greasy kitchen smk, will 
be as clean as a new pin if you use SAPOLIO. Oue cake will prov«» ■*!) 
we say. Be a clever little 'himsekee;)er and try it. 

BEWARE OF IMITATIONS. 



MUNRO'S PUBLICATIONS. 



The Seaside Library-Pocket Edition. 



Persons who wish to purchase the following works In complete and un- 
abridged form are cautioned to order and see that they get The Seaside 
Library, Pocket Edition, as works pubhslied in other Libraries are fre- 
quently abridged and incomplete. Every number of The Seaside Library 
is unchanged and unabridged. 

Newsdealers wishing Catalogues of The Seaside Library, Pocket Edition, 
bearing their imprint, will be supplied on sending their names, addresses 
and number required. 

The works in The Seaside Library, Pocket Edition, are printed from 
larger type and on better paper than any other series published. 

The following works are for sale by all newsdealers, or will be sent to 
any addx-ess, postage free, on receipt of price, by the publisher. Address 

GEORGE MUNRO, Munro's Publishing House, 
P. O. Box 3761. 17 to 27 Vandewater Street, N. Y. 

{WTien ordering by mail please order by numbers.] 



LIST OF AUTHORS. 



Works by the author of ** Adclie's 
Husband." 

388 Addie's Husband ; or, Through 

Clouds to Sunshine 10 

504 My Poor Wife 10 

Works by the author of '* A Fatal 
Dower," 

S46 A Fatal Dower 10 

372 Phyllis' Probation. 10 

461 His Wedded Wife 20 

829 The Actor's Ward. - . 20 

Works by the author of ** A Great 
Mistake.'* 

244 A Great Mistake , SO 

588 Cherry , 10 

Works by the author of "A 
Woman's Love-Story." 



322 A Woman's Love-Story . 
677 Griselda. 



Mrs. Alexander's Works. 



5 The Admiral's Ward 20 

17 The Wooing O't 20 

62 The Executor 20 

189 Valerie's Fate 10 

2*29 Maid, Wife, or Widow ? 10 

236 Which Shall it Be? 20 

339 Mrs. Vereker's Courier Maid. . . 10 

490 A Second Life 20 

B64 At Bay 10 

m Beaton's Bargain SO 



797 Look Before You Leap 20 

805 The Freres. 1st half 20 

805 The Freres. 2d half 2# 

806 Her Dearest Foe. 1st half 20 

806 Her Dearest Foe. 2d half 20 

814 The Heritage of Langdale 20 

815 Ralph Wilton's Weird . , 10 

Alison's Works. 

194 " So Near, and Yet So Far I". . . 10 

278 For Life and Love 10 

481 The House That Jack Built.... 10 

F. Austey's Works. 

59 Vice Versa 20 

225 The Giant's Robe 20 

503 The Tinted Venus. A Farcical 

Romance 10 

819 AFallen Idol 2C 



B. M. Ballantyne's Works. 

89 The Red Eric...., 10 

95 The Fire Brigade 10 

96 Erling the Bold 10 

772 Gascoyne, the Sandal-Wood 

Trader , 20 

S. Bariusr-Gonld's Works. 

787 Court Royal 20 

878 Little Tu'penny 10 

Basil's Works. 

344 " The Wearing of the GreeB " . 20 

547 A Coquette's Conquest 20 

585 A Drawn Game 9(J 



THE SEASIDE LIBRARY. 



Anne Beale's Works. 

188 Idonea 20 

199 The Fisher Village 10 

Walter Besant's Works. 

97 AU in a Garden Fair 80 

:37 Uncle Jack 10 

140 A Glorious Fortune 10 

l4iJ Love Finds the Way, and Other 

Stories. By Besant and Rice 10 

j;W Dorothy Forster 20 

824 In Luck at Last 10 

541 Uncle Jack , 10 

651 " Self or Bearer " 10 

882 Gliildren of Gibeon 20 

M. Betham-Ed wards' s Woikf 

273 Love and Mirage ; or, The Wait- 
ing on an Island 10 

579 The Flower of Doom, and Other 

Stories 10 

B94 Doctor Jacob 20 

William Black's Works. 

1 Yolande 20 

18 Sbandon Bells. 20 

21 Sunrise : A Story of These 

Times 20 

23 A Princess of Thule 20 

39 In Silk Attire 20 

44 Macleod of Dare 20 

49 That Beautiful Wretch 20 

50 The Strange Adventures of a 

Phaeton 20 

70 White Wings : A Yachting Ro- 
mance 10 

78 Madcap Violet 20 

81 A Daughter of Heth 20 

124 Til ree Feathers 20 

125 The Monarch of Mincing Lane. 20 

126 Kilmeuy , 20 

138 Green Pastures and Piccadilly. 20 
265 Judith Shakespeare: Her Love 

Affairs and Other Adventures 20 
472 The Wise Women of Inverness. 10 
627 WhitH Heather 20 

R-. D. Blackmore's Works. 

67 Lorua Doone. 1st half 20 

67 Lorna Doone. 2d half 20 

427 The Remarkable History of Sir 

Thomas Upmore, Bart.. M. P. 20 

615 Marv Anerley 20 

625 Erema; or, IMy Father's Sin... 20 

629 Cripps, tlie Carrier 20 

630 Oiudock Nowell. First half... 20 

630 Cradock iMowell. Second half. 20 

631 Cliristowell. A Dartmoor Tale 20 

632 ( lara Vaughan 20 

633 The IMaid of Sker. First half. 20 
633 The Maid of Sker. Second half 20 

636 Alice Lorraine. First half 20 

636 Alice Lorraine. Second half.. 20 

Miss M. E. Braddon's Works. 

35 Lady Audley's Secret 20 

56 Phantom Fortune 20 

74 Aurora Floyd 20 

HO Under the Red Flag 10 



153 The Golden Calf 20 

204 Vixen 30 

211 The Octoroon 10 

234 Barbara : or. Splendid Misery. . vO 

263 An Ishmaelite '20 

315 The Mistletoe Bough. Edited 

by Miss Braddon 20 

434 Wyllard's Weird 20 

478 Diavola; or. Nobody's Daugh- 
ter. Parti 20 

478 Diavola; or. Nobody's Daugh- 
ter. Part II 20 

480 Married in Haste. Edited by 

Miss M. E. Braddon 20 

487 Put to the Test. Edited l)y Miss 

M. E. Braddon 20 

488 Joshua Haggard's Daughter.. . . 20 

489 Rupert Godwin 20 

495 Mount Royal 20 

496 Only a Woman. Edited by Miss 

M. E. Braddon 20 

497 The Lady's Mile 20 

498 Only a Clod 20 

499 The Cloven Foot 20 

511 A Strange World 20 

515 Sir Jasper's Tenant 20 

524 Strangers and Pilgrims 20 

529 The Doctor's Wife 20 

542 Feuton's Quest 20 

541 Cut by the County; or, Grace 

Darnel , 10 

548 The Fatal Marriage, and The 

Shadow in the Corner 10 

549 Dudley Carleon; or. The Broth- 

er's Secret, and George CmuI- 
field's Journey 10 

552 Hostages to Foftvme 20 

553 Birds of Prey 20 

551 Charlotte's Inheritance. (Se- 
quel to " Birds of Prey '").... 20 

557 To the Bitter End 20 

559 Taken at the Flood 20 

560 Asphodel 20 

561 Just a I am; or, A Living Lie 20 

567 Dead ,\.en's Shoes 20 

570 John Marchmont's Legacv. ... 20 
618 The Mistletoe Bough. Christ- 
mas, 1885. Edited by Miss M. 

E. Braddon 20 

840 One Thing Needful; or. The Pen- 
alty of Fate 20 

881 Mohawks 20 

Works by Charlotte M. Braenie, 
Author of "Dora Thorne." 

19 Her Mother's Sin 10 

51 Dora Thorne 20 

54 A J^roken W'edding-Ring 20 

68 A Queen Amongst Women 10 

69 Madoliu's Lover 20 

73 Redeemed bv Love 20 

76 Wife in Name Onlv 20 

79 Wedded and Parted 10 

92 Lord Lynne's Choice 10 

148 Thorns and Orange-Blossoms . 10 

190 Romance oi a Black Veil 10 

220 Which Loved Him Best?. ..... 10 

237 Repented at Leisure 20 

849 " Prince Charlie's Daughter " . 10 



POCKET EDITION. 



iif 



Charlotte M. Braeiiie's Works 

(CONTINUED). 

250 Sunshine and Roses; or, Di- 
ana's Discipline „ 10 

2;54 Tiie Wife's Secret, and Fair 

but False 10 

283 Tiie Sin of a Lifetime 10 

2Sr At War With Herself 10 

288 From Gloom to Sunlight 10 

291 Love's Wjirfare 10 

202 A Golden Heart 10 

2m The Shadow of a Sin , 10 

294 Hilda 10 

295 A Woman's War 10 

29iJ A Rose in Thorns 10 

297 Her Marriage Vow; or, Hilary's 

Follv 10 

299 The Fatal Lilies, aud A Bride 

from the Sea 10 

300 A Gilded Sin, and A Bridge of 

Love 10 

303 Ingiedew House, and More Bit- 

ter than Death 10 

304 In Cnpid's Net 10 

305 A Dead Heart, and Lady Gwen- 

doline's Dream 10 

306 A Golden Dawn, and Love for 

a Day , 10 

307 Two Kisses, and Like no Other 

Love 10 

308 Bevond Pardon. 20 

411 A Bitter Atonement 20 

433 My Sister Kate 10 

459 A Woman's Temptation 20 

460 Under a Shadow 20 

465 'I'he Earl's Atonement 20 

466 Between Two Loves 20 

467 A Struggle for a Ring ... 20 

469 Lady Darner's Secret 20 

470 Eveivn'sFoilv 20 

471 Tlirown on the World 20 

476 Between Two Sins 10 

516 Put Asunder; or. Lady Castle- 

maine's Divorce 20 

576 Her Martyrdom 20 

626 A Fair Mystery 20 

741 The Heiress of Hilldrop; or, 

The Romance of a Young 

Girl 20 

745 For Another's Sin; or, A Strug- 

gle for Love 20 

792 Set in Diamonds. 20 

821 The World Between Them 20 

853 A True Ma-dalen 20 

854 A Woman's Error 20 

Charlotte Bronte's "Works. 

15 Jane E.yre 20 

67 Shirley..... SO 

Ithoda Broughton's Works. 

86 Belinda 20 

101 Second Thoughts 20 

227 Nancy , 20 

645 Mrs. Smith of Longmains 10 

758 " Gooa-bye, Sweetheart 1" 20 

T65 Not Wisely, But Too WeD 20 

r67 Joan... 20 



768 Red as a Rose is She 5^ 

769 Cometh Up as a Flower 20 

862 Betty's Visions 10 

Mary E. Bryan's Works. 

731 The Bayou Bride 20 

857 Kildee; or. The Sphinx of the 

Red House. 1st half 20 

857 Kildee; or. 'J'he Sphinx of the 

Red House. 2d half 20 

Robert Buchanan's Works. 

145 " Storm- Beaten :" God and The 

Man 2C 

154 Annan Water 20 

181 The New Abelard 10 

398 Matt: A Tale of a Caravan.... 10 

646 The Master of the Mine 20 

Captain 5' red Burnaby's Works. 

375 ARide to Khiva 20 

384 On Horseback Through Asia 

Minor 20 

E. Fairfax Byrrne's Works. 

521 Entangled 20 

538 A Fair Country Maid 20 

Hall Caine's Works. 

445 The Shadow of a Crime 20 

520 She's All the World to Me 19 

Ro^a Noucliette Carey's Works. 

215 Not Like Other Girls 20 

396 Robert Ord's Atonement 20 

551 Ban -araHeathcote's Trial 20 

608 ForLilias 20 

liCwis Carroll's Works. 
462 Alice's Adventures in Wonder- 
land. Illustrated by John 

Tenniel 20 

789 Through the Looking-Glass, 
and What Ahce Found There. 
Illustrated by John Tenniel.. 20 

Mrs. H. liovett Cameron's Works. 

595 A North Country Maid 20 

796 In a Grass Country 20 

Wilkie Collins's Works. 

E2 The New Magdalen 10 

102 The Moonstone 20 

167 Heart and Science 20 

168 No Thoroughfare. By Dickens 

and Collins ... 10 

175 Love's Random Shot, and Other 

Stories 10 

233 " I Say No;" or, The Love-Let- 

ter Answered.. 20 

508 The Girl at the Gate 10 

591 The Queen of Hearts 20 

613 The Ghost's Touch, and Percy 

and the Prophet IC 

623 Mv Lo.d v's Monev 10 

701 The Woman in Whit6. 1st half 20 
701 The Womnti in White. 2d half 20 

:02 Man and Wife. 1st half 2f' 

70.' Man .in(i Wife. 2d iiaif iO 

76i The Evil Genius SO 



tv 



THE SEASIDE LIBKARY. 



Mabel Collins's Works. 

749 Lord Vanecourt's Daughter.... 20 
828 The Prettiest Woman in Warsaw 20 

Hugh Conway's Works, 

240 Called Back 10 

251 The Daughter of the Stars, and 

Other Tales 10 

301 Dark Days 10 

302 The Blatcliford Bequest 10 

502 Carriston's Gift 10 

525 Paul Vargas, and Other Stories 10 

543 A Family Affair 20 

601 Slings and Arrows, and Other 

Stories 10 

711 A Cardinal Sin 20 

804 Liviug or Dead 20 

830 Bound by a SpeU 20 

J. Fenimore Cooper's Works. 

60 The Last of the Mohicans 20 

63 The Spy 20 

309 The Pathfinder 20 

SIO The Prairie 20 

818 The Pioneers; or, The Sources 

of the Susquehanna 20 

349 The Two Admirals 20 

359 The Water-Witch 20 

861 The Red Rover 20 

373 Wing and Wing 20 

378 Homeward Bound; or. The 

Chase 20 

379 Home as Found. (Sequel ta 

'* Homeward Bound") 20 

380 Wyandotte ; or, The Hutted 

Knoll 20 

385 The Headsman ; or. The Ab- 

bave des Vignerons 20 

394 The Bravo 20 

397 Lionel Lincoln; or. The Leag- 
uer of Boston 20 

400 The Wept of Wish-Ton-Wish. . . 20 

413 Afloat and Ashore 20 

414 Miles Wallingford, (Sequel to 

" Afloat and Ashore ") 20 

415 The Ways of the Hour 20 

416 Jack Tier; or. The Florida Reef 20 

419 TheChainbearer; or,TheLittle- 

pagre Manuscripts 20 

420 Sataustoe; or, The Littlepage 

Manuscripts 20 

421 The Redskins; or, Indian and 

Injin. Being the conclusion 
of the Littlepage Manuscripts 20 

422 Precaution 20 

42;i The Sea Lions; or. The Lost 

Sealers 20 

424 Mercedes of Castile; or, The 

Voyage to Cathay 20 

425 The Oak-Openings; or. The Bee- 

Hunter 20 

481 TheMonikins 20 

Georgiana M. Craik's Works. 

450 Godfrey Helstono 20 

C06 Mrs. Hollyer 20 



B. M. Croker's Works, 

207 Pretty Miss Neville 20 

260 Proper Pride 10 

412 Some One Else 20 

May Cromnielin's Works. 

452 In the West Countrie 20 

619 Jov ; or, The Light of Cold- 

Home Ford 20 

647 Goblin Gold..„ 10 

Alpliouse Daudet's VVoi'ks. 

534 Jack 20 

574 The Nabob: AStory of Parisian 

Life and Manners 20 

Charles Dickens's Works. 

10 The Old Curiositv Shop 20 

22 David Copperfield. Vol. 1 20 

22 David Copperfield. Vol. IL... 20 

24 Pickwick Papers. Vol. 1 20 

24 Pickwick Papers. Vol. II 20 

37 Nicholas Nickieby. First half. 20 
37 Nicholas Nickieby. Second half 20 

41 Oliver Twist 20 

77 A Tale of Two Cities 20 

84 Hard Times 10 

91 Barnaby Rndge. 1st half 20 

91 Barnaby Rudge. 2d half 20 

94 Little Dorrit. First half 20 

94 Little Dorrit. Second half 20 

106 Bleak House. First half 20 

106 Bleak House. Second half.... 20 

107 Dombey and Son. 1st half 20 

107 Dombey and Son. 2d half 20 

108 Tlie Cricket ou the Hearth, and 

Doctor Marigold 10 

131 Our Mutual Friend. (1st half). 20 

131 Our Mutual Friend. (2d half).. 20 

132 Master Humphrey's Clock 10 

152 The Uncommercial Ti-aveler. .. 20 

168 No Thoroughfare. By Dickens 

and Collins — 10 

169 The Haunted Man 10 

437 Life and Adventures of Martin 

Chuzzlewit. First half 20 

437 Life and Adventures of Martin 

Chuzzlewit. Second half 20 

439 Great Expectations 20 

440 Mrs. Lirriper's Lodgings 10 

447 American Notes 20 

448 Pictures From Italy, and The 

IMudfog Papers. &c 20 

454 The Mystery of Edwin Drood.. 20 
456 Sketches bv Boz. Illustrative 
of Every -day Life and Every- 
day People 20 

676 A Child's History of England. 20 

Sai'ah Doinluey's WoHis. 

3:38 The Family Difficulty 10 

679 Where Two Ways Meet 10 

F. Du Boisgobey's Works. 

82 Sealed Lips 20 

104 The Coral Pin. 1st half 20 

104 The Coral Pin. 2d half 20 

264 Pi6douche, a French Detective. IC 



POCKET EDITION. 



828 



453 

<i?5 
522 

523 

648 
C97 



V. Du Boisgobey's Works 

(continued). 

Babiole, the Pretty Milliner, 
First half 

Babiole, the Prettj^ Milliner. 
Second half 

The Lottery Ticket 

The Prima Donna's Husband., 
or. The 



Zig-Zag, the Clown; 
Steel Gauntlets 



782 
782 
851 
851 



14 
16 
25 
29 
30 
118 

119 
123 

129 
13^1 

136 

166 
171 

284 
312 

842 



404 



486 
494 



541 
738 

771 
785 
862 
«75 



The Consequences of a Duel. A 
Parisian Romance 

The Angel of the Bells 

The Pretty Jailer. 1st half. . . . 

The Pretty Jailer. 2d half. .... 

The Sculptor's Daughter. 1st 
half 

The Sculptor's Daughter. 2d 
half 

The Closed Door. 1st half 

The Closed Door. 2d half 

The Cry of Blood. 1st half. . . . 

The Cry of Blood. 2d half 

"The Duchess's" Works. 

Molly Bavvu 

Portia 

Airy Fairy Lilian 

PhylHs 

Mrs. Geoffrey 

Beauty's Daughters 

Faith and Unf ai th 

Loys, Lord Berresford, and 

Eric Dering 

Monica, and A Rose Distill'd. .. 

Sweet is True Love 

Rossmoyne 

Tlie Witching Hour, and Other 

Stories 

"That Last Rehearsal," and 

Other Stories 

Moonshine and Marguerites — 
Fortune's Wheel, and Other 

Stoi'ies 

Doris 

A Week's Anmsement; or, A 

Week in Killarney 

The Baby, and One New fear's 

Eve 

Mildred Trevanion 

In Durance Vile, and Other 

Stories 

Dick's Sweetheart 

A Maiden All Forlorn, and Bar- 
bara 

A Passive Crime, and Other 

Stories 

"As It Fell Upon a Day." 

Lady Branksniere 

A Mental Struggle 

The Haunted Chamber 

Ugly Barrington 

Lady Valworth's Diamonds — 

Aiexauder Dumas's Works. 



20 



55 The Three Guardsmen. 
T5 Twenty Years After. . . 



20 



259 The Bride of Monte-Cristo. A 
Sequel to "The Count of 
Monte-Cristo " 1« 

262 The Count of Monte-Cristo. 

Part I ?.0 

262 The Count of Monte-Cristo. 

Part II 20 

717 Beau Tancrede; or. The Mar- 
riage Verdict 20 

Maria Edgeworth's Works. 

708 Ormond 20 

788 The Absentee. An Irish Story. 20 

Mrs. Annie Edwards's Works. 

644 AGirton Girl 20 

834 A Ballroom Repentance 20 

835 Vivian the Beauty 20 

836 A Point of Honor 20 

837 A Vagabond Heroine 10 

838 Ought We to Visit Her? 20 

839 Leah: A Woman of Fashion... 20 

841 Jet: Her Face or Her Fortune? 10 

842 A Blue-Stocking 10 

843 Archie Lovell 20 

844 Susan Fielding 20 

845 Philip Earnscliffe; or. The Mor- 

als of May Fair 20 

846 Ste\eu Lawrence. First half. 20 
846 Steven Lawrence. Second half 20 
850 A Playwright's Daughter 10 

George Eliot's Works. 

3 The Mill on the Flos.s 20 

31 Middlemarch. 1st half 20 

31 Middlemarch. 2d half . . ^ 

34 Daniel Derouda. 1st half 20 

34 Daniel Deronda. 2d half 2y) 

36 Adam Bede 20 

42 Romola 20 

693 Felix Holt, the Radical 20 

707 Silas Maruer: The Weaver of 

Raveloe 10 

728 Janet's Repentance Itt 

763 Impressions of Theophrastus 

Such 10 

B. lio Farjeon's Works. 

179 Little Make-Believe 10 

573 Love's Harvest 20 

607 Self-Doomed 10 

616 The Sacred Nugget .. 20 

657 Christmas Angel 10 

G. Manville Feun's Works, 

193 The Rosery Folk 10 

558 Poverty Corner 20 

587 The Parson o' Dumford 20 

609 The Dark House 10 

Octave Feuillet's Works, 
66 The Romance of a Poor Young 

Man 10 

386 Led Astray; or, "La Petite 

Comtesse " 10 

JJIrs. Forrester's Works. 

80 June 20 

280 Omnia Vauitas. A Tale of So- 
. cietir 19 



THE SEASIDE LIBRARY. 



Mrs. Forrester's Works 

(continued). 

484 Although He Was a Lord, and 

Other Tales 10 

715 I Have Lived and Loved 20 

721 Dolores 20 

724 IMy Lord and My Lady 20 

726 Mv Hero 20 

727 Fair Women 20 

729 Mignon 20 

73^ From Olympus to Hades 20 

734 Viva 20 

736 Roy and Viola 20 

740 Rhona 20 

744 Diana Carew; or, For a Wom- 
an's Sake 20 

883 Once Again 20 

Jessie Jb'othergili's Works. 

314 Peril..., 20 

572 Healey 20 

R. E. Francillou's Works. 

135 A Great Heiress: A Fortune 

in Seven Checks 10 

819 Face to Face : A Fact in Seven 

Fables 10 

360 Ropes of Sand 20 

656 The Golden Flood. By R. E. 

Francillon and Wm. Senior.. 10 

Emile Gaboriau's Works. 

7 File No. 113 -« 20 

12 Other People's Money 20 

20 Within an Inch of His Life 20 

26 Monsieur Lecoq. Vol 1 20 

26 Monsieur Lecoq. Vol. H 20 

M3 Tlie Clique of Gold 10 

38 Tlie Widow Lerouge 20 

43 The Mystery of Orcival 20 

144 Promises of Marriage 10 

Charles Gibbon's Works. 

64 A Maiden Fair 10 

317 By Mead and Stream 20 

James Grant's Works. 

566 The Royal Highlanders ; or, 

The Black Watch in Egypt... 20 
781 The Secret Dispatch 10 

Miss Grant's Works. 

222 The Sun-Maid 20 

555 Cara Roma 20 

Arthur Griffiths's Works. 

614 No. 99 10 

680 Fast and Loose 20 

H. Rider Haggard's Works. 

432 The Witch's Head 20 

753 King Solomon's Mines* 20 

Thomas Hardy's Works. 

139 The Romantic Adventures of 

a Milkmaid 10 

530 A Pair or Blue Eyes 20 

690 Far From tlie IMaddine: Crowd. 20 
791 The Mayor of Casterbridge... . 20 



John B. Harwood's Works. 

143 One False, Both Fair 20 

358 Within the Clasp 20 

Mary Cecil Hay's Works. 

65 Back to the Old Home 10 

72 Old Myddelton's Money 20 

196 Hidden Perils 10 

197 For Her Dear Sake 20 

224 The Arundel Motto 20 

881 The Squire's Legacy 20 

290 Nora's Love Test 20 

408 Lester's Secret 20 

678 Dorothy's Venture 20 

716 Victor and Vanquished 20 

849 A Wicked Girl 20 

Mrs. Cashel-Hoey's Works. 

313 The Lover's Creed 20 

802 A Stern Chase 20 

Tighe Hopkins's Works, 

509 Nell Haflfeuden 20 

714 'Twixt Love and Duty 20 

Works by the Author of "Judith 
Wynne." 

332 Judith W.v une 20 

506 Lady Lovelace 20 

William H. G. Kingston's Works. 

nr A Tale of the Shore and Ocean. 20 

133 Peter the Whaler 10 

701 Will VVeatherlielm 20 

76.ii The Midshipman, Marmaduke 

Merry 20 

Vernon I^ee's Works. 

399 Miss Brown 20 

859 Ottiiie: An Eighteenth Century 
Idyl. Bv Vernon Lee. The 
Pri 1 1 ce of the 100 Soups. Edit- 
ed by Vernon Lee 90 

Charles Lever's Works. 

191 Harry Lorrequer 20 

212 Charles O'Malley. the Irish Dra- 
goon. First half 20 

21-^ Charles O'Malley, the Irish Dra- 
goon. Second half 20 

243 Tom Burke of " Ours." First 

half 20 

•43 Tom Burke of "Ours." Sec- 
ond half 20 

Mary Linskill's Works. 

473 ALostSon 20 

620 Between the Heather and the 
Northern Sea 20 

Mrs. £. Tiynn Liinton's Works. 

122 lone Stewart 20 

817 Stabbed in the Dark 10 

Samuel liOver's Work?. 

663 Handy Andy *. . 20 

664 Rory O'More.... 80 



POCKET EDITIOK. 



vii 



Sir E. Bulwer Lytton's Works. 

40 The Last Days of Pompeii 20 

83 A Strange Story 20 

90 Ernest Maltravers 20 

130 Tlie Last of the Barons. First 

half 20 

130 The Last of the Barons. Sec- 
ond half 20 

162 Eugene Aram 20 

164 Leila; or, TiieSiegre of Grenada 10 
650 Alice: or, The Mysteries. (A Se- 
quel to " Ernest Maltravers ") 20 
720 Paul Clifford 20 

George Macdouald's Works. 

282 Donal Grant 20 

325 The Portent 10 

326 Phantasfes. A Faerie Romance 

for Men and Women 10 

722 What's Mine's Mine 20 



E. Marlitt's Works. 

652 The Lady with the Rubies. 
858 Old Ma'm'selle's Secret. . . . 



159 
183 



276 
444 
449 



Florence Marry at' s Works. 

A Moment of Madness, and 

Other Stories 10 

Old Contrairy, and Other 

Stories 10 

The Ghost of Charlotte Cray, 

and Other Stories 10 

Under the Lilies and Roses 10 

The Heart of Jane Warner 20 

Peeress and Player 20 

The Heir Presumptive 20 

The Master Passion 20 

Her Lord and Master 20 



Justin McCarthy's Works. 



825 
860 

861 My Sister the Actress 20 

863 -' ~ 
864 



' My Own Child." 

" No Intentions." 20 

865 Written in Fire 20 

866 Miss Harrington's Husband... 20 

867 The Gi ils of Fe versham 20 

868 Petronel 20 

869 The Poison of Asps 10 

870 Out of His Reckoning 10 

^72 With Cupid's Eves 20 

87S A Harvest of Wildcats 20 

877 Facing the Footlights 20 

Captain Marryat's Works. 

88 ThePrivateersman 20 

272 The Little Savage 10 

Helen B. Mathers's Works. 

13 Eyre's Acquittal 10 

221 Comin' Thro' the Rye 20 

438 Found Out 10 

535 Murder or Manslaughter? 10 

673 Storv of a Sin 20 

713 "CiierrvRipe" 20 

795 Sam's Sweetheart 20 

H Tiift Fasliion of tlrs World 10 

J99 ji£y Lady Green Sleeves 20 



20 



121 Maid of Athens 

602 Camiola 20 

685 England Under Gladstone. 

1880—1885 20 

747 Our Sensation Novel. Edited 

by Justin H. McCarthy, M.P. . 10 
779 Doom! An Atlantic Episode. .. 10 

Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller's 
Works. 

267 Laurel Vane; or, The Girls' 

Conspiracy 30 

268 Lady Gay's Pride; or, The 

Miser's Treasure 20 

269 Lancaster's Choice 20 

316 Sworn to Silence; or. Aline 

Rodney's Secret 20 

Jean Middlemas's Works. 

155 Lady Muriel's Secret 

539 Silvermead 



20 



Alan Muir's Works. 



172 "Golden Girls" 20 

346 Tumbledown Farm 10 

Miss ]>[ulock's Works* 

11 John Halifax, Gentleman 20 

245 Miss Tommy, and In a House- 
Boat 10 

808 King Arthur, Not a Love Story 20 

David Christie Murray's Works. 

58 By the Gate of the Sea 10 

195 " The Way of the World " 20 

320 A Bit of Human Nature "10 

661 Rainbow Gold 20 

674 First Person Singular 20 

691 Valentine Strange 20 

695 Hearts: Qiieen, Knave, and 

Deuce 20 

698 A Life's Atonement . 20 

737 Aunr Rachel 10 

826 Cynic Fortune 20 

Works by the author of "My 
Ducats and My Daughter.'* 

376 The Crime of Christmas Day. 10 
596 My Ducats and My Daughter... 20 

W. E. Norris's Works. 

184 ThirlbyHall 20 

277 A Man of His Word 10 

355 That Terrible Man 10 

500 Adrian Vidal 20 

824 Her Own Doing 10 

848 My Friend Jim 10 

871 A Bachelor's Blunder 20 

Laurence Oliphant's Works. 

47 AltloraPeto 20 

537 Piccadilly 10 



viii 



THE SEASIDE LIBRAKY. 



Mrs. Oliphant's Works. 

45 A Little Pilgrim 10 

177 Salem Chapel 20 

205 The Minister's Wife 30 

821 The Prodigals, and Their In- 
heritance 10 

337 Memoirs and Resolutions of 
Adam Graeme of Mossgray, 
including some Chronicles of 

the Borough of Fendie 20 

345 Madam 20 

351 The House on the Moor 20 

357 John 20 

370 Lucy Crofton 10 

371 Margaret Maitland 20 

377 Magdalen Hepburn : A Story of 

tiie Scottish Reformation 20 

402 Lilliesleaf ; or, Passages in the 
Life of Mrs Margaret Mait- 
land of Sunny side 20 

410 Old Lady Mary 10 

527 The Da^■s of My Life 20 

528 At His G:ites 20 

568 Tiie Perpetual Curate 20 

569 Harry Muir 20 

603 Agnes. 1st half 20 

603 Agnes. 2d half 20 

604 Irmocent. 1st half 20 

604 Innocent. 2d half 20 

605 Ombra 20 

645 ( )hver's Bride 10 

655 The Open Door,and The Portrait 10 

687 A Country Geiitieman 20 

703 A House Divided Against Itself 20 
710 The Greatest Heiress in England 20 

827 Effie Ogilvie 20 

880 The Sou of His Father 20 

♦* Ouida's " Works, 

4 Under Two Flags 20 

9 Wanda, Countess von Szalras.. 20 

116 Moths 20 

128 Afternoon and Other Sketches. 10 

226 Friendship 20 

228 Princess Napraxine 20 

238 Pascarel 20 

239 Signa.. 20 

433 A Rainy June 10 

639 Othmar 20 

671 Don Gesualdo 10 

672 In Maremma. First half 20 

672 In Maremma. Second half 20 

874 A House Party 10 

James Payn's Works. 

48 Thicker Tlian Water 20 

186 Tiie Canon's Ward 20 

343 The Talk of the Town 20 

577 In Peril and Privation 10 

589 The Luck of the Darrells 20 

823 The Be.v' of the Apes , . . . gO 

Rliss Jane Porter's Works. 
660 The Scottish Chiefs. 1st half. . 20 
660 The Scottish Chiefs. 2d half.. 20 

696 Thaddeus of Warsaw 20 

Cecit Power's Works. 

836 Philistia 20 

Ml Babylon gO 



Mrs. Canipbeli Praed's Works. 

428 Zero: A Story of Monte-Carlo. iO 
477 Affinities 10 

811 The Head Station 20 

Eleanor C. Price's Works. 

173 The Foreigners 20 

331 Gerald.. 20 

Charles Reade's Wof ks. 

46 Very Hard Cash 20 

98 A Woman-Hater 20 

206 The Picture, and Jack of All 

Trades 10 

210 Readiana: Comments on Cur- 
rent Events 10 

213 A Terrible Temptation 20 

214 Put Yourself in His Place 20 

216 Foul Play 20 

231 Griffith Gaunt; or, Jealousy... 20 

232 Love and Mouej-; or, A Perilous 

Secret 10 

235 "It is Never Too Late to 
Mend." A Matter- of -Fact Ro- 
mance 20 

Mrs. J. H. liiddelPs Works. 

71 A Struggle for Fame 20 

593 Berna Boyle 29 

"Rita's" Works, 

252 A Sinless Secret 10 

446 Dame Durden 20 

598 " Corinna." A Study 10 

617 Like Dianas Kiss 20 

F. W. Robinson's Works. 

157 Millv'sHero 20 

217 The Man She Cared For 20 

261 A Fair Maid 20 

455 Lazarus in London 20 

590 Tiie Courting of Mary Smith. . . 20 

W. Clark Russell's Works. 

85 A Sea Queen 20 

109 Little Loo 20 

ISO Round the Gallev Fire 10 

209 John Holdsworth. Chief Mate.. 10 

223 A Sailor's Sweetheart 20 

592 A Strange Vo vage 20 

682 In the Middle Watch. Sea 

Storios 20 

743 Jack's Courtship. 1st half 20 

743 Jack's Courtship. 2d half 20 

Adeline Sergeant's Works. 
257 Beyond Recall 10 

812 No Saint 20 

Sir Walter Scott^s Works. 

28 Ivanhoe 20 

201 The Monastery 2C 

202 The Ahbot. (Sequel to "The 

Monnstet-y ") 20 

353 The Black Dwarf, and A Le- 
gend of Montrose ., 9i 

362 Th<> Bride of Lammermoor, . .. 9U 

363 'I'he Sui-geon\s Daughter t'J 

364 Castle Dangerous 10 



POCKET EDITION. 



ix 



8ii' Walter Scott's Works 

(continued^. 
891 The Heart of Mid-Lothian 20 

392 Peveril of the Peak -. 20 

393 The Pirate 20 

401 Waverley 20 

417 The Fair Maid of Perth; or, St. 

Valentine's Day 20 

418 St. Ronan's AVell 20 

463 Redgaiintlet. A Tale of the 

Eighteenth Century 20 

507 Chronicles of the Canongate, 
and Other Stories 10 

William Sime's Works. 

429 Boulderstone ; or, New Men and 

Old Populations 10 

580 The Red Route 20 

597 Ilaco the Dreamer 10 

649 Cradle and Spade 20 

Hawley Smart's Works, 

348 From Post to Finish. A Racing 

Romance 20 

367 Tie and Trick 20 

550 Struck Down 10 

847 Bad to Beat 10 

Frank E. Smedley's Works. 

333 Frank Fairlegh; or, Scenes 
from the Ldfe of a Private 
Pupil 20 

562 Lewis Arundel; or, The Rail- 
road of Life 20 

T. W^. Speight's Works. 

150 For Himself Alone. 10 

653 A Barren Title 10 

Robert Liouis Stevenson's Works. 

686 Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and 

Mr. Hyde 10 

704 Prince Otto 10 

832 Kidnapped 20 

855 The Dynamiter 20 

856 New Arabian Nights .20 

Julian Stiirgis's Works. 

405 My Friends and I. Edited by 

Julian Sturgis 10 

694 John Maidment 20 

Eugene Sue's Woi'ks, 

270 The Wandering Jew. Part I... 20 

270 The Wandering Jew. Part H. . 20 

271 The Mysteries of Paris. Part L 20 
271 The Mysteries of Paris. PartH. 20 

George Temple's Works. 

599 I<ancelot Ward, M.P 10 

642 Britta 10 

William M. Thackeray's Works. 

27 Vanity Fair 20 

165 The History of Henry Esmond. 20 

464 The Newcomes. Part 1 20 

464 The Newcomes. Part H 20 

670 The Rose and the Ring, Illus- 
trated 10 



Works by the Author of "The 
Two Miss Flemings." 

637 What's His Offence? >20 

780 Rare Pale Margaret. 20 

784 The Two Miss Flemings . . 20 

831 Pomegranate Seed 20 

Annie Thomas's Works. 

141 She Loved Him! 10 

142 Jenifer 20 

565 No Medium 10 

Anthony Trollope's Works. 

32 The Land Leaguers 20 

93 Anthony TroUope's Autobiog- 
raphy .... 20 

147 Rachel Ray 20 

200 An Old Man's Love 10 

531 The Prime Minister. 1st half. . 20 
531 The Prime Minister. 2d half... 20 

621 The Warden 10 

622 Harry Heathcote of Gangroil. . . 10 
667 The Golden Lion of Granpere.. 20 

700 Ralph the Heir. 1st half 20 

700 Ralph the Heir. 2d half 29 

775 The Three Clerks 20 

Margaret Veley's ^Vorks, 

298 Mitchelhurst Place 10 

586 " For Percival " 20 

Jules Verne's Works. 

87 Dick Sand; or, A Captain at 
Fifteen 20 

100 20,000 Leagues Under the Seas. 20 

368 The Southern Star; or, the Dia- 
mond Land 20 

395 The Archipelago on Fire 10 

578 Mathias Sandorf. Illustrated. 

Part I ...- 10 

578 Mathias Sandorf. Illustrated, 

Part II 10 

578 Mathias Sandorf. Illustrated. 

Part III 10 

659 The Waif of the " Cynthia "... '.^0 

751 Great Voyages and Great Navi- 
gators. First half 20 

751 Great Voyages and Great Navi- 
gators. Second half 20 

833 Ticket No. " 9672," First half. . 10 

li. B. Walford's Works. 

241 The Baby's Grandmother 10 

256 Mr. Smith : A Part of His Life. 20 

258 Cousins 20 

658 The History of a Week lO 

F. Warden's Works. 

192 At the World's Mercy 10 

248 The House on the Marsh 10 

286 Deldee ; or. The Iron Hand .... 20 

482 A Vagrant Wife 20 

.556 A Prince of Darkness 20 

820 Doriss Fortune 10 



THE SEASIDE LIBRARY. 



William Ware's Works. 

709 Zenobia; or. The Fall of Pal- 
myra. 1st half 20 

709 Zenobia; or, The Fall of Pal- 
myra. 2d half 20 

760 Aurelian; or, Rome in the Third 
Century 20 

E. Werner's Works, 

827 Raymond's Atonement 20 

640 AtaHigh Price 20 

fi.'J. Wbyte-Melville's Works. 

409 Roy's Wife 20 

451 Market Harborough, and Inside 
the Bar 20 

John Strange Winter's Works. 

492 Mignon ; or, Booties' Baby. D- 

lustrated 10 

600 Honp-La. Illustrated 10 

638 In Quarters with the 25th (The 

Bliick Horse) Dragoons 10 

688 A Man of Honor. Ilhisirated.. 10 
746 Cavalry Life: or. Sketches and 

Stories in Barracks and Out. . 20 
813 Army Society. Life in a Gar- 
rison Town. 10 

818 Pluck 10 

876 Jlignon's Secret. ...... = . 10 

Mrs. Henry Wood's Works. 
8 East Lynne 20 

255 TheMvstery 20 

277 The Surgeon's Daughters 10 

508 The Unlioly Wish 10 

513 Helen Whitney's Wedding, and 

Other Tales 10 

514 The Mystery of Jessy Page, and 

Other Tales 10 

610 The Story of Dorothy Grape, 

and Other Tales 10 

Charlotte M. Yonge's Works. 

247 The Armourer's Prentices 10 

275 The Three Brides 10 

535 Henrietta's Wish; or, Domi- 
neering 10 

563 The Two Sides of the Shield.... 20 
640 Nnttie's Father 20 

665 The Dove in the Eagle's Nest.. 20 

666 My Young Alcides: A Faded 

Photograph 20 

739 The Caged Lion .. 20 

742 Love and Life 20 

783 Chantry House 20 

790 The Chaplet of Pearls; or. The 

White and Black Ribaumont. 

First half 20 

790 ITae Chaplet of Pearls; or, The 

White and Mlack Ribaumout. 

Second half 20 

800 Hopes and Fears; or, Scenes 

from the Life of a Spinster. 

First half 20 

WO Hopes and Fears; or. Scenes 

from the Life of a Spinster. 

Second half.... 20 



Miscellaueons. 

53 The Story of Ida. Francesca. 10 
61 Charlotte Temple. Mrs. Row- 
son iO 

99 Barbara's History. Amelia B. 

Edwards 20 

103 Rose Fleming. Dora Russell.. 10 
105 A Noble Wife. John Saunders 20 

111 The Little School-master Mark. 

J. H.Shorthouse 10 

112 The Waters of Marah. John 

Hill 20 

113 Mrs. Carr's Companion. M. G. 

Wightwick 10 

114 Some of Our Girls. Mrs. C. J. 

Eiloart 20 

115 Diamond Cut Diamond. T. 

Adolphus TroUope 10 

120 Tom Brown's School Days at 

Rugby. Thomas Hughes 20 

127 Adrian Bright. Mrs. Cuddy .... 20 
149 The Captain's Daughter. From 

the Russian of Pushkin 10 

151 The Ducie Diamonds. C. Blath- 

erwick 10 

156 "For a Dream's Sake." Mrs. 

Heibert Martin 20 

158 The Starling. Norman Mac- 

leod, D.D 10 

160 Her Gentle Deeds. Sarah Tytler 10 

161 The Lady of Lyons. Founded 

on the Play of that title by 

Lord Lytton 10 

163 Winifred Power. Joyce Dar- 

rell 20 

170 A Great Treason. Mary Hop- 

pus 30 

174 Under a Ban. Mrs. Lodge 20 

176 An April Day. Philippa Prifc- 

tie Jephson 10 

178 More Leaves from the Journal 

of a Life in the Highlands. 

Queen Victoria 10 

182 The Millionaire 20 

185 Dita. Lady JMargaretMajendie 10 
187 The Midnight Sun. Fredrika 

Bremer 10 

198 A Husband's Story 10 

203 John Bull and His Island. Max 

ORell 10 

218 Agnes Sorel. G. P. R. James. . 20 

219 Lady Clare : or. The Master of 

theFoi-ges. Georees Oimet 10 
242 The Two Orphans. DEnnery. 10 
253 The Amazon. Carl Vosmaer. . 10 
266 The Water-Babies. Rev. Chas. 

Kingsley 10 

274 Alice. Grand Duchess of Hesse, 
Princess of Great Britain and 
Ireland. Biographical Sketch 

and Letters 10 

279 Little Goldie: A Story of Wom- 
an's Love. Mrs. Sumner Hay- 
den SO 

285 The Gambler's Wife 20 

289 Jolui Bull's Neighbor in Her 
True Light. A " Brutal Sax- 
on " «.,.f .. 10 



POCITET EDITION. 



Miscellaneous— Continued. 

Sil Two Years Before the Mast. R. 

H. Dana, Jr 20 

323 A Willful Maid 20 

329 The Polisli Jew. (Translated 

from tlie French by Caroline 
A. Merij^hi.) Erckinaiin Chat- 
rian 10 

330 May Blossom ; or, Between Two 

Loves. Margaret Lee 20 

334 A Marriage of Convenience. 

Harriett Jay 10 

835 The White Witch 20 

UO Under Which King? Compton 

Reade 20 

341 Madolin Rivers; or. The Little 

Beauty of Red Oak Seminary. 

Laii ra Jean Libbev 20 

347 As Avon Flows. Henry Scott 

Vince 20 

350 Diana of the Crossways. George 

Meredith 10 

352 At Any Cost Edward Garrett. 10 
:!54 Tlie Lotterv of Life. A Story 
of New York Twenty Years 
Ago. John Brougham...... 20 

355 The Princess Dagomar of Po- 

land. Heinrich Felbermann. 10 

356 A Good Hater. Frederick Boyle 20 
365 George Cinisty ; or, The Fort- 
unes of a Minstrel. Tony 
Pastor ,\ 20 

866 The Mvsterious Hunter; or, 

The Man of Death. Capt. L. 

C. Carleton 20 

369 Miss Bretherton. Mrs. Hum- 

phrv Ward 10 

874 The t)ead Man's Secret. Dr. 

Jupiter Paeon 20 

351 Tiie Red Cardinal. Frances 

Elliot 10 

382 Tliree Sisters. Elsa D'Esterre- 

Keeling 10 

383 Introduced to Society. Hamil- 

ton Aid6 10 

387 The Secret of the Cliffs. Char- 
lotte P'rench 20 

889 Ichabod. A Portrait. Bertha 

Thomas 10 

403 An English Squire. C. R. Cole- 
ridge 20 

406 The Merchant's Clerk. Samuel 

Warren 10 

407 Tylney Hall. Thomas "Bond. .. 20 
420 Venus's Doves. Ida Ashworth 

Taylor 20 

430 A Bitter Reckoning. Author 

of "By Crooked Paths".... 10 
435Klytia: A Story of Heidelberg 

Castle. George Taylor 20 

436 StHJla. Fan!iv Lewaid 20 

441 A Sea Chnnge. Flora L. Shaw. 20 

442 Rjinthorpe. George Ilenrv 

Lewes 20 

443 The Bachelor of the Albany... 10 
457 The Russians at the Gates of 

Herat. Charles Maivin 10 



458 A Week of Passion ; or, The 
Dilemma of Mr. George Bar- 
ton the Younger. Edward 
Jenkins 20 

468 The Fortunes, Good and Bad, 
of a Sewing-Girl. Charlotte 
M. Stanley 10 

474 Serapis. An Historical Novel. 

George Ebers 20 

479 Louisa. Katharine S. Macquoid 20 

483 Betwixt Mv Love and Me, By 

author of "A Golden Bar "... 10 

485 Tinted Vapours. J. Maclaren 

Cobban 10 

491 Society in London. A Foreign 

Resident 10 

493 Colonel Enderby's Wife. Lucas 

Malet 20 

501 Mr. Butler's Ward. F. Mabel 

Robinson 20 

504 Curly: An Actor's Story. John 

Coleman '. ]0 

505 The Society of Loudon. Count 

Paul Vasili 10 

510 A Mad Love. Author of " Lover 

and Lord " 10 

512 The Waters of Hercules 20 

518 The Hidden Sin 'M 

519 James Gordon's Wife 2© 

526 Madame De Presnel. E. Fian- 
ces Povnter 20 

532 Ardcn Court. Barbara Graham -.'O 
5:;3 H.izel Kirke. Marie Walsh .... •:•» 
530 Dissolving Views. Mrs. Andrew 

Lang 10 

545 Vida's Story. By the author of 

"Guilty Without Crime".. . 10 

546 j\Irs. Keith's Crime. A Novel. . ]'* 
571 Paul Crew's Story. Alice Co- 

myns Carr 10 

575 The Finger of Fate. Captain 

Mavne Reid 20 

581 The "Betrothed. (I Promessi 

Sposi.) AUessandro Manzoni 20 

582 Lucia. Hugh and Another. Mrs. 

J. H. Needell 20 

583 Victory Deane. Cecil Griffith.. 20 

584 Mixed IMotives 10 

599 Lancelot Ward, M.P, George 

Temple 10 

612 My Wife's Niece. By the author 

of " Dr. Edith Romney " 28 

624 Primus in Indis. M. J. Colqu- 

houn 10 

628 Wedded Hands. By tlie author 

of " Mv Lady's Folly " 20 

634 The Unforeseen. Alice O'Han- 

lon 20 

641 The Rabbi's Spell. Stuart C. 

Cumberland 10 

043 The Skeich-Book of Geoffrey 

Cr;iyon, Gent. Washington 

Irving ^.'9 

654 " Us."' An Olii-fashioned Story, 

M r:i. Molesworth 19 

66-i Tlie Bhstery of Allan Grale. 

Is.il ella Fyvie Mayo 20 

CeS Half Way. An Anglo-French 

Ri-uiance ...SO 



THE SEASIDE LniRARY. 



miscellaneous— Continued. 

669 Tlie Philosophy of Whist. 

William Pole 20 

«75 3Ivs. Dymond. Miss 1'hackeray 20 
681 A Siuger's Stoiy. May Laffan. 10 

683 The Bachelor Vicar of New- 

forth. Mrs. J. Harcourf-Roe. 20 

684 Last Days ac Apswich 10 

692 The Mikado, and Other Comic 

Operas. Writren by W. S. 

Gilbert. Composed by Arthur 

Sullivan 20 

T05 The Woman 1 Loved, and ttie 

Woman Who Loved Me. Isa 

B]ao:den 10 

706 A Crimson Stain. Annie Brad- 

shaw 10 

712 For Maimie's Sake. Grant 

Allen 20 

718 Unfairly Won. Mrs. Power 

O'Donoghue 20 

719 Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. 

Lord Byron 10 

733 Mauleverer's Millions. T. We- 
myss Reid 20 

725 My Ten Years' Imprisonment. 

Silvio Pellico 10 

730 The Autobiography of Benja- 
min Franklin 10 

735 Until the Day Breaks. Emily 

Spender — , 20 

738 In the Golden Days. Edna 

Lyall 20 

748 Hurrish : A Study. By the 

Hon. Emilv Lawless 20 

750 An Old Story of My Farming 

Days. Fritz Reutcr. 1st half 20 

?50 An Old Story of Mv Faiming 

Days. Fritz Reutc?r. 2d half 20 

^"52 Jackanapes, and Other Stories. 

Juliana Horatia Ew- ing ... . JO 

J'54 How to be Happy Though Mar- 
ried. By a Graduate in the 
University of Matrimony 20 

755 Mai-gery Daw 20 

766 The Strange Adventures of Cap- 
tain Dangerous. A Narrative 
in Plain English. Attempted 
by George Augustus Sala 20 

[TF/ien ordering by mail please order by numbers.] 

Persons who wish to purchase the foregoing works in complete and un- 
abridged form are cautioned to order and see that they get The Seaside 
Library, Pocket Edition, as works published in other libraries are fre- 
quently abridged and incomplete. Every number of The Seaside Library 
is unchanged and unabridged. 

Newsdealers wishing catalogues of The Si-astde Library. Pocket Edi- 
rion, hearing their imprint, will be supplied on sending their names, 
addresses, and number required. 

The works in The Seaside Library, Pocket Edition, are printed front 
larger type and on better paper than any other series published. 

The foregoing works are for sale by all newsdealers, or will be .sent t» 
any address, postage free, on receipt of price, by the publisher. Address 

GEOROE MUNRO, Munro's Publishing House, 

P. O. Box 3751. 17 to 27 Vandewater Street, New Yorlc 



757 Love's Martyr. Laurence Alma 

Tadema , . . . 10 

759 In Shallow Waters. Annie Ar- 

mitt 80 

766 No. XIII; or, The Story of the 
Lost Vestal. Emma Mar- 
shall 10 

770 The Castle of Otranto. Hor- 
ace Walpole.. 10 

773 The Mark of Cain. Andrew 

Lang 10 

774 The Life and Travels of Jlungo 

Park 10 

776 Pere Goriot. Honore De Bal- 

zac 20 

777 The Voyages and Travels of 

of Sir John Mauudeville, Kt., 10 

778 Society's Verdict. By tlie au- 

thor of " My Blairi.'ige " 20 

786 Ethel Mildniay's Follies. By au- 
thor of '"Petite's Romance ". 20 
793 Vivian Grey. By the Rt. Hon. 
Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of 

Beaconsfield. First half 20 

793 Vivian Grey. By the Rt Hon. 
Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of 
Beaconsfield. Second half. .. 20 
801 She Stoops to Conquer, and 
TheGood-NafuredMan. Oli- 
ver Goldsmith 10 

803 Major Frank. A. L. G. Bos- 

boom-Toussaint 20 

807 If Love Be Love. D. Cecil Gibbs 20 
«09 Witness M.v Hand. By author 

of " Lady Gwendolen's Tryst " 10 
810 The Secret of Her Life. Ed- 
ward Jenk ins 20 

816 Rogues and Vagabonds. By 
George R. Sims, author of 

""Ofctler Joe"...., 20 

822 A Passion Flower. A Novel SO 

852 Under Five Lakes. M. Quad.. 20 
879 The Touch.^tone of Peril. A 
Novel of Anglo-Indian Life, 
With Scenes During the Mu- 
tiny. By R. E. Forrest 20 



THE SEASIDE LIBRARY.-Pocket Edition. 



LATEST ISSUES: 



870 
871 
872 
873 

874 

875 

876 
877 
878 



881 



884 
885 



891 



PRICK. 

Pole on Whist 20 

The Girls of Feversham. By 
Floreuce Marrjac 20 

Petronel. By Florence Marry at 20 

The Poison of Asps. By Flor- 
ence Mairyat , 10 

Out of His Reckoning. By 
Florence Marryat 10 

A Bachelor's Blunder. By W. 
E. Noiris 20 

With Cupid's Eyes. By Flor- 
ence Marryat 20 

A Harvest of Wild Oats. By 
Florence Marryat 20 

A House Party. By "Ouida" 10 

Lady Valworth's Diamonds. By 
" The Duchess " — 20 

Mignou's Secret. John Strange 
Winter 10 

Facing the Footlights. By Flor- 
ence Marryat 20 

Little Tu' penny. By S. Baring- 
Gould 10 

The Touchstone of Peril, By 
R. E. Forrest 20 

The Son of His Father. By Mrs. 
Oliphant 20 

Mohawks. By Miss M. E. Brad- 
don 20 

Children of Gibeon. By Walter 
Besant 20 

Once Again. By Mrs. For- 
rester 20 

A Voyage to the Cape. By W. 
Clark Russell. 20 

Les Miserables. Victor Hugo. 
Parti 20 

Les Miserables. Victor Hugo. 
Partn 20 

Les Miserables. Victor Hugo, 
Part HI 20 

Paston Carew, Millionaire and 
Miser. Mrs. E. Lynn Linton. 20 

A Modern Telemachus. By 
Charlotte M. Yonge 20 

Treasure Island. .Robert Louis 
Stevenson 10 

An Inland Voyage. By Robert 
Louis Stevenson 10 

The Mistletoe Bough. Christ- 
mas, 1886. Edited by Miss M. 
E. Braddon 20 

VeraNevill; or, Poor Wisdom's 
Chance. By Mrs. H. Lovett 
Cameron 20 

That Winter Night: or. Love's 
Victory. Robert Buchanan. 10 

Love's Conflict. By Florence 
Marryat. First half 20 



NO. PRICK. 

893 Love's Conflict. By Florence 

Marryat. Second half 20 

894 D o c t o r C u p i d . By Rhoda 

Bi'oughton 20 

895 A Star and a Heart, By Flor- 

ence Marryat 10 

896 The Guilty River. By Wilkie 

Collins 10 

897 Ange. By Florence Marryat... 20 

898 Bulldog and Butterfly, and Julia 

and Her Romeo, by David 
Christie Murray. Romeo and 
Juliet : A Tale of Two Young 
Fools, by William Black 20 

899 A Little Stepson. By Florence 

Marryat 10 

900 By Woman's Wit. By Mrs. Al- 

exander 20 

901 A Luekj^ Disappointment. By 

Florence Marryat 10 

902 A Poor Gentleman. By Mrs, 

Oliphant. First half 20 

902 A Poor Gentleman. By Mrs. 

Ohphant. Second half 20 

903 PhyUida. By Florence Marryat 20 

904 The Holy Rose. By Walter Be- 

sant 10 

905 The Fair-Haired Alda. By Flor- 

ence Marryat 20 

906 The World Went Very Well 

Then. By Walter Besant. , . , 20 

907 The Bright Star of Life. By B. 

L. Far jeon 20 

908 A Willful Young Woman 20 

909 The Nine of Hearts. By B. L. 

Far jeon , . , 20 

910 She: A History of Adventure. 

By H. Rider Haggard 20 

911 Golden Bells: A Peal in Seven 

Changes. By R. E. Francillon 20 
913 Pure Gold. By Mrs. H, Lovett 

Cameron, First half 20 

912 Pure Gold. By Mrs. H. Lovett 

Cameron, Second half 20 

913 The Silent Shore, By John 

BloundelleBurton 20 

914 Joan Wentworth. Bv Katharine 

S. Macquoid " 20 

915 That Other Person. First half 20 
915 That Other Person. Second half 20 

917 The Case of Reuben Malachi. 

By H. Sutherland Edwards.. 10 

918 The Red Band. By F. Du Bois- 

gobey. First half 20 

918 The Red Band. By F. Du Bois- 

gobey. Second half 20 

919 Locksley Hall Sixty Years After, 

etc. By Alfred, Lord Tenny- 
son, P.L., D.C.L 10 



The foregoing works, contained in The Skaside Library, Pocket Edition, 
are for sale by all newsdealers, or will be sent to any address, postage free, on 
receipt of price, parties ordering by mail vjill please order by nuvibers. Ad- 

MUNRO'S PUBLISHING HOUSE, 

P. O. Box 8761. 17 to 37 Vaudewater Street, N, Y. 



NEW TABERNACLE SERMONS 



BY 



\ll I DeWITT TALM/GE, D.D, 



Handsomely Bound in CIotL 12mo. Price $1.00. 



The latest of Dr. Talmage's sermons have not yet been pre- 
sented in book form. They have appeared weekly in The New 
York Fireside Companion, and are now 

Published for tlie First Time in Book Form, 

THE PRICE OP WHICH IS WITHIN THE REACH OP ALU. 

Eacli Mie will Coilalii Tllrty Senas, 

PRINTED EN 

CLEAR, BOLD, HANDSOME TYPE, 

ASTD WILL. MAKE 

AN ELEGANT AND ACCEPTABLE HOLIDAY OIET, 

The above will be sent postpaid on receipt of price, $1.0(X 

Address 

GEORGE MUNRO, Publisher, 

P.O. BOXS751. 17 to 37 Yandewater Street« New York* 



JUST ISSUED. JUST ISSUED. 



JULIET CORSON'S 

NEW FAMILY COOK BOOK. 

BY MISS JULIET CORSON, 

Author of " Meals for the Million," etc., etc. 

StTBERINTENDENT OF THE NeW YoRK SCHOOL OF CoOKKRY. 



FBICE: HANSSOHELY BOUNS IN CLOTB, $1.00. 



A COMPREHEKSIVE COOK BOOK 

For Family Use in City and Country. 

CONTAINING 

PRACTICAL RECIPES AND FULL AND PLAIN DIREC- 

TIONS FOR COOKING ALL DISHES USED 

IN AMERICAN HOUSEHOLDS. 

The Best and Most Economical Methods of Cooking Meats, Fisb^ 
Vegetables, Sauces, Salads, Puddings and Pies. 

How to Prepare Relishes and Savory Accessories, Picked-up Disheisd 
Soups, Seasoning, Stuffing and Stews* 

How to Make Good Bread, Biscuit, Omelets, Jellies, Jams, Pan« 
cakes, Fritters and Fillets. 



Miss Corson is the best American writer on cooking. All of her reciped 
have been carefully tested in the New York School of Cookery. If her direc- 
tions are carefully followed there will be no failures and no reason for com- 
plaint. Her directions are always plain, very complete, and easily followed. 

Juliet Corson's New Family Cook Book 

Is sold by all newsdealers. It will be sent, postpaid, on receipt of prio«t 
handsomely bound in cloth, $1.00. Address 

GEORGE MUNRO, 

MuNRo's Publishing House, 

P. O. Box 8751. 17 to 27 Vandewater St., N. Y. 



MTJNEO'S PUBLICATIOITS. 



The New York Fashion Bazar Book of the Toilet. 

PRiC E 25 CE NTS. 

This is a little book which we can recommend to every lady for the preserva» 
tion and increase of Health and Beauty. It contains full directions for all the 
arts and mysteries of personal decoration, and for increasing the natural 
graces of form and expression. All the little affections of the skin, hair, eyes 
and body that detract from appearance and happiness are made the subjects 
of precise and excellent recipes. Ladies are instructed how to reduce their 
weight without injury to health and without producing pallor and weakness. 
Nothing necessary to a complete toilet book of recipes and valuable advice and 
information has been overlooked in the compilation of this volume. 



THE NEW YORK FASHION BAZAR BOOK OF THE TOILET is sold 
by all newsdealers. It will be sent to any address, postpaid, on receipt of 
price, 25 cents, by the publisher. Address 

GEORGE MUNRO, 
MUNRO'S PUBLISHING HOUSE, 
P. O. Box 3751. ir to tjy Vandewater Street, New York. 



THE NEW YORK FASHION BAZAR 

Model Letter-Writer and Lover's Oracle 



PRIC E 25 CE NTS. 

A COMPLETE GUIDE FOR BOTH LADIES AND GENTLEMEN IN 
ELEGANT AND FASHIONABLE LETTER-WRITING. 

CONTAINING 

Perfect Examples of Every Form of Correspondence, Business Letters, Love 
Letters. Letters to Relatives and Friends, Wedding and Reception Cards, 
Invitations to Entertainments, Letters Accepting and Declining Invi- 
tations, Letters of Introduction and Recommendation, Letters of 
Condolence and Duty, Widows' and Widowers'' Letters, Love 
Letters for All Occasions, Proposals of Marriage, Letters 
Between Betrothed Lovers, Letters of a Young Girl to 
Her Sweetheart. Correspondence Relating to House- 
hold Management, Letters Accompanying Gifts- 



Every form of letter used in affairs of the heart will be found in this little 
book, it contains simple and full directions for writing a good letter on all 
occasions. The latest forms used in the best society have been carefully fol- 
lowed. It is an excellent manual of reference for all forms of engraved cards 
and invitations. 



For sale by all Newsdealers, or sent to any address on receipt of 25 cents, 
postage prepaid, by the publisher. Address 

GEORGE MUNRO, Munro's Publishing House, 

(P. O, Box 3751.^ 17 to 27 Vandewater Street. New Yorko 



* Oiuda's "' Latest Novel Now B-eady ic 
Large, Bold, Handsome Type.. 



OTHMAR. 

By ^'OUIDA." 

Seaside Library, Pocket Edition, No. 639 

IPJUICE SO CEIVTS. 



For sale by all newsdealers, or sent to any address, postage iJi'ei)aid 
on receipt of price, 20 cents. Addi'ess 

€}EORGE MUNBO, Muuro's Publishing House, 

R O. Box 3751. ir t© 27 Vandewater Street, N. Y. 



BTQW KEADY-Beautifully Bound in Cloth-PEIOE 50 CENTS, 



A NEW PEOPLE'S EDITION 

OF THAT MOST DELIGHTFUL OF CHILDREN'S STORIES, 

Mice's Adventures In Wonderland. 

By LEWIS CARROLL, 
Author of " Through the Looidng-Glass,'* etc. 
With Forty-two Beautiful Illustrations by John Tenniei, 

The most delicious and taking: nonsense for children ever written. A 
book to be read by all mothers to their little ones. It makes them dancs 
with delight. Everybody enjoys the fun of this charming writer for the 
nursery. 

THIS NE-W PEOPLE-S EDITION, BOUND IN CLOTH. PRICE 50 CENT€ 

IS PRINTED IN LARGE, HANDSOME. READABLE TYPE, 

WITH ALL THE ORIGINAL ILLUSTRi^'^Til^NS 

OF THE EXPENSIVE ENGLISH EDITIG>7. 



Sent l»j Mail on Receipt oiP£»0 Cente, 



Address GEORGE MUNRO. Miinry^ Publishing House, 

t?-. (JP. Box 37$1. Vf to "47 VamUewj^ter !!*treei, ^■ew Yam 





mM'' / 

^m '-^ SOAPMAKERSBYSEAbEDAPPOlNTMENT 

^^ To IlMAe PRINCE of WALES 



THE 

New York Fashion Bazar. 

THE BEST AMERICAN HOME MAGAZINE. 

Price 35 Cents Per Copy : $3.00 Per Year. 



All yearly subscribers on our list on the first of December will be 
entitled to a beautiful chromo, entitled: 



< ( 



HAPPY AS A KING." 



The New York Fashion Bazar is a magazine for ladies. It 
contains everything which a lady's magazine ought to contain. 
The fashions in dress which it publishes are new and reliable. Par- 
ticular attention is devoted to fashions for children of all ages. Its 
plates and descriptions will assist every lady in the preparation of 
her wardrobe, both in making new dresses and remodeling old ones. 
The fashions are derived from the best houses and are always prac- 
tical as well as new and tasteful. 

Every lady reader of The New York Fashion Bazar can make 
her own dresses with the aid of Munro's Bazar Patterns. These are 
carefully cut to measure and pinned into the perfect semblance of the 
garment. They are useful in altering old as well as in making new 
clothing. 

The Bazar Embroidery Supplements form an important part of 
the magazine. Fancy work is carefully described and illustrated, 
and new patterns given in every number. 

All household matters are fully and interestingly treated. Home 
information, decoration, personal gossip, correspondence, and recipes 
for cooking have each a department. 

Among its regular contiibutors are Mary Cecil Hay, " The Duch- 
ess," author of " Molly Bawn," Lucy Randall Comfort, Charlotte 
M. Braeme, author of " Dora Thorne," Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller 
and Mary E. Bryan. 

The stories published in The New York Fashion Bazar are the 
best that can be had. 

GEORGE MTJNRO, Publisher, 

P. O. Box 3751. 17 TO 27 Vandewater Street, N. Y. 



THE CEL.EBRATEI3 

SOBMER 

GRATTD, SQTJAEE AND UPRIGHT PIANOS. 




FIRST PRIZE 

DIPLOMA. 

Centennial Exnibi- 
tion, 1876; Montreal, 
1881 and 1883. 

The enviable po- 
sition. Sohmer & 
Co. hold among 
American Piano 
Manufacturers is 
solely due to the 
merits of their in- 
struments. 

ARE AT PRESENT THE MOST POPULAR 

AND PREFERRED BY THE LEADING ARTISTS. 
SOHMER & CO., Mauufacturevs, No. 149 to 155 E. 14th Street, N. Y. 



They are used 
in Conservato- 
ries, Schools and 
Seminaries, on ac- 
count ot their su- 
perior tone and 
unequaled dura- 
bility. 

The SOHMER 
Piano is a special 
favorite with the 
leading musicians 
and critics. 



THE 



"Short LineLimited" 



TO 



NW 



.«#^Gp 



THE 



imii 



St. Paul and Minneapolis. 



Railway. 



"Shore Line Limited" 



TO 



Milwaul(ee and Waulcesha. 



IT TRAVERSES THE MOST DESIRABLE PORTIONS OF 

ILLINOIS, IOWA, NEBRASKA, WISCONSIN, MINNESOTA, DAKOTA, 

WYOMING AND NORTHERN MICHIGAN. 



-iTHE. POPULAR. SHORT. LINEi^ 

BETWEEN 
CHICAGO, MILWAUKEE, MADISON, ST. PAUL, MINNEAPOLIS, 

OMAHA, COUNCIL BLUFFS, DENVER, SAN FRANCISCO, 

PORTLAND, OREGON, 

AND ALL POINTS IN THE WEST AND NORTHWEST. 

PALACE SLEEPING CARS, PALATIAL DINING CARS 

AND SUPERB DAY COACHES ON THROUGH TRAINS. 

Close Connections in Union Depots with Branch and Connecting Lines. 



ALL AGENTS SELL TICKETS VIA THE NORTH-WESTERN 

Kew York Office, 409 Hroa<1":iro 
Boston Office, 6 State St reel. 
UlnnempolU Office, 13 ^'_colU•t House. 



Chicago Office, 62 Clark St. 
OmahiOftlco, 14 !1 Farnnm St. 
8l. I'aul v-fflte, 159 E. Third bt. 



Denver Office, 8 Windsor Hotel Itlork. 

Siin Francisco Office, 2 New 1Iontt;iinierv f^t. 

Kilwuukeo Office, 102 >ViscoDsiri !stre«t. 



R. S. Hair, Oenoral 



Agent, CHICAGO, ILL. 



-^^^ 



.^^'•^; 



.-V 



''^. c'^- 



A-^' '^V 









^'^ -yn^ -I 



' 'o. 






o 0' 






5** 



^^' 



.^^ 



.%^ % 



A>' <v^- 



^^^ "^ 



\' V- 



0. ^. 



^;^ 



(i 






% 



A' 



.-«; 



A^ 









%. 



'••^, rS-' -i. 



T- 









^ c,^' 

'^x^^ 

.x^^' "^^ 






















.# ^ 









•4'- 



0-" c°''<=*;''^^ 






O "a. 



^^^^''* o:^ 



NO' \N 









'%/. "^^^ J 






: 

i 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 




IIIIHIil 

014 546 584 9 ^ 



li 















IJil'WJl 






S3y , 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2008 with funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/balladsotherpoemOOtennrich 



BALLADS 



AND OTHER POEMS 



BY 



ALFRED TENNYSON 



LONDON 

"C. KEGAN PAUL & CO., i PATERNOSTER SQUARE 

1880 



{TJie rights of translation and of rejproductmi are rese^'ved) 



TO 

ALFEED TENNYSON 

MY GRANDSON 



Golden-hair'd Ally whose name is one with mine. 

Crazy with laughter and babble and earth's new wine, 

Now that the flower of a year and a half is thine, 

O little blossom, O mine, and mine of mine, 

Glorious poet who never hast written a line, 

Laugh, for the name at the head of my verse is thine. 

May'st thou never be wrong 'd by the name that is mine ! 



CONTENTS. 



-•o^ 



BALLADS AND OTHER POEMS. 

PAGE 

The First Quarrel 1 

KlZPAH • • 13 

The Northern Cobbler 25 

The Revenge : a Ba^^lad. of the Fleet . . 40 

The Sisters . . . • 53 

The Village Wife ; or, The Entail . . . . 71 
In the Children's Hospital . • , . . .87 
Dedicatory Poem to the Princess Alice . . 97 

The Defence of Lucknow 99 

Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham . . .112 

Columbus . . 125 

The Voyage of Maeldune 140 



I 



VI CONTENTS. 

Page 
De Profundis: 

The Two Greetings 156 

The Human Cry . . . .... 161 



SONNETS. 

Prefatory Sonnet to the * Nineteenth Century ' 162 

To THE Rev. W. H. Brookfield . . ... 163 

Montenegro 164 

To Victor Hugo 165 

TRANSLATIONS, ETC. 

Battle of Brunanburh . » . . , 169 

Achilles over the Trench 179 

To THE Princess Frederica of Hanover on her 

Marriage .,.•.•..• 182 

Sir John Franklin 183 

To Dante .184 



THE FIRST QUAPdlEL. 
(In the Isle of Wight.) 

I. 

* Wait a little/ you say, * you are sure it 11 all come 

right/ 
But the boy was born i' trouble, an' looks so wan an' 

so w^hite : 
Wait ! an' once I ha' waited — I hadn't to wait for long. 
Now I wait, wait, wait for Hany. — No, no, you are 

doing me wrong ! 
Harry and I were married : the boy can hold up his 

head, 
The boy was bom in wedlock, but after my man was 

dead j 



Z THE FIEST QUARREL. 

I ha' work'd for hiin fifteen years, an' I work an' I 

wait to the end. 
I am all alone in the world, an' you are my only friend. 



II. 

Doctor, if you can wait, I'll tell you the tale o' my 

life. 
"When Hany an' I were children, he call'd me his own 

little wife ; 
I was happy when I was with him, an' sorry when he 

was away. 
An' when we play'd together, I loved him better than 

He workt me the daisy chain — he made me the cows- 

hp ball. 
He fought the boys that were rude an' I loved him 

better than all. 



THE FIRST QUARREL. 3 

Passionate girl tho' T was, an' often at home in dis- 
grace, 

I never could quarrel with Harry — I had but to look 
in his face. 

III. 

There was a farmer in Dorset of Harry's kin, that 

had need 
Of a good stout lad at his farm ; he sent, an' the 

father agreed ; 
So Harry was bound to the Dorsetshire farm for years 

an' for years ; 
I walked with him down to the quay, poor lad, an' 

we parted in tears. 
The boat was beginning to move, we heard them 

a-ringing the bell, 
' I'll never love any but you, God bless you, my own 

Httle Kell.' 

B 2 



4 THE FIRST QUARREL. 

IV. 

I was a child, an' be was a child, an' he came to harm ; 
There Avas a girl, a hussy, that workt with him up at 

the farm, 
One had deceived her an' left her alone with her sin 

an' her shame, 
And so she w^as wicked with Harry ; the girl was 

the most to blame. 

V. 

And years went over till I that w^as little had grown 

so tall, 
The men would say of the maids * Our Nelly's the 

flower of 'em all.* 
I didn't take heed o' them, but I taught myself all I 

could 
To make a good Avife for Harr}^, when Harry came 

home for good. 



THE FIRST QUARREL. 5 

VI. 

Often I seemed unhappy, and often as happy too, 
For I heard it abroad in the fiekls * I'll never love any 

but you ; ' 
^ I'll never love any but you ' the morning song of the 

lark, 
^ I'll never love any but you ' the nightingale's hymn 

in the dark. 

VII. 
And Harry came home at last, but he look'd at me 

sidelong and shy, 
Yext me a bit, till he told me that so many years had 

gone by, 
I had grown so handsome and tall — that I might ha' 

forgot him somehow — 
For he thought — there were other lads — ^he wasfear'd 

to look at me now. 



6 THE FIRST QUARREL. 

VIII. 

Hard was the frost in tlie field, we were married o' 

Christmas day, 
Married among the red berries, an' all as merry as 

May— 
Those were the pleasant times, my house an' my man 

were my pride, 
We seem'd like ships i' the Channel a-sailing with 

wind an' tide. 

IX. 

But work was scant in the Isle, tho' he tried the 

villages round. 
So Harry went over the Solent to see if work could be 

found ; 
An' he wrote ' I ha' six weeks' work, little wife, so 

far as I know ; 
I'll come for an hour to-morrow, an' kiss you before I 



go-' 



THE FIRST QUARREL. 7 

X. 

So I set to righting the house, for wsisn't he coming 

that day 1 
An' I hit on an old deal-box that \yas pushed in a 

corner away, 
It was full of old odds an' ends, an' a letter along wi' 

the rest, 
I had better ha' put my naked hand in a hornets' nest. 



XI. 

* Sweetheart ' — this was the letter — this was the letter 

I read — • 

* You promised to find me work near you, an' I wish 

I was dead — • 
Didn't you kiss me an' promise 1 you haven't done it, 

my lad. 
An' I almost died o' your going away, an' I wish that 

I had.' 



8 THE FIMfc>T QUARREL. 

XII. 

I too wish that I had — in the pleasant times that had 

past, 
Before I quarrell'd with Harry — my quarrel — the first 

an' the last. 



XIII. 

For Harry came in, an' I liimg him the letter that 

drove me wild. 
An* he told it me all at once, as simple as any child, 
' What can it matter, my lass, what I did wi' my 

single life ? 
I ha' been as true to you as ever a man to his wife ; 
An' she wasn't one o' the worst.' ' Then,' I said, ' I'm 

none o' the best/ 
An' he smiled at me, ' Ain't you, my love 1 Come, 

come, little wife, let it rest ! 



THE FIRST QUARREL. 1^ 

The man isn't like tlie woman, no need to make sucli 

a stir.' 
But be anger'd me all tlie more, an' I said * You were 

» keeping with her, 
When I was a-loving you all along an' the same as 

before.' 
An' he didn't speak for a while, an' he anger'd me 

more and more. 
Then he patted my hand in his gentle way, ^ Let by- 
gones be ! * 
' Bygones ! you kept yours hush'd,' I said, ^ when you 

married me ! 
By-gones ma' be come-agains ; an' site — ^in her shame 

an' her sin — 
You'll have her to nurse my child, if I die o' my l}'ing 

in! 
You'll make her its second mother ! I hate her — an' 

I hate you ! * 



10 THE FIRST QUARREL. 

Ah, Harry, my man, you had better ha' beaten me 

black an' blue 
Than ha' spoken as kind as you did, when I were so 

crazy wi' spite, • 
' Wait a little, my lass, I am sure it 'ill all come right. 

XIV. 
An' he took three turns in the rain, an' I watch'd him, 

an' when he came in 
I felt that my heart was hard, he was all wet thro' to 

the skin, 
An' I never said ^ off wi' the wet,' I never said ^ on 

wi' the dry,' 
So I knew my heart was hard, when he came to bid 

me goodbye. 
* You said that you hated me, Ellen, but that isn't 

true, you know ; 
I am going to leave you a bit — you'll kiss me before 

Igor 



THE FIRST QUARREL. 11 

xy. 

* Going ! you're going to her — kiss her — if you will/ 

I said, — • 
I was near my time wi' the boy, I must ha' been light 
i' my head — • 

* I had sooner be cursed than kiss'd ! ' — I didn't know 

well what I meant, 
But I turned my face from him, an' he turn'd his face 
an' he went. 

XVI. 

And then he sent me a letter, ' I've gotten my work 

to do ; 
You wouldn't Idss me, my lass, an' I never loved any 

but you ; 
I am sorry 'for all the quarrel an' sorry for what she 

wrote, 
I ha' six weeks' work in Jersey an' go to-night by 

the boat.' 



12 THE FIRST QUARREL. 

XVII. 

An' tlie wind began to rise, an' I thouglit of him out 

at sea, 
An' I felt I had been to blame ; he was always kind 

to me. 
Wait a little, my lass, I am sure it 'ill all come 

riglit ' — ■ 
An' the boat went down that niojht — the boat went 



down that night. 



13 



RIZPAIL 



17—. 



I. 
Wailing, wailing, wailing, the wind over land and 

sea — 
And Willy's voice in the wind, ' mother, come out 

to me/ 
Why should he call me to-night, when he knows that 

I cannot go ? ' 

For the downs are as bright as day, and the full moon 

stares at the snow, 



14 RIZPAH. 

II. 

We should be seen, my dear ; they would spy us out 

of the town. 
The loud black nights for us, and the storm rushing 

over the down, 
When I cannot see my own hand, but am led by the 

creak of the chain, 
And grovel and grope for my son till I find myself 

drenched with the rain. 

III. 
Anything fallen again 1 nay — what was there left to 

fall ] 
I have taken them home, I have number'd the bones, 

I have hidden them all. 
What am I saying ^ and what are yoic ? do you come 

as a spy ? 
Falls ] what falls 1 who knows ? As the tree falls so 

must it He. 



IIIZPAH. 15 



IV. 



Who let her in 1 how long has she been ] you — what 

have you heard ? 
"Why did you sit so quiet ? you never have spoken a 

word. 
— to pray with me — yes — a lady — none of their 

spies — 
But the night has crept into my heart, and begun to 

darken my eyes, 

V. 

Ah — you, that have lived so soft, what should you 

know of the night, 
The blast and the burning shame and the bitter frost 

and the fright 1 
I have done it, while you were asleep— you were only 

made for the day, 
I have gathered my baby together— -and now you may 

go your way. 



16 KIZPAII. 



VI. 

Nay — for it's kind of you, Madam, to sit by an old 

dying wife. 
But say nothing hard of my boy, I have only an hour 

of Hfe. 
I kiss'd my boy in the prison, before he went out to 

die. 
* They dared me to do it,* he said, and he never has 

told me a lie. 
I whipt him for robbing an orchard once when he was 

but a child — 
^ The farmer dared me to do it,' he said ; he was 

always so wild — 
And idle — and CDuldn't be idle — my Willy — he never 

could rest. 
The King shoull have made him a soldier, he would 

have been one of his best. 



EIZPAH. 



VII. 

But lie lived with a lot of wild mates, and they never 

would let him be good ; 
They swore that he dare not rob the mail, and he 

swore that he would ; 
And he took no life, but he took one purse, and when 

all was done 
He flung it among his fellows — I'll none of it, said 

my son. 



VIII. 



I came into court to the Judge and the laAvyers. I 

told them my tale, 
God's own truth — but they kill'd him, they kill'd him 



for robbing the mail. 



18 RIZPAH. 

They hang'd liim in chains for a show — we had always 

borne a good name — 
To be hang'd for a thief — and then put away — isn't 

that enough shame 1 
Dust to dust — low down — let us hide ! but they set 

him so high 
That all the ships of the world could stare at him, 

passing by. 
God 'ill pardon the hell-black raven and horrible fowls 

of the air, 
But not the black heart of the lawyer who kill'd him 

and hang'd him there, 

IX. 

And the jailer forced me away. I had bid him my 

last goodbye ; 
They had fasten'd the door of his cell. * mother I ' 

I heard him cry, . 



KIZPAH. 19 

I couldn't get back tho' I tried, he had something 

further to say, 
And now I never shall know it. The jailer forced me 

away. 

X. 

Then since I couldn't but hear that cry of my boy 

that was dead, 
They seized me and shut me up : they fasten'd me 

down on my bed. 
' Mother, O mother ! ' — ^he call'd in the dark to me 

year after year — - 
They beat me for that, they beat me — ^you know that 

I couldn't but hear ; 
And then at the last they found I had grown so stupid 

and still 
They let me abroad again — ^but the creatures had 

worked their will, 

c 2 



20 KIZPAH. 

XI. 

Flesh of my flesh was gone, but bone of my bone was 

left— 
I stole them all from the lawyers — and you, will you 

call it a theft ?— 
My baby, the bones that had suck'd me, the bones 

that had laughed and had ciied — 
Theirs ? no ! they are mine — not theirs — they had 

moved in my side. 

XII. 
Do you think I was scared by the bones ? I kiss'd 

'em, I buried *em all — 
I can't dig deep, I am old — in the night by the 

churchyard wall. 
My Willy 'ill rise up whole when the trumpet of 

judgment 'ill sound, 
But I charge you never to say that I laid him in holy 

ground. 



RIZPAH. 



21 



XIII. 

They would scratch Mm up — they would hang him 

again on the cursed tree. 
Sill? yes — we are sinners, I know — let all that be, 
And read me a Bible verse of the Lord's good will 

toward men — 
' Full of compassion and mercy, the Loid ' — let me 

hear it again ; 
* Full of compassion and mercy — long-suffering.' Yes, 

O yes ! 
For the lawyer is bom but to murder — the Saviour 

lives but to bless. 
7/e'll never put on the black cap except for the worst 

of the worst, 
And the first may be last — I have heard it in church 

— and the last may be fiist. 



22 pjzrAH. 

Suffering — long-suffering — yes, as tlie Lord must 

know, 
Year after year in the mist and tlie wind and the 

shower and the snow. 

xir. 
Heard, have you ? what 1 they have told you he never 

repented his sin. 
How do they know it 'i are tlisy his mother 1 are yoio 

of his Idn 1 
Heard ! have you ever heard, when the storm on the 

downs began. 
The wind that 'ill wail like a child and the sea that 

'ill moan like a man ? 

XV. 

Election, Election and Keprobation — it's all very well. 
But I go to-night to my boy, and I shall not find him 
in Hell. 



EIZPAII. 23 

For I cared so much, for my boy that the Lord has 

look'd into my care, 
And He means me I'm sure to be happy with Willy, 

I know not where, 

XVI. 

And if he be lost — but to save m^/ soul, that is all 

your desire : 
Do you think that I care for my soul if my boy be 

gone to the fire ? 
I have been with God in the dark — go, go, you may 

leave me alone — 
You never have borne a child — ^}'ou are just as hard 

as a stone. 

XVII. 

Madam, I beg your pardon ! I tliink that you mean 

to be kind, 
But I cannot hear what you stay for my Willy's voice 

in the wind — 



24 RIZPAH. 

The snow and tlie sky so Imght — lie used but to call 

in the daik, 
And he calls to me now from the church and not 

from the gibbet — for hark ! 
Nay — you can hear it yourself — it is coming — shaking 

the walls — 
Willy — the moon's in a cloud Good night. I am 

going. He calls. 



25 



TEE NORTHERN COBBLER. 

I. 

Waait till our Sally cooms in, far thou mun a' sights^ 

to tell. 
Eh, but I be maain glad to seea tha sa Wty an' well. 

* Cast awaay on a disolut land wi* a vartical soon-^ ! ' 
Strange fur to goa fur to think what saailors a* seean 

an' a' doon ; 

* Summat to drink — sa' 'ot ] ' I 'a nowt but Adam's 

wine : 
What's the 'eat o' this little 'ill-side to the 'eat o' the line 1 



^ The vowels at, pronounced separate!}' though in the 
closest conjunction, best render the sound of the long i and y 
in this dialect. But since such words as crdiin\ daUn\ wliaij 
(u(l)y &c., look awkward except in a page of express phonetics, 
I have thought it better to leave the simple i and y, and to 
trust that my readers will give them the broader pronuncia- 
tion. 

^ The 00 short, as in * wood.' 



2(j THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 

II. 

' What's i' tha bottle a-stanning theer 1 ' I'll tell tha. 

Gin. 
But if thou wants thy grog, tha mun goii fur it down 

to the inn, 
J^aay — fur I be maain-glad, but thaw tha was iver sa 

dry, 

Thou gits naw gin fro' the bottle theer, an' I'll tell 
tha wny. 

III. 

Mea an' thy sister was mai-ried, when wur it 1 back- 
end o' June, 

Ten year sin', and wa 'greed as well as a fiddle i' tune : 

I could fettle and clump owd booots and shoes wi' the 
best on 'em all, 

As fer as fro' Thursby thurn hup to Harmsby and 
Ilutterby Hall. 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 27 

We was busy as beeas i' the bloom an' as 'appy as 

'art could think, 
An' then the babby wur bui-n, and then I taiikes to 

the drink. 

jv. 

An' I weant gaainsaiiy it, my lad, thaw I be hafe 

shaamed on it now. 
We could sing a good song at the Plow, we could 

sing a good song at the Plow ; 
Thaw once of a frosty night I slither'd an' hurted my 

huck,^ 
An' I coom'd neck-an-crop soomtimes slaape down i' 

the squad an' the muck : 
An' once I fowt wi' the Taailor — not hafe ov a man, 

my lad — 
Fur he scrawm'd an' scratted my faace like a cat, an' 

it maade 'er sa mad 

^ Hip. 



28 THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 

That Sally she turn'd a tongue-banger,^ an' raated ma, 

^ Sofctin' thy braains 
Guzzlin' an' soakin' an' smolikin' an' hawmin' ^ about 

i' the laanes, 
So'i sow-droonk that tha doesn not touch thy 'at to 

the Squire ; ' 
An' I loook'd cock-eyed at my noase an' I seead 'im a- 

gittin' o' fire; 
But sin' I wur hallus i' liquor an' hallus as droonk as 

a king, 
Foiilks' co3stom flitted awaay like a kite wi' a brokken 

string. 

V. 

An' Sally she wesh'd foiilks' cloliths to keep the wolf 

fro' the door, 
Eh but the moor she riled me, she druv me to drink 

the moor, 

» So Did. 2 Lounging. 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 29 

Fur I fun', when 'er back wur turn'd, wheer Sally's 

owd stockin' wur 'id, 
An' I grabb'd the munny she maiide, and I weiir'd it 

o' liquor, I did. 

VI. 

An' one night I cooms 'oUm like a bull gotten loose at 

a faiiir, 
An' she wur a-waaitin' fo'mma, an' cryin' and tearin' 

'er 'aair. 
An' I tummled athurt the craadle an' sweiir'd as I'd 

break ivry stick 
C furnitur 'ere i' the 'ouse, an' I gied our Sally a kick, 
An' I mash'd the taables an' chairs, an' she an' the 

babby beal'd,^ 
Fur J knaw'd naw moor what I did nor a mortal 

beast o' the feiild. 



Bellowed, cried out. 



30 THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 

VII. 

An' when I waakecl i' tlie murnin' I seead that our 

Sally went laamed 
Cos' o' the kick as I gied er, an' I wur dreadful 

ashaamed ; 
An' Sally wur sloomy ^ an' draggle-taail'd in an owd 

turn gown, 
An' the babby's faace wurn't wesh'd an' the 'ole 'ouse 

hupside down. 

VIII. 
An' then I minded our Sally sa pratty an' neat an 

sweeat, 
Straat as a pole an' clean as a flower fro' 'ead to feeat : 
An' then I minded the fust kiss I gied 'er by Thursby 

thurn ; 
Theer wur a lark a-singin' 'is best of a Sunday at 

mum. 



* Sluggish, out of spirits. 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 31 

Couldn't see 'im, we 'eiird im a-mouiitin' oop 'iglier 

an' 'iglier, 
An' then 'e turn'd to the snn, an' 'e shined like a 

spailde o' fire. 
* Doesn't tha see 'im/ she axes, ^ fur I can see 'im 1 ' 

an I 
Seead nobbut the smile o' the sun as danced in 'er 

pratty blue eye ; 
An' I says * I mun gie tha a kiss,' an' Sally says 

^ ISToa, thou meant,' 
But I gied 'er a kiss, an' then anoother, an' Sally says 

' doant ! ' 



IX. 

An' when we coom'd into Meeatin', at fust she wur 

all in a tew, 
But, arter, we sing'd the 'ymn togither like birds on a 

beugh ; 



32 THE NORTIIERX COBBLER. 

An' Muggins *e preiicli'd o' Hell-fire an* the loov o' 

God fur men, 
An' then upo' coomin' awaiiy Sally gied me a kiss ov 

'ersen. 

X. 

Ileer wur a fall fro' a kiss to a kick like Saatan as fell 
Down out o' heaven i' Hell-fire — thaw theer's naw 

drinkin' i' Hell ; 
Mea fur to kick our Sally as kep the wolf fro' the 

door, 
All along o' the drink, fur I loov'd 'er as well as afoor. 



XI. 

Sa like a graat num-cumpus I blubber'd awaay o' the 

bed— 
* Weant niver do it naw moor ; ' an' Sally loookt np an' 

she said, 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 33 

* I'll upowd it ^ tha weiint ; tliou'rt laike the rest o' the 

men, 
Thou'll goa sniffin' about the tap till tha does it agean. 
Theer's thy hennemy, man, an' I knaws, as knaws tha 

sa well, 
That, if tha seelis 'im an' smells 'im tha'll foller 'im 

slick into Hell.' 

XII. 

* Xaay,' says I, ' fur I weiint goii sniffin' about the 

tap.' 
' We'cint tha 1 ' she says, an' mysen I thowt i' mysen 
* mayhap.' 

* Noa : ' an' I started awaay like a shot, an' down to 

the Hinn, 
An' I browt what tha seetis stannin' theer, yon big 
black bottle o' gin. 



» I'll uphold it. 
D 



34 THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 

XIII. 

* That caps ovvt/ ^ sa^'S Sally, an' saw slie begins to cry, 
But I puts it inter 'er 'ands an' I says to 'er, ^ Sally,' 

says I, 

* Stan' 'im tlieer i' tlie nalime o' the Lord an' the 

power ov 'is Graace, 
Stan' 'im theer, fur I'll loook my hennemy strait i' the 

faace, 
Stan' 'im theer i' the winder, an' let ma locok at 'im 

then, 
E' seeiims naw moor nor watter, an' 'e's the Divil's 

oan sen.' 

■ ■ ■ } 

XIV. 

An' I wur down i' tha mouth, couldn't do naw work 

an' all, 
IS'asty an' snaggy an' sha'aky, an' poonch'd my 'and wl' 

the hawl, 



^ That's beyond everything. 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 35 

But she wur a power o' coomfut, an' sattled 'ersen o' 

my knee, 
An' coiixd an' cDodlecl me cop till agean I feel'd mysen 

free. 

XV. 

An' Sally she tell'd it about, an' foalk stood a-gawmin' * 

in, 

t 

As thaw it wur summat bewitch'd istead of a quart o' 

gin; 
An' some on 'em said it wur watter— an' I wur 

chousin' the wife. 
Fur I couldn't 'owd 'ands off gin, wur it nobbut to 

saave my life ; 
An' blacksmith 'e strips me the thick ov 'is airm, an' 

'e shaws it to me, 

' Fecal thou this ! thou can't graw this upo' watter ! ' 
says he. 



* Staring vacantly. 
D 2 



36 THE NORTUERN COBBLER. 

An' Doctor 'e calls o' Sunday an' just as candles was 

lit, 
' Thou moant do it/ he says, * tha mun break 'im off 

bit by bit.' 
* Thou'rt but a Methody-man,' says Parson, and laays 

down 'is 'at. 
An' 'e points to the bottle o' gin, * but I respecks tha 

fur that ; ' 
An' Squire, his oan very sen, walks down fro' the 'AH 

to see, 
An' 'e spanks 'is 'and into mine, ' fur I respecks tha,' 

says 'e ; 
An' coostom ageiin draw'd in like a wind fro' far an' 

wide. 
And browt me the bocots to be cobbled fro' hafe the 

coontryside. 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 37 



XVI 

An' theer 'e stans an' theer 'e shall stan to my dying 

daay ; 
I 'a gotten to loov 'im agean in anoother kind of a 

waay, 
Proud on 'im, like, my lad, an' I keeaps 'im clean an' 

bright, 
Loovs 'im, an' roobs 'im, an' doosts 'im, an' puts 'im 

back i' the light. 

XVII. 

Wouldn't a pint a' sarved as well as a quart Kaw 

doubt : 
But I liked a bigger feller to fight wi' an' fowt it out. 
Fine an' meller 'e mun be by this, if I cared to taUste, 
But I moiint, my lad, and I weant, fur I'd fe'al mysen 

clean disgraiiced. 



38 THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 

XVIII. 

An' once I said to the Missis, * My lass, when I cooms 

to die, 
Smash the bottle to smithers, the Divil's in 'im,' 

said I. 
But arter I chaanged my mind, an' if Sally be left 

aloan, 

I'll hev 'im a-buried wi'mma an' taake 'im afoor the 
Throiin. 

XIX. 

Coom thou 'eer — yon laiidy a-steppin' along the 

streeat, 
Doesn't tha knaw 'er — sa pratty, an' feat, an' neat, 

an' sweeat 1 
Look at the deaths on 'er back, thebbe ammost 

spick-span-new, 
An' Tommy's faace is as fresh as a codlin 'at's wesh'd 

i' the dew. 



THE NORTHERN COBBLER. 39 



XX. 



^Ere's our Sally an' Tommy, an* we be a-goin to dine, 
Bail con an' taates, an' a beslings-puddin' ^ an' Adam's 



wine : 



But if tha wants ony grog tha mun goii fur it down 

to the Hinn, 
Fur I weiint shed a drop on 'is blood, noa, not fur 

Sally's oan kin. 



' A pudding made with the first milk of the cow after 

calvincr. 



40 



THE REVENGE. 
A Ballad of the Fleet. 

I. 

At Flores in the Azores Sir Eicliard Grenville lay, 

And a pinnace, like a fluttered bird, came flying from 
far away : 

' Spanish ships of war at sea ! we have sighted fifty- 
three ! ' 

Then sware Lord Thomas Howard : ^ Tore God I am 
no coward ; 

But I cannot meet them here, for my ships are out of 
gear, ^ 



THE REVENGE. 41 

And the half my men are sick. I must fly, but follow 
quick. 

We are six ships of the line ; can we fight with fifty- 
three T 

II. 

Then spake Sir Eichard Grenville : * I know you are 

no coward ; 
You fly them for a moment to fight with them again. 
But Tve ninety men and more that are lying sick 

ashore, 
I should count myself the coward if I left them, my 

Lord Howard, 
To these Inquisition dogs and the devildoms of Spain.' 

- III. 

So Lord Howard past away with five ships of war 

that day, 
Till he melted like a cloud in the silent summer 

heaven; 



42 THE REVENGE. 

But Sir Bichard bore in hand all his sick men from 

the land 
Very carefully and slow, 
Men of Bideford in Devon, 
And we laid them on the ballast down below ; 
For we brought them all aboard, 
And they blest him in their pain, that they were not 

left to Spain, 
To the thumbscrew and the stake, for the glory of the 

Lord. 



IV. 

He had only a hundred seamen to work the ship and 

to fight. 
And he sailed away from Flores till the Spaniard 

came in sight. 
With his huge sea-castles heaving upon the weather 

bow. 



THE REVENGE. 43 

' Shall we fight or shall we fly ? 

Good Sir Kicharcl, tell us now, 

For to fight is but to die ! 

There'll be little of us left by the time this sun be set.' 

And Sir Kichard said again : * We be all good 

English men. 
Let us bang these dogs of Seville, the children of the 

devil, 
For I never turned my back upon Don or devil yet.' 



V. 

Sir Kichard spoke and he laugh'd, and we roar'd a 

hurrah, and so 
The little Hevenge ran on sheer into the heart of 

the foe. 
With her hundred fighters on deck, and her ninety 

sick below ; 



44 THE REVENGE. 

For half of their fleet to the right andhalf to the left 
were seen, 

And the little Kevenge ran on thro* the long sea- 
lane between. 



VI. 

Thousands of their soldiers look'd down from their 

decks and laugh'd, 
Thousands of their seamen made mock at the mad 

little craft 
Running on and on, till delayM 
By their mountain-like San Philip that, of fifteen 

hundred tons, 
And up-shadowing high above us with her yawning 

tiers of guns, 
Took the breath from our sails, and we stay'd. 



THE REVENGE. 45 

VII. 

And while now the great San Philip hung above us 
like a cloud 

Whence the thunderbolt will fall 

Long and loud, 

Four galleons drew away 

From the Spanish fleet that day, 

And two upon the larboard and two upon the star- 
board lay. 

And the battle-thundei broke from them all, 

VIII. 

But anon the great San Philip, she bethought her- 
self and went 

Having that within her womb that had left her ill 
content ; 

And the rest they came aboard us, and they fought 
us hand to hand, 



46 THE KEVENGE. 

For a dczen times they came with their pikes and 

miisqueteers, 
And a dozen times we shook 'em off as a dos: that 

shakes his ears 
When he leaps from the water to the land. 



'o 



IX. 

And the sun went down, and the stars came out far 
over the summer sea, 

But never a moment ceased the fight of the one and 
the fifty- three. 

Ship after ship, the whole night long, their high-built 
galleons came, 

Ship after ship, the whole night long, with her battle- 
thunder and flame ; 

Ship after ship, the whole night long, drew back with 
her dead and her shame. 



THE REVENGE. 47 

For some were sunk and many were shattered, and so 

could fight U3 no more — 
God of battles, was ever a battle like this in the world 

before 1 



X. 



For*he said * Fight on 1 fight on ! ' 



Tho' his vessel was all but a wreck ; 

And it chanced that, when half of the short summer 

night was gone. 
With a grisly wound to be drest he had left the deck, 
But a bullet struck him that was dressing it suddenly 

dead. 
And himself he was wounded again in the sice and 

the head. 
And he said * Fight on ! fight on ! ' 



48 THE REVENGE. 

XI. 

And the night went down, and the sun smiled out far 

over the summer sea, 
And the Spanish fleet with broken sides lay round us 

all in a ring ; 
But they dared not touch us again, for they fear'd 

that we still could sting, 
So they watch'd what the end would be. 
And we had not fought them in vain, 
But in perilous plight were we, • 
Seeing forty of our poor hundred were slain. 
And half of the rest of us niaim'd for life 
In the crash of the cannonades and the desperate 

strife ; 
And the sick men down in the hold wex^e most of 

them stark and cold. 
And the pikes were all broken or bent, arid the powder 
was all of it spent ; 



THE KEVEXGE. 49 

And the masts and tlie rigging were lying over the 

side ; 
But Sir Eichard cried in his English pride, 

* We have fought such a fight for a day and a night 
As may never be fought again ! 

\Ye have won great glory, my men ! 

And a day less or more 

At sea or ashore, 

AYe die — does it matter when 1 

Sink me the ship, Master Gunner — sink her, split her 

in twain ! 
Fall into the hands of God, not into the hands of 

Spain ! ' 

XII. 

And the gunner said * Ay, ay,* but the seamen made 
reply : 

* "We have children, we have wives, 

And the Lord hath spared our lives. » 

E 



50 THE REVENGE. 

We will make the Spaniard promise, if we yield, to 

let us go ; 
We shall live to fiQ:ht a^^jain and to strike another 

blow.' 
And the lion there lay dying, and they yielded to the 

foe. 

XIII. 

And the stately Spanish men to their flagship bore 

him then, 
Where they laid him by the mast, old Sir Kichard 

caught at last. 
And they j^raised him to his face with their courtly 

foreign grace ; 
But he rose upon their decks, and he cried : 
^ I have fought for Queen and Faith like a valiant 

man and true ; 
I have only done my duty as a man is bound to do : 



THE REVENGE. 51 

With a joyful spii-it I Sir Richard Grenville die ! ' 
And he fell upon their decks, and he died. 

XIV. 

And they stared at the dead that had been so valiant 

and true, 
And had holden the power and glory of Spain so 

cheap 
That he dared her with one little ship and his English 

few; 
Was he devil or man 1 He was devil for aught they 

knew, 
But they sank his body with honour down into the 

deep, 
And they mann'd the Revenge with a swarthier 

alien crew, 
And away she sail'd with her loss and long'd for her 



own ; 



B 2 



52 THE EEYENGE. 

When a wind from the lands they had rviin'd awoke 
from sleep, 

And the water began to heave and the weather to 
moan, 

And or ever that evening ended a great gale blew. 

And a wave like the wave that is raised by an earth- 
quake grew, 

Till it smote on their hulls and their sails and their 
masts and their flags, 

And the whole sea plunged and fell on the shot- 
shatter 'd navy of Spain, 

And the little Kevenge herself went down by the 
island crags 

To be lost evermore in the main. 



53 



THE SISTERS. 

They have left the doors ajar ; and by their clash, 
And prelude on the keys, I know the song, 
Their favourite — which I call ' The Tables Turned/ 
Evelyn begins it * diviner Air.' 

EVELYIf. 

O diviner Air, 

Thro* the heat, the drowth, the dust, the glare. 

Far from out the west in shadowing showers, 

Over all the meadow baked and bare. 

Making fresh and fair 

All the bowers and the flowers. 

Fainting flowers, faded bowers. 



54 THE SISTERS. 

Over all this weary world of ours, 
Breathe, diviner Air ! 

A sweet voice that — you scarce could better that. 
Now follows Edith echoing Evelyn. 



EDITH. 

O diviner light, 

Thro' the cloud that roofs our noon with night, 

Thro' the blotting mist, the blinding showers. 

Far from out a sky for ever bright. 

Over all the woodland's flooded bowers. 

Over all the meadow's drowning flowers, 

Over all this ruiii'd world of ours. 



Break diviner light ! 



Marvellously like, their voices— and themselves ! 
Tho' one is somewhat deeper than the other, 



THE SISTERS. 55 

As one is somewhat graver than the other — 

Edith than Evelyn. Your good Uncle, whom 

You count the father of your fortune, longs 

For this alliance : let me ask you then, 

Which voice most takes you 1 for I do not doubt 

Being a watchful parent, you are taken 

With one or other : tho' sometimes I fear 

You may be flickering, fluttering in a doubt 

Between the two — which must not be — which might 

Be death to one : they both are beautiful : 

Evelyn is gayer, wittier, prettier, says 

The common voice, if one may trust it : she 1 

No ! but the paler and the graver, Edith. 

Woo her and gain her then : no wavering, boy ! 

The graver is perhaps the one for you 

Who jest and laugh so easily and so well. 

For love w^ill go by contrast, as by likes. ' 



56 THE SISTERS. 

No sisters ever prized eacli otlier more. 
Not so : their mother and her sister loved 
More passionately still. 

Bnt that my best 
And oldest friend, your Uncle, wishes it, 
And that I know you worthy everyway 
To be my son, 1 might, perchance, be loath 
To part them, or part from them : and yet one 
Should marry, or all the broad lands in your view 
From this bay window — which our house has held 
Three hundred years — will pass collaterally. 

My father with a child on either knee, 
A hand upon the head of either child, 
Smoothing their locks, as golden as his own 
Were silver, ^ get them wedded ' would he say. 
And once my prattling Edith ask'd him ' why 1 ' 
Ay, why 1 said he, ' for why should I go lame 1 ' 



THE SISTERS. 57 



Then told them of his wars, and of his wound. 
For see — tliis wine — the grape from whence it flow'd 
Was blackening on the slopes of Portugal, 
When that brave soldier, down the terrible ridge 
Plunged in the last fierce charge at Waterloo, 
And caught the laming bullet. He left me this. 
Which yet retains a memory of its youth, 
As I of miaie, and my first passion. Come ! 
Here's to your happy union with my child ! 

Yet must you change your name : no fault of mine ! 
You say that. you can do it as willingly 
As birds make ready for their bridal-time 
By change of feather : for all that, my boy, 
Some birds are sick and sullen when they moult. 
An old and worthy name ! but mine that stirr'd 
Among our civil wars and earlier too 
Among the Roses, the more venerable. 



58 THE SISTERS. 

/ care not for a name — no fault of mine. 
Once more — a happier marriage than my own ! 

You see yon Lombard poplar on the plain. 
The highway running by it leaves a breadth 
Of sward to left and right, where, long ago, 
One bright May morning in a world of song, 
I lay at leisure, watching overhead 
The aerial poplar wave, an amber spire. 

I dczed ; I woke. An open landaulet 
Whirl'd by, which, after it had past me, show'd 
Turring my way, the loveliest face on earth. 
The face of one there sitting opposite. 
On whom I brought a strange unhappiness, 
That time I did not see. 

Love at first sight 
May seem — with goodly rhyme and reason for it — 



THE SISTERS. 59 

Possible — at first glimpse, and for a face 

Gone in a moment — strange. Yet once, when first 

I came on lake Llanberris in the dark, 

A moonless night with storm — one liglitning-fork 

Flashed out the lake ; and tho' I loitered there 

The full day after, yet in retrospect 

That less than momentary thunder- sketch 

Of lake and mountain conquers all the day. 

The Sun himself has limn'd the face for me. 
Not quite so quickly, no, nor half as well. 
For look you here-=— the shadows are too deep, 
And like the critic's blurrino; comment make 
The veriest beauties of the work appear 
The darkest faults : the sweet eves frown : the 

lips 
Seem bat a gash. My sole memorial 
Of Edith — no the other, — both indeed. 



60 THE SISTERS. 

So that bright face was ilash'd thro' sense and 
soul 
And by the poplar vanish'd — to be found 
Long after, as it seem'd, beneath the tall 
Tree-bowers, and those long-sweeping beechen boughs 
Of our New Forest. I was there alone : 
The phantom of the whirling landaulet 
For ever past me by : when one quick peal 
Of laughter drew me thro* the glimmering glades 
Down to the snowlike sparkle of a cloth 
On fern and foxglove. Lo, the face again, 
My ExDsalind in this Arden — Edith — all 
One bloom of youth, health, beauty, happiness. 
And moved to merriment at a passing jest. 

There one of those about her knowins: me 
Call'd me to join them ; so with these I spent 
What seem'd my crowning hour, my day of days. 



THE SISTERS. 61 

I woo'd her then, nor unsuccessfully, 
The worse for her, for me ! was I content 1 
Ay — no, not quite ; for now and then I thought 
Laziness, vague love-longings, the bright May, 
Had made a heated haze to magnify 
The charm of Edith — that a man^s ideal 
Is high in Heaven, and lodged with Plato's God,' 
Not findable here — content, and not content. 
In some such fashion as a man may be 
That having had the portrait of his friend 
Drawn by an artist, looks at it, and says, 
* Good ! very like ! not altogether he.' 

As yet I had not bound myself by words. 
Only, believing I loved Edith, made 
Edith love me. Then came the day when I, 
Flattering myself that all my doubts were fools 
Born of the fool this Age that doubts of all — • 



Q2 THE SISTERS. 

Not I tLat day of Edith's love or mine — 
Had braced my purpose to declare myself : 
I stood upon the stairs of Paradise. 
The golden gates would open at a word. 
I spoke it — told her of my passion, seen 
And lost and found again, had got so far, 
Had caught her hand, her eyelids fell — I heard 
Wheels, and a noise of welcome at the doors — 
On a sudden after two Italian years 
Had set the blossom of her health again, 
The younger sister, Evelyn, enter'd — there. 
There was the face, and altogether she. 
The mother fell about the daughter's neck, 
The sisters closed in one another's arms. 
Their people throng'd about them from the hall. 
And in the thick of question and reply 
I fled the house, driven by one angel face. 
And all the Furies. 



THE SISTERS. 63 



9 



I was bound to her ; 

I could not free myself in honour — bound 

Not by the sounded letter of the word, 
But counterpressures of the yielded hand 

That timorovisly and faintly echoed mine, 

Quick blushes, the sweet dwelling of her eyes 

Upon me when she thought I did not see — 

Were these not bonds 1 nay, nay, but could I wed her 

Loving the other 1 do her that great wrong 1 

Had I not dream'd I loved her yestermorn 1 

Had I not known where Love, at first a fear. 

Grew after marriage to full height and form ? 

Yet after marriage, that mock-sister there — ■ 

Brother-in-law — the fiery nearness of it — 

Unlawful and disloyal brotherhood — 

What end but darkness could ensue from this 

For all the three ? So Love and Honour jarr'd 

Tho' Love and Honour joined to raise the full 



64 THE SISTERS. 

High-tide of doubt that sway'd me up and down 
Advancing nor retreating. 

Edith wrote : 
* My mother bids me ask ' (I did not tell you — • 
A widow with less guile than many a child. 
God help the wrinkled children that are Christ's 
As well as the plump cheek — she wrought us harm, 
Poor soul, not knowing) 'are you ill] (so ran 
The letter) * you have not been here of late. 
You will not find me here. At last I go 
On that long-promised visit to the North. 
I told your wayside story to my mother 
And Evelyn. She remembers you. Farewell. 
Pray come and see my mother. Almost blind 
With ever-growing cataract, yet she thinks 
She sees you when she hears. Again farewell.* 

CoLl words from one I had hoped to warm so far 



THE SISTERS. ^5 

That I could stamp my image on her heart ! 
* Pray come and see my mother, and farewell.* 
Cold, but as welcome as free airs of heaven 
After a dungeon's closeness. Selfish, strange ! 
What dwarfs are men ! my strangled vanity 
Utter'd a stifled cry — to have vext myself 
And all in vain for her — cold heart or none — 
No bride for me. Yet so my path was clear 
To win the sister. 

"Whom I woo'd and won. 

For Evelyn knew not of my former suit, 
Because the simple mother work'd upon 
By Edith pray'd me not to whisper of it. 
And Edith would be bridesmaid on the day. 

But on that day, not being all at ease, 
I from the altar glancing back upon her. 
Before the first * I will * was utter'd, saw 
The bridesmaid pale, statuelike, passionless — 



66 THE SISTERS. 

* No harm, no harm ' I tiirn'd again, and placed 
My ring upon the finger of my biide. 



So, when we parted, Edith spoke no word, 
She wept no tear, but round my Evelyn clung 
In utter silence for so long, I thought 
* What will she never set her sister fi*ee ? ' 



We left hei', happy each in each, and then. 
As tho' the happiness of each in each 
Were not enough, must fain have torrents, lakes, 
Hills, the great things of Nature and the fair. 
To lift us as it were from commonplace. 
And help us to our joy. Better have sent 
Our Edith thro' the glories of the earth, 
To change with her horizon, if true Love 
Were not his own imperial all-in-all. 



THE SISTERS. G7 

Far off we went. My God, I would not live 
Save that I think this gross hard-seeming world 
Is our misshaping vision of the Powers 
Behind the world, that make our griefs our gains. 

For on the dark night of our marriage-day 
The great Tragedian, that had quench'd herself 
In that assumption of the bridesmaid — she 
That loved me — our true Edith — her brain broke 

With over-acting, till she rose and lied 
Beneath a pitiless rush of Autumn rain 

To the deaf church — to be let in — to pray 

Befoie tJiat altar — so I think ; and there 

They found her beating the hard Protestant doors. 

She died and she was buried ere we knew. 

I learnt it first. I had to speak. At once 
The bright quick smile of Evelyn, that had sunn'd 

F 2 



68 THE SISTERS. 

The morning of our man-iage, past away : 
And on our home-return the daily want 
Of Edith in the house, the garden, still 
Haunted us like her ghost ; and by and by, 
Either from that necessity for talk 
Which lives with blindness, or plain innocence 
Of nature, or desire that her lost child 
Should earn from both the praise of heroism, 
The mother broke her promise to the dead, 
And told the living daughter with what love 
Edith liJid welcomed my brief wooing of her, 
And all her sweet self-sacrifice and death. 

Henceforth that mystic bond betwixt the twins- 
Did I not tell you they were twins 1 — prevail'd 
So far that no caress could win my wife 
Back to that passionate answer of full heart 
I had from her at fiist. Not that her love, 



THE SISTERS. 69 

Tho' scarce as great as Edith^s power of love, 
Had lessen'cl, but the mother's garrulous wail 
For ever woke the unhappy Past again, ' 

Till that dead bridesmaid, meant to be my bride, 
Put forth cold hands between us, and I fear'd 
The very fountains of her life were chill'd ; 
So took her thence, and brought her here, and here 
She bore a child, whom reverently we call'd 
Edith ; and in the second year was bom 
A second — this I named from her own self, 
Evelyn ; then two weeks — no more — she joined^ 
In and beyond the grave, that one she loved. 

Now in this quiet of declining life. 
Thro* dreams by night and trances of the day, 
The sisters glide about me hand in hand, 
Both beautiful ahke, nor can I tell 
One fi'om the other, no, nor care to tell 
One from the other, only know they come, 



70 THE SISTERS. 

They smile upon me, till, remembering all 
The love they both have borne me, and the love 
I bore them both — divided as I am 
From either by the stillness of the grave — 
I know not which of these I love the best. 



But you love Edith ; and her own true eyes 
Are traitors to her ; our quick Evelyn — 
The mei'rier, prettier, wittier, as they talk, 
And not without good reason, my good son — 
Is yet untouch'd : and I that hold them both 
Dearest of all things — well, I am not sure — 
But if there lie a preference eitherway, 
And in the rich vocabulary of Love 
^ Most dearest ' be a true superlative — 
I think / likewise love your Edith most. 



71 



THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL} 

I* 

'OusE-KEEPER seiit tha my lass, fur New Squire coom'd 

last night. 
Buttei* an' heggs — ^yis — yis. I'll goii wi' tha back : all 

right ; 
Butter I warrants be prime, an' I warrants the heggs 

be as w^ell, 
Hafe a pint o' milk runs out when ya breaks the shell. 

II. 

Sit thysen down fur a bit : hev a glass o' cowslip wine ! 
I liked the owd Squire an' 'is gells as thaw they was 
gel Is o' mine, 



* 8ee note to * Northern Cobbler.' 



72 THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. 

Fur then we w^as all es one, the Squire an' 'is darters 

an' me, 
Hall but Miss Annie, the heldest, I niver not took to 

she : 
But Nelly, the last of the cletch,^ I liked 'er the fust 

on 'em all, 
Fur hoffens we talkt o' my dai-ter es died o' the fever 

at fall : 
An' I thowt 'twur the will o' the Lord, but Miss Annie 

she said it wur draains, 
Fur she hedn't naw coomfut in 'er, an' arn'd naw thanks 

fur 'er paains. 
Eh ! thebbe all wi' the Lord my childer, I han't gotten 

none ! 
Sa new Squire's coom'd wi' 'is taail in 'is 'and, an' owd 

Squire's gone. 



' A brood of chickens. 



THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. / O 

III. 

Fur 'staate be i' taail, my lass : tha dosn* knaw what 

that be ? 
But I knaws the law, I does, for the lawyer ha towd 

it me. 
' When theer's naw 'ead to a 'Ouse by the fault o' that 

ere maale — 
The gells they counts fur.nowt, and the next un he 

taiikes the taail,* 

IV. 

What be the next un like ? can tha tell ony harm on 

'im lass 1 — 
Xaay sit down — naw 'urry — sa cowd ! — hev another 

glass ! 
Straange an' cowd fur the time ! we may happen a 

fall o' snaw — 
Not es I cares fur to hear ony harm, but I likes to 

knaw. 



74 THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. 

An' I 'caps es 'e beant boooklarn'd : but 'e closn not 

coom fro' the shere ; 
We'd anew o' that wi' the Squire, an' we haates boook- 

larnin' ere. 

V. 

Fur Squiie wur a Varsity scholard, an' niver lookt 

arter the land — 
Whoiits or turmuts or taates — 'e 'ed hallus a boook i' 

'is 'and, 
Halhis aloan wi' 'is boooks, thaw nigh upo' seventy 

year. 
An' boooks, what's boooks 1 thou knaws thebbe ney- 

ther 'ere nor theer. 

VI. 

An' the gells, they hedn't naw taails, an' the lawyei^ he 

towd it me 
That 'is taail were so'a tied up es he couldn't cut down 

a tree ! 



THE VILLAGE WIFE; OR, THE ENTAIL. 75 

* Drat the trees/ says I, to be sewer I haates 'em, mv 

lass, 
Fur we puts the muck o' the land, an' they sucks the 

muck fro' the giass. 

VII. 

An' Squire wur hallus a-smilin', an' gied to the tramps 
goin' by — 

An' all o' the wust i' the parish — wi' hoffens a drop in 

'is eye. 
An' ivry darter o' Squire's hed her awn ridin-eree to 

'ersen, 
An' they i^mpaged about wi' their grooms, an' was 

'untin' arter the men. 
An' hallus a-dallackt ^ an' dizen'd out, an' a-buyin' new 

cloathes, 
While 'e sit like a graat glimmer-gowk ^ wi' 'is glasses 

athurt 'is noase. 



* Overdrest in gay colours. * Owl. 



76 THE VILLAGE WIFE j OR, THE ENTAIL. 

An' 'is noase sa grufted wi' snuff es it couldn't be 

scroob'd awaay, 
Fur atween 'is readin' an' writin' 'e snifft up a box in 

a daay, 
An' 'e niver runn'd arter the fox, nor alter the birds 

wi' 'is jsjun, 
An' 'e niver not shot one 'are, but 'e leaved it to 

Charlie 'is son, 
An' 'e niver not fish'd 'is awn ponds, but Charlie 'e 

cotch'd the pike, 
Fur 'e warn't not burn to the land, an' 'e didn't take 

kind to it like ; 
But I ears es 'e'd gie fur a howry ^ owd book thutty 

pound an' moor, 
An' 'e'd wrote an owd book, his awn sen, sa I knaw'd 

es 'e'd coom to be poor ; 

> Filthy. 



' THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. / / 

An* 'e gied — I be fear'cl fur to tell tha 'ow much — fur 

an owd scrattecl stoan, 
An' *e digg'cl up a loomp i' the land an' 'e got a brown 

pot an' a bcan, 

An' 'e bowt owd money, es wouldn't goa, wi' good 

gowd o' the Queen, 
An' 'e bowt little statutes all-naakt an' which was a 

shaame to be seen ; 
But 'e niver loookt ower a bill, nor 'e niver not seed 

to owt, 
An* 'e niver knawd nowt but boobks, an' boooks, as 

thou knaws, beant nowt. 

VIII. 

But owd Squire's laady es long es she lived she kep 

'em all clear, t 

Thaw es long es she lived I niver hed none of 'ei 

darters 'ere; 



78 THE VILLAGE WIFE; OR, THE ENTAIL. 

But arter she died we was all es one, the childer 



an' me. 



An* sarvints runn'd in an' out, an' offens we hed 'em 

to tea. 
Lawk ! 'ow I laugh'd when the lasses 'ud talk o' their 

Missis's waays, 
An' the Missisis talk'd o' the lasses. — I'll tell tha 

some o' these daays. 
Hoanly Miss Ainiie were saw stuck oop, like 'er 

mothei* afoor — 
'Er an' 'er blessed daiter — they niver derken'd my 

door. 

IX. 

An' Squire 'e smiled an' e' smiled till 'e 'd gotten a 

friglit at last, 
An' 'e cxUs fur 'is son, fur the 'turney's letters they 

foller'd sa fast ; 



THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. 79 

But Squire wur afear'd o* 'is son, an' ^e says to 'im, 

meek as a mouse, 
' Lad, thou mun cut off thy taail, or the gells 'ull goa 

to the 'Ouse, 
Fur I finds es I be that i' debt, es I 'oaps es thou'll 

'elp me a bit, 
An' if thou'll 'gree to cut off thy taail I may saave 

my sen yit.' 

X. 

But CharHe 'e sets back 'is ears, an' 'e swears, an' 'e 

says to 'im ' Noa.' 
' I've gotten the 'staate by the taail an' be dang'd if I 

iver let goa ! 
Coom ! coom ! feyther/ 'e says, ' why shouldn't thy 

boobks be sowd ? 
I hears es soom o' thy boooks mebbe worth their weight 

i' gowd.' 



80 THE VILLAGE WIFE; OR, THE ENTAIL. 

XI. 

Heaps an* heaps o' boobks, I ha' see'd 'em, belong'd 

to the Squire, 
But the lasses 'ed teard out leaves i' the middle to 

kindle the fire ; 
Sa moast on 'is owd big boooks fetch'd nigh to nowt 

at the saale, 
And Squire were at Charlie agean to git 'im to cut 

off 'is taail. 

XII. 

Ya wouldn't find Charlie's likes — 'e were that out- 
dacious at 'oam, 

Not thaw ya went fur to raake out Hell wi' a small- 
tooth coamb — 

Droonk wi' the Quoloty's wine, an' droonk wi' the 
farmer's aale, 

Mad wi' the lasses an' all — an' 'e wouldn't cut off the 
taail. 



THE VILLAGE WIFE; OR, THE ENTAIL. 81 

XIII. 

Thou's coom'd oop by the beck ; and a thurn be 

a-grawin' theer, 
I niver ha seed it sa white wi' the Maay es I see'd it 

to-year — 
Theerabouts Charlie joompt — and it gied me. a scare 

tother night, 
Fur I thowt it wur Charlie's ghoast i' the derk, fur 

it loookt sa white. 
* Billy/ says 'e, ' hev a joomp ! ' — thaw the banks o 

the beck be sa high, 
Fur he ca'd 'is 'erse Billy-rough -un, thaw niver a hair 

wur awry ; 
But Billy fell bakkuds o' Charlie, an' Charlie 'e brok 

'is neck, 
So theer wur a hend o' the taail, fur 'e lost 'is taail i' 

the beck. 

o 



82 THE VILLAGE WIFE : OH, THE ENTAIL. 



xiy. 



Sa 'is taiiil wur lost an' 'is boooks wur gone an' 'is boy 

wur dead, 
An' Squire 'e smiled an' 'e smfled, but 'e niver not 

lift oop 'is ead : 
Halliis a soft nn Squire ! an' 'e smiled, fur 'e hedn't 

naw friend, 
Sa feyther an' son was buried togither, an' this wur 

the hend. 

XV. 

An' Parson as hesn't the call, nor the mooney, but 

hes the pride, 
'E reads of a sewer an' sartan 'oap o' the totlier side; 
But I beant that sewer es the Lord, howsiver they 

praay'd an' praay'd, 
Lets them inter 'eaven easy es leaves their debts to 

be paaid. 



THE VILLAGE WIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. 83 

Siver the moulds rattled down vipo' pooi' owd Squire 

i* the wood, 
An' I cried along wi' the gells, fur they weant nirer 

coom to naw good. 

XVI. 

Eur Molly the youngest she walkt awaay wi' a hoffi- 

cer lad, 
An' nawbody 'eard on 'er sin, sa o' coorse she be gone 

to the bad ! 
An' Lucy wnr laame o' one leg, sweet- 'arts she niver 

'ed none — 
Straange an' unheppen ^ Miss Lucy ! we naamed her 

* Dot an' gaw one ! ' 
An' Hetty wur weak i' the hattics, wi'out ony harm 

i' the legs, 
An' the fever 'ed baaked Jinny's Vad as bald as one o' 

them heggs, 



I 



^ Ungainly, a\vk\rard. 
G 2 



84 THE VILLAGE AVIFE ; OR, THE ENTAIL. 

An' Nelly wur up fro* the craadle as big i' the mouth 

as a cow, 
An' saw she mun hammergrate,^ lass, or' she weant git 

a maate onyhow ! 
An' es fur Miss Annie es call'd me afoor my awn 

foalks to my faace 
* A hignorant village wife as 'ud hev to be larn'd her 

awn plaace,' 
Hes fur Miss Hannie the heldest hes now be a-grawin' 

sa hotvd, 
I knaws that mooch o' shea, es it beiint not fit to be 

towd ! 

XVII. 

Sa I didn't not ta'ake it kindly ov owd Miss Annie to 

saay 
Es I should be talkin agean 'em, es soon es they went 

awaay, 

* Emigrate. 



THE VILLAGE WIFE; OR, THE ENTAIL. 85 

Fur, lawks ! 'ow I cried when they went, an' our 

!N'elly she gied me 'er 'and. 
Fur I'd ha done owt fur the Squire an' 'is gells es 

belong'd to the land ; 
Boobks, es I said afoor, thebbe neyther 'ere nor theer ! 
But I sarved 'em wi' butter an' heggs fur huppuds o' 

twenty year. 



XVIII. 



An' they hallus paaid what I hax'd, sa I hallus deal'd 

wi' the Hall, 
An' they knaw'd what butter wur, an' they knaw'd 

what a hegg wur an' all ; 
Hugger-mugger they lived, but they wasn't that easy 

to please, 
Till I gied 'em Hinjian curn, an' they laiiid big heggs 

es tha seeas ; 



8b THE VILLAGE WIFE; OK, THE ENTAIL. 

An' I niver puts saame ^ i' my butter, they does it at 

Willis's faim, 
Tailste another drop o' the wine — tweant do tha naw 

harm. 



XIX. 

Sa new Squire's cooin'd wi' 'is taail in 'is 'and, an' 

owd Squire's gone ; 
I heard 'im a i-oomlin' by, but arter my nightcap war 

on ; 
Sa I han't clapt eyes on 'im yit, fur he coom'd last 

night sa laiite — ♦ 

Pluksh ! ! ! 2 the hens i' the peas ! why didn't tha hesp 

the gaate % 



» Lard. 

2 A cry accompanied by a clapping of hands to scare 
trespassing fowl. 



87 



IN THE CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL, 
Emmie. 

I. 

Our doctor had calFd in another, I never had seen 

him before, * 

But he sent a chill to my heart when 1 saw him come 

in at the door. 
Fresh from the surgery-schools of France and of other 

lands — 
Harsh red hair, big voice, big chest, big merciles^^ 

hands ! 
Wonderful cures he had done, yes, but they said too 

of him 



88 IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 

He was happier using the knife than in trying to save 

the limb, 
And that I can well believe, for he looked so coarse 

and so red, 
I could think he was one of those who would break 

their jests on the dead, 
And mangle the living dog that had loved him and 

fawn'd at his knee — 
DrenchVl with the hellish oorali — that ever such 



things should be ! 



II. 

Here was a boy — ^I am sure that some of our children 

would die 
But for the voice of Love, and the smile, and the 

comforting eye — 
Here was a boy in the ward, every bone seem'd out of 

its place — 



IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 89 

Caught in a mill and crusli'd — it was all but a hope- 
less case : 
And he handled him gently enough; but his voice 

and his face were not kind, 
And it was but a hopeless case, he had seen it and 

made up his mind, 
And he said to me roughly ' The lad will need little 

more of your care/ 
' All the more need,' I told him, * to seek the Lord 

Jesus in prayer ; 
They are all his children here, and I pray for them all 

as my own : ' 
But he turned to me, * Ay, good woman, can prayer 

set a broken bone 1 ' 
Then he mutter'd half to himself, but I know that I 

heard him say 
^ All very well — but the good Lord Jesus has had his 

day/ 



90 IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 

III. 

Had ? has it come 1 It has only dawn'd. It will come 

by and by. 
how could I serve in the wards if the hope of the 

world were a lie ? 
How could I bear with the sights and the loathsome 

smells of disease 
But that He said Ye do it to me, when ye do it to 

these ' ? 

IV. 

So he went. And we past to this ward where the 

younger children are laid : 
Here is the cot of our orphan, our darling, our meek 

little maid ; 
Empty you see just now ! We have lost her who loved 

her so much — 
Patient of pain tho* as quick as a sensitive plant to 

the touch ; 



IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 91 

Hers was the prettiest prattle, it often moved me to 

tears, 
Hers was the gratefullest heart I have found in a 

child of her years — 
Nay you remember our Emmie ; you used to send her 

the flowers ; 
How she would smile at 'em, play with 'em, talk to 

'em hours after hours ! 
They that can wander at will where the works of the 

Lord are reveal'd 
Little guess what joy can be got from a cowslip out 

of the field ; 
Flowers to these ' spirits in prison ' are all they can 

know of the spring, 
They freshen and sweeten the wards like the waft of 

an Angel's wing ; 
And she lay with a flower in one hand and her thin 

hands crost on her breast — 



92 IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 

Wan, but as pretty as heart can desire, and we thought 

her at rest, 
Quietly sleeping — so quiet, our doctor said ^ Poor little 

dear, 
Nurse, I must do it to-morrow ; she'll never live thro' 

it, I fear.' 

V. 

J walk'd with our kindly old Doctor as far as the 

head of the stair. 
Then I return'd to the ward ; the child didn't see I 

was there. 



VI. 

Never since I was nurse, had I been so grieved and 

so vext ! 
Emmie had heard him. Softly she call'd from her cot 

to the next. 



IX THE children's HOSPITAL. 93 

• He says I shall never Kve thro' it, Annie, what 

shaU I do r 
Annie consider'd. ^If I,' said the wise little Annie, 

' was you, 
I should cry to the dear Lord Jesus to help me, for, 

Emmie, you see. 
It's all in the picture there : " Little children should 

come to me.'^ ' 
(Meaning the print that you gave us, I find that it 

always can please 
Our children, the dear Lord Jesus with children about 

his knees.) 
' Yes, and I will,' said Emmie, * but then if I call to 

the Lord, 
How should he know that it's me 1 such a lot of beds 

in the ward ! ' 
That was a puzzle for Annie. Again she consider'd 

and said : 



94 i^ THE children's hospital. 

' Emmie, you put out your arms, and you leave 'em 

outsi'de on the bed — 
The Lord has so much to see to ! but,. Emmie, you tell 

it him plain, 
It's the little girl with her arms lying out on the 

counterpane/ 



VII. 

I had sat three nights by the child — I could not watch 

her for four — 
My brain had begun to reel — I felt I could do it no 

more. 
That was my sleeping-night, but I thought that it 

never would pass. 
There was a thunderclap once, and a clatter of hail on 

the glass, 



IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 95 

And there was a phantom cry that I heard as I tost 
about, 

The motherless bleat of a lamb in the storm and the 
darkness without ; 

My sleep was broken besides with dreams of the dread- 
ful knife 

And fears for our delicate Emmie who scarce would 
escape with her life ; 

Then in the gray of the morning it seem'd she stood 
by me and smiled, 

And the doctor came at his hour, and we went to see 
to the child. 



VIII. 

He had brought his ghastly tools : we believed her 

asleep again — 
Her dear, long, lean, little arms lying out on the 

counterpme ; 



96 IN THE children's HOSPITAL. 

Say that His day is done ! Ah why should we caie 

what they say ? 
The Lord of the children had heard her, and Emmie 

had past away. 



97 



DEDICATORY POEM TO THE 
PRINCESS ALICE. 

Dead Princess, living Power, if that, which lived 
True life, live on — and if the fatal kiss. 
Born of true life and love, divorce thee not 
From earthly love and hfe — ^if what we call 
The spirit flash not all at once from out 
This shadow into Substance — then perhaps 
The mellow'd murmur of the people's praise 
From thine own State, and all our breadth of realm, 
Where Love and Longing dress thy deeds in light. 
Ascends to thee ; and this March morn that sees 
Thy Soldier-brother's bridal orange-bloom 
Break thro' the yews and cypress of thy grave, 

H 



98 DEDICATORY POEM TO THE PRINCESS ALICE. 

And thine Imperial mother smile again, 
May send one ray to thee ! and who can tell — 
Thou — England's England-loving daughter — thou 
Dying so English thou wouldst have her flag 
Borne on thy coffin — where is he can swear 
But that some broken gleam from our poor earth 
May touch thee, while remembering thee, I lay 
At thy pale feet this ballad of the deeds 
«Of England, and her banner in the East ! 



99 



THE DEFENCE OF LUC KNOW. 

I. 

Banner of England, not for a season, banner of 
Britain, hast thou 

Floated in conquering battle or flapt to the battle- 
cry ! 

Never with mightier glory than when we had reared 
thee on high 

Flying at top of the roofs in the ghastly siege of 
Lucknow — 

Shot thro' the staff or the halyard, but ever we raised 
thee anew, 

And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of 



I 



England blew. 



H 2 



100 THE DEFENC:^ OF LUCKNOW. 



II 

Frail were the works tliat defended the hold that we 

held with our lives — 
Women and children among us, God help them, our 

children and wives ! 
Hold it we might — and for fifteen days or for twenty 

at most. 
' Never surrender, I charge you, but every man die at 

his post ! ' 
Voice of the dead whom we loved, our Lawrence the 

best of the brave : 
Cold were his brows when we kiss'd him — we laid 

him that night in his grave. 
* Every man die at his post ! ' and there hail'd on our 

houses and halls 
Death from their rifle-bullets, and death from their 

cannon-balls, 



THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 101 

Death in our innermost chamber, and death at our 

slight barricade, 
Death while we stood with the musket, and death 

while we stoopt to the spade, 
Death to the dying, and wounds to the wounded, for 

often there fell 
Striking the hospital wall, crashing thro' it, their shot 

and their shell, 
Death — for their spies were among us, their marks- 
men were told of our best. 
So that the brute bullet broke thro' the brain that 

could think for the rest ; 
Bullets would sing by our foreheads, and bullets 

would rain at our feet — 
Fire from ten thousand at once of the rebels that 

girdled us round — 
Death at the glimpse of a finger from over the breadth 

of a street. 



102 THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 

Death from the heights of the mosque and the palace, 

and death in the ground ! 
Mine ? yes, a mine ! Countermine ! down, down ! and 

creep thro' the hole ! 
Keep the revolver in hand ! you can hear him — the 

murderous mole ! 
Quiet, ah ! quiet — wait till the point of the pickaxe l3e 

thro' ! 
Click with the pick, coming nearer and nearer again 

than before — 
Kow let it speak, and you fire, and the dark pioneer is 

no more ; 
And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of Eng- 
land blew ! 



THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 103 



III. 

Ay, but the foe sprung his mine many times, and it 

chanced on a day 
Soon as the blast of that underground thunderclap 

echoed away, 
Dark thro* the smoke and the sulphur Hke so many^ 

fiends in their hell — 
Cannon-shot, musket-shot, volley on volley, and yell* 

upon yell — 
Fiercely on all the defences our myriad enemy felL 
What have they done? where is it? Out yonder. 

Guard the Redan ! 
Storm at the Water-gate ! storm at the Bailey- gate ! 

storm, and it ran 
Surging and swaying all round us, as ocean on every side 
Plunges and heaves at a bank that is daily drowned 

by the tide — 



104 THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 

So many thousands that if they be bold enough, who 
shall escape 1 

Kill or be kill'd, live or die, they shall know we are 
soldiers and men ! 

Keady ! take aim at their leaders — their masses are 
gapp'd with our grape — 

Backward they reel like the w\ave, like the wave 
flinging forward again, 

Flpng and foiFd at the last by the handful they 
could not subdue ; 

And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of Eng- 
land blew. 



IV. 

Handful of men as we were, we were English in 

heart and in limb, 
Strong with the strength of the race to command, to 

obey, to endure, 



THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 105 

Each of ^us fought as if hope for the garrison hung 

but on him ; 
Still — could we watch at all points ? we were every 

day fewer and fewer. 
There was a whisper among us, but only a whisper 

that past : 
' Children and wives — if the tigers leap into the fold 

unawares— 
Every man die at his post — ^and the foe may outlive 

us at last — 
Better to fall by the hands that they love, than to fall 

into theirs ! ' 

Roar upon roar in a moment two mines by the enemy 
sprung 

Clove into perilous chasms our walls and our poor 

palisades. 
Rifleman, true is your heart, but be sure that your 

hand be as true ! 



106 THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 

Sharp is the fire of assault, better aimed are your 
flank fusillades — 

Twice do we hurl them to earth from the ladders to 
which they had clung, 

Twice from the ditch where they shelter we drive 
them with hand-grenades ; 

And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of Eng- 
land blew. 



T. 

Then on another wild morning another wild earth- 
quake out-tore 

Clean from our lines of defence ten or twelve good 
paces or more. 

Kifleman, high on the roof, hidden there from the 

» 
light of the sun — 

One has leapt up on the breach, crying out : ' Follow 

me, follow me ! ' — 



THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 107 

Mark him — ^he falls ! then another, and him too, and 

down goes he. 
Had they been bold enough then, who can tell bnt 

the traitors had won ? 
Boardings and rafters and doors — an embrasure ! 

make way for the gun ! 
Now double-charge it with grape ! It is charged and 

we fire, and they run. 
Praise to our Indian brothers, and let the dark face 

have his due ! 
Thanks to the kindly dai-k faces who fought with us, 

faithful and few. 
Fought with the bravest among us, and drove them, 

and smote them, and slew, 
That ever upon the topmost roof our banner in India 

blew. 



108 THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 



VI. 

Men will forget what we suffer and not what we do. 

We can fight 
But to be soldier all day and be sentinel all thro' 

the night — 
Ever the mine and -assault, our sallies, their lying 

alarms. 
Bugles and drums in the darkness, and shoutings and 

soundings to arms, 
Ever the labour of fifty that had to be done by &ve, 
Ever the marvel among us that one should be left alive. 
Ever the day with its traitorous death from the loop- 
holes around, 
Ever the night with its coffinless corpse to be laid in 

the ground. 
Heat like the mouth of a hell, or a deluge of cataract 

skies. 



THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 109 

Stench of old offal decaying, and infinite torment of 

flies, 
Thoughts of the breezes of May blowing over an- 

English field 
Cholera, scurvy, and fever, the wound that would not 

be heard, 
Lopping away of the limb by the pitiful-pitiless 

knife, — ■ 
Torture and trouble in vain, — ^for it never could save 

us a life. 
Valour of delicate women who tended the hospital 

bed. 
Horror of women in travail among the dying and 

dead. 
Grief for our perishing children, and never a moment 

for grief. 
Toil and ineffable weariness, faltering hopes of relief, 
Havelock baffled, or beaten, or butchered for all that 

we knew — 



110 THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW. 

Then day and night, day and night, coming down on 
the still-shatter'd waUa 

Millions of musket-Lullets, and thousands of cannon- 
balls — • 

But ever upon the topmost roof our banner of England 
blew 

VII. 

Hai'k cannonade, fusillade ! is it true what was told 
by the scout, 

Out ram and Havelock breaking their way throvigh 
the fell mutineers 1 

Surely the pibroch of Europe is ringing again in our 
ears ! 

All on a sudden the garrison utter a jubilant shout, 

Havelock's glorious Highlanders answer with con- 
quering cheers, 

Sick from the hospital echo them, women and children 
come out, 



THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOYT. Ill 

Blessing the wholesome white faces of Havelock's 
good fusileers, 

Kissing the war-harden*d hand of the Highlander wet 
with their tears ! 

Dance to the pihroch ! — saved ! we are saved ! — is it 
you 1 is it you ] 

Saved by the valour of Havelock, saved by the bless- 
ing of Heaven ! 

* Hold it for fifteen days ! ' we have held it for eighty- 
seven I 

And ever aloft on the palace roof the old banner of 
England blew. 



112 



Sm JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

(In Wales.) 

My friend should meet me somewliere hereabout 
To take me to that hiding in the hills. 

I have broke their cage, no gilded one, I trow — 
I read no more the prisoner's mute wail 
Scribbled or carved upon the pitiless stone ; 
I find hard rocks, hard life, hard cheer, or none, 
For I am emptier than a friar's brains ; 
But God is with me in this wilderness, 
These wet black passes and foam-churning chasms, — 
And God's free air, and hope of better things. 



SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 113 

I would I knew their speech ; not now to glean, 
Not now — I hope to do it — some scattered ears, 
Some ears for Christ in this wild field of Wales — 
But, bread, merely for bread. This tongue that wagg'd 
They said with such heretical arrogance 
Against the proud archbishop Arundel — 
So much God's cause was fluent in it — is here 
But as a Latin Bible to the crowd ; 
' Bara ! ' — what use 1 The Shepherd, when I speak. 
Vailing a sullen eyelid with his hard 
' Dim Saesneg ' passes, wroth at things of old — 
No fault of mine. Had he God's word in Welsh 
He might be kindlier : happily come the day ! 

Not least art thou, thou little Bethlehem 
In Judah, for in thee the Lord was born ; 
Nor thou in Britain, little Lutterworth, 
Least, for in thee the word was born again. 

I 



114 SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

Heaven-sweet Evangel, ever-living word, 
Who whilom e spakest to the South in Greek 
About the soft Mediterranean shores, 
And then in Latin to the Latin crowd, 
As good need was — thou hast come to talk our isle. 
Hereafter thou, fulfilling Pentecost, 
Must learn to use the tongues of all the world. 
Yet art thou thine own witness that thou bringest 
Kot peace, a sword, a fire. 

What did he say, 
My frighted Wiclif-preacher whom I crost 
In flying hither 1 that one night a crowd 
Throng'd the waste field about the city gates : 
The king was on them suddenly with a host. 
Why there ? they came to hear their preacher. Then 
Some cried on Cobham, on the good Lord Cobham ; 
Ay, for they love me ! but the king — nor voice 
Nor finger raised against liim — took and hanged, 



SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 115 

Took, hanged and burnt — how many — thirty-nine — 
Call'd it rebeUion — hang'd, poor friends, as rebels 
And burned alive as heretics ! for your Priest 
Labels — to take the king along with him — 
All heresy, treason : but to call men traitors 
May make men traitors. 

llose of Lancaster, 
E/ed in thy birth, redder with household war, 
Kow reddest with the blood of holy men. 
Redder to be, red rose of Lancaster — 
If somewhere in the North, as Rumour sang 
Fluttering the hawks of this crown-lusting line — 
By firth and loch thy silver sister grow,^ 
That wei*e my rose, there my allegiance duei. 
Self-starved, they say — nay, murder'd doubtless dead'. 
So to this king I cleaved : my friend was be. 
Once my fast friend : I would have given my life 



» Richard II. 
I2 



116 SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

To help his own from scathe, a thousand lives 
To save his soul. He might have come to learn 
Our Wiclif s learning : but the worldly Priests 
Who fear the king's hard common-sense should find 
What rotten piles uphold their masonwork, 
Urge him to foreign war. had he will'd 
I might have stricken a lusty stroke for him, 
But he would not ; far liever led my friend 
Back to the pure and universal church, 
But he would not ; whether that heirless flaw 
In his throne's title make him feel so frail. 
He leans on Antichrist ; or that his mind. 

So quick, so capable in soldiership, 

In matters of the faith, alas the while ! 

More worth than all the kingdoms of this world, 

Huns in the rut, a coward to the Priest. 



SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 117 

Burnt — good Sir Roger Acton, my dear friend ! 
Burnt too, my faithful preacher, Beverley ! 
Lord give thou power to thy two witnesses ! 
Lest the false faith make merry over them ! 
Two — nay but thirty-nine have risen and stand, 
Dark with Jhe smoke of human sacrifice, 
Before thy light, and cry continually — 
Cry — against whom ? 

Him, who should bear the sword 
Of Justice — what ! the kingly, kindly boy ; 
Who took the world so easily heretofore, 
My boon companion, tavern-fellow — liim 
Who gibed and japed — in many a merry tale 
That shook our sides — at Pardoners, Summoners, 
Friars, absolution-sellers, monkeries 
And nunneries, when the wild hour and the wine 
Had set the wits aflame. 



118 SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

Harry of Monmoutli, 
Or Amurath of the East 1 

Better to sink 
Thy fleurs-de-lys in slime again, and fling 
Thy royalty back into the riotous fits 
Of wine and harlotry — thy shame, and mine, 
Thy comrade — than to persecute the Lord, 
.And play the Saul that never will be Paul. 

^urnt, burnt ! and while this mitred Arundel 
T)ooms our unlicensed preacher to the flame, 
' The mitre-sanction'd harlot draws his clerks 
Into the suburb — their hard celibacy, 
•Sworn to be veriest ice of pureness, molten 
Into adulterous living, or such crimes 
As holy Paul — ^a shame to speak of them — 



Among the heathen — 



Sanctuary granted 



SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 119 

To bandit, thief, assassin — yea to liini 

Who hacks his mother's throat — denied to him, 

Who finds the Saviour in his mother tongue. 

The Gospel, the Priest's pearl, flung down to swine — 

The swine, lay-men, lay- women, who will come, 

God willhig, to outlearn the filthy friar. 

Ah rather. Lord, than that thy Gospel, meant 

To coui'se and range thro' all the world, should be 

Tether'd to these dead pillars of the Church — 

Kather than so, if thou wilt have it so, 

Burst vein, snap sinew, and crack heart, and life 

Pass in the fire of Babylon ! but how long, 

O Lord, how long ! 

My friend should meet me here. 
Here is the copse, the fountain and — a Cross ! 
To thee, dead wood, I bow not head nor knees. 
Kather to thee, green boscage, work of God, 
Black holly, and white-flower'd wayfaiing-tree 1 



120 SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

Kather to thee, thou living water, drawn 
By this good Wiclif mountain down from heaven, 
And speaking clearly in thy native tongue — 
No Latin — He that thirsteth, come and drink ! 

Eh ! how I angered Arundel asking me 
To worship Holy Cross ! I spread mine arms, 
God's work, I said, a cross of flesh and blood 
And holier. That was heresy. (My good fiiend 
By this time should be with me.) * Images ] ' 

* Bury them as God's truer images 

f 

Are daily buried.' * Heresy. — Penance ? ' ' Fast, 

Hairshirt and scourge — nay, let a man repent. 
Do penance in his heart, God hears him.' * Heresy — - 
Not shriven, not saved 1 * * What profits an ill Priest 
Between me and my God 1 I would not spurn 
Good counsel of good friends, but shrive myself 
No, not to an Apostle.' ^ Heresy.' 



SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 121 

(My friend is long in coming.) * Pilgrimages 1 ' 

* Drink, bagpipes, revelling, devil's-dances, vice. 
The poor man's money gone to fat the friar. 

Who reads of begging saints in Scripture 1 * — * Heresy ' — 
(Hath he been here — not found me — ^gone again ] 
Have I mislearnt our place of meeting 1) ' Bread — 
Bread left after the blessing ? ' how they stared, 
That was their main test-question — glared at me ! 

* He veil'd Himself in flesh, and now He veils 
His flesh in bread, body and bread together.* 
Then rose the howl of all the cassock*d wolves, 

* No bread, no bread. God's body 1 ' Archbishop, 

Bishop, 

Priors, Canons,. Friars, belMngers, Parish-clerks — 

* No bread, no bread ! ' — * Authority of the Church, 
Power of the keys ! ' — Then I, God help me, I 

So mock'd, so spurn'd, so baited two whole days — 
I lost myself and fell from evenness, 



122 SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

And raiFd at all the Popes, that ever since 
Sylvester shed the venom of world-wealth 
Into the church, had only proven themselves 
Poisoners, murderers. Well — God pardon all — 
Me, them, and all the world — ^yea, that proud Priest, 
That mock-meek mouth of utter Antichrist, 
That traitor to King Eichard and the truth, 
Who rose and doom'd me to the fire. 

Amen ! 
Nay, I can bum, so that the Lord of life 
Be by me in my death. 

Those three ! the fom-th 
Was like the son of God. Not burnt were they. 
On them the smell of burning had not past. 
That was a miracle to convert the king. 
These Pharisees, this Caiaphas- Arundel 
What miracle could turn ] He here again, 

He thwarting their traditions of Himself, 



SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 123 

ZTe would be found a heretic to Himself, 
And doom'd to bum alive. 

So, caught, I bum. 
Burn 1 heathen men have borne as much as this, 
For freedom, or the sake of those they loved. 
Or some less cause, some cause far less than mine ; 
For every other cause is less than mine. 
The moth will singe her wings, and singed return, 
Her love of light quenching her fear of pain — 
How now, my soul, we do not heed the fire 1 
Faint-hearted 1 tut ! — ^faint-stomach'd ! faint as I am, 
God willing, I will burn for Him. 

Who comes 1 
A thousand marks are set upon my head. 
Friend 1 — ^foe perhaps — a tussle for it then ! 
ISTay, but my friend. Thou art so well disguised, 
I knew thee not. Hast thou brought bread with thee 1 
I have not broken bread for fifty hours. 



124 SIR JOHN OLDCASTLE, LORD COBHAM. 

None 1 I am damn*d already by the Priest 

For holding there was bread where bread was none — 

No bread. My friends await me yonder 1 Yes. 

Lead on then. Up the mountain 1 Is it far 1 

Not far. Climb first and reach me down thy hand. 

I am not like to die for lack of bread, 

For I must live to testify by fire.* 



* He was burnt on Christmas Day/HIT. 



125 



COLUMBUS. 

Chains, my good lord : in your raised brows I read 
Some wonder at our chamber ornaments. 
We brought this iron from our isles of gold. 

Does the king know you deign to visit him 
Whom once he rose from off his throne to greet 
Before his people, Kke his brother king 1 
I saw your face that morning in the crowd. 

At Barcelona — tho' you were not then 
So bearded. Yes. The city deck'd herself 
To meet me, roar'd my name j the king, the queen 



126 COLUMBUS. 

Bad me be seated, speak, and tell them all 
The story of my voyage, and while I spoke 
The crowd^s roar fell as at the ' Peace, be still ! ' 
And when I ceased to speak, the king, the queen, 
Sank from their thrones, and melted into tears. 
And knelt, and lifted hand and heart and voice 
In praise to God who led me thro' the wasta 
And then the great ' Landamus ' rose to heaven. 

Chains for the Admiral of the Ocean ! chains 
For him who gave a new heaven, a new earth, 
As holy John had prophesied of me, 
Gave glory and more empire to the kings 
Of Spain than all their battles ! chains for him 
Who pushed liis prows into the setting sun, 
And made West East, and sail'd the Dragon's mouth, 
And came upon the Mountain of the World, 
And saw the rivers roll from Paradise ! 



COLUMBUS. 127 

Chains ! we are Admirals of the Ocean, we, 
"We and our sons for ever. Ferdinand 
Hath sign'd it and our Holy Catholic queen — 
Of the Ocean — of the Indies — Admirals we — 
Our title, which we never mean to yield, 
Our guerdon not alone for what we did, 
But our amends for all we might have done — 
The vast occasion of our stronger life — 
Eighteen long years of waste, seven in your Spain, 
Lost, showing courts and kings a truth the babe 
"Will suck in with his milk hereafter — earth 
A sphere. 

"Were you at Salamanca 1 !N"o. 
We fronted there the learning of all Spain, 
All their cosmogonies, their astronomies : 
Guess-work they guess'd it, but the golden guess 
Is mLorning-star to the full round of truth. 



128 COLUMBUS. 

No guess-work ! I was certain of my goal ; 
Some thought it heresy, but that would not hold. 
King David call'd the heavens a hide, a tent 
Spread over earth, and so this earth was flat : 
Some cited old Lactantius : could it be 
That trees grew downward, rain fell upward, men 
Walk'd like the fly on ceilings ] and besides, 
The great Augustine wrote that none could breathe 
Within the zone of heat ; so might there be 
Two Adams, two mankinds, and that was clean 
Against God^s word : thus was I beaten back, 
And chiefly to my sorrow by the Church, 
And thought to turn my face from Spain, appeal 
Once more to France or England ; but our Queen 
Recaird me, for at last their Highnesses 
Were half-assured this earth might be a sphere. 



COLUMBUS. 129 

All glory to the all-blessed Trinity, 
All glory to the mother of our Lord, 
And Holy Chnrch, from whom I never swerved 
Not even by one hair's-breadth of heresy, 
I have accomplished what I came to do. 

Not yet — ^not all — last night a dream — I sail'd 
On my first voyage, harass'd by the frights 
Of my first crew, their curses and their groans. 

The great flame-banner borne by Tenerifie, 
The compass, like an old friend false at last 
In our most need, appall'd them, and the wind 
Still westward, and the weedy seas — ^at length 
The landbird, and the branch with berries on it, 
The carven staff* — and last the light, the light 
On Guanahani ! but I changed the name ; 
San Salvador I call'd it ; and the light 
Crew ag I gazed, and brought out a broad sky 



130 COLUMBUS. 

Of dawning over — not those alien palms, 

The marvel of that fair new nature — not 

That Indian isle, but our most ancient East 

Moriah with Jerusalem ; and I saw 

The glory of the Lord flash up, and heat 

Thro* all the homely town from jasper, sapphire, 

Chalcedony, emerald, sardonyx, sardius, 

Chrysolite, beryl, topaz, chrysoprase, 

Jacynth, and amethyst — and those twelve gates. 

Pearl — and I woke, and thought — death — I shall die- 

I am written in the Lamb's own Book of Life 

To walk within the gloiy of the Lord 

Sunless and moonless, utter light — but no ! 

The Lord had sent this bright, strange dream to me 

To mind me of the secret vow I made 

"When Spain was waging war against the Moor— 

I strove myself with Spain against the Moor. 

There came two voices from the Sepulchre, 

Two friars crying that if Spain should oust 



COLUMBUS. 131 

The Moslem from her limit, he, the fierce 
Soldan of Egypt, would break down and raze 
The blessed tomb of Christ ; whereon I vow*d 
That, if our Princes harken'd to my prayer, 
AVhatever wealth I brought from that new world 
Should, in this old, be consecrate to lead 
A new crusade against the Saracen, 
And free the Holy Sepulchre from thrall. 

Gold ] I had brought your Princes gold enough 
If left alone I Being but a Genovese, 
I am handled worse than had I been a Moor, 
And breach'd the belting wall of Cambalu, 
And given the Great Khan's palaces to the Moor, 
Or clutch'd the sacred crown of Prester John, 
And cast it to the Moor : but Jiad I brought 
From Solomon's now-recover'd Opliir all 
The gold that Solomon's navies carried home, 

K2 



132 COLUMBUS. 

Would that have gilded me 1 Blue blood of Spain, 

The* quartering your own royal arms of Spain, 

I have not : blue blood and black blood of Spain, 

The noble and the convict of Castile, 

Howl'd me from Hispaniola ; for you know 

The flies at home, that ever swarm about 

And cloud the highest heads, and murmur down 

Truth in the distance — these outbuzz'd me so 

That even our prudent king, our righteous queen — 

I pray'd them being so calumniated 

They would commission one of weight and worth 

To judge between my slander'd self and me — 

Fonseca my main enemy at their court, 

They send me out his tool, Bovadilla, one 

As ignorant and impolitic as a beast — - 

Blockish irreverence, brainless greed— who sacked 

My dwelling, seized upon my papers, loosed 

My captives, feed the rebels of the crown. 



COLUMBUS. 133 

Sold the crown-farms for all but notlimg, gave 

All but free leave for all to work the mines, 

Drove me and my good brothers home in chains, 

And gathering ruthless gold — a single piece 

Weighed nigh four thousand Castillanos— so 

They tell me — weigh'd him down into the abysm — 

The hurricane of the latitude on him fell, 

The seas of our discovering over-roll 

Him and his gold ; the fi*ailer caravel. 

With what was mine, came happily to the shore. 

There was a glimmering of God's hand. 

And God 
Hath more than glimmered on me. my lord, 
I swear to you I heard his voice between 
The thunders in the black Yeragua nights, 
* soul of little faith, slow to believe ! 
Have I not been about thee from thy birth 1 



134 COLUMBUS. 

Given thee the keys of the great Ocean-sea ? 
Set thee in light till time shall be no more ? 
Is it I who have deceived thee or the world ? 
Endure ! thou hast done so well for men, that men 
Cry out against thee : was it otherwise 
"With mine own Son ? ' 

And more than once in days 
Of doubt and cloud and storm, when drowning hope 
Sank all but out of sight, I heard his voice, 
* Be not cast down. I lead thee by the hand, 
Fear not.* And I shall hear his voice again — 
I know that he has led me all my life, 
I am not yet too old to work his will — 
His voice again. 

Still for all tliat, my lord, 
I l}^ng here bedridden and alone, 



COLUMBUS. 135 

Cast off, put by, scouted by court and king — 
The first discoverer starves — his followers, all 
Flower into fortune — our world's way — and I, 
Without a roof that I can call mine own, 
With scarce a coin to buy a meal withal. 
And seeing what a door for scoundrel scum 
I open'd to the West, thro* which the lust, 
Villany, violence, avarice, of your Spain 
Poured in on all those happy naked isles — 
Their kindly native princes slain or slaved. 
Their wives and children Spanish concubines. 
Their innocent hospitalities quench'd in blood. 
Some dead of hunger, some beneath the scourge, 
Some over-labour'd, some by their own hands, — • 
Yea, the dear mothers, crazing Nature, kill 
Their babies at the breast for hate of Spain — 
Ah God, the harmless people whom we found 
In Hispaniola's island-Paradise 1 



136 COLUMBUS. 

Who took us for tlie very Gods from Heaven, 
And we have sent them very fiends from Hell ; 
And I myself, myself not blameless, I 
Could sometimes wish I had never led the way. 



Only the ghost of our great Catholic Queen 
Smiles on me, saying, * Be thou comforted ! 
This creedless people will be brought to Christ 
And own the holy governance of Rome.' 



But who could dream that we, who bore the Cross 
Thither, Avere excommunicated there. 
For curbing ciimes that scandalised the Cross, 
By him, the Catalonian JNIinorite, 
Home's Yicar in our Indies ? who believe 
These hard memorials of cur truth to Spain 
Clung closer to us for a longer term 



COLUMBUS. 137 

Than any fiiend of ours at Court 1 and yet 

Pardon — too harsh, unjust. I am racked with pains* 

You see that I have hung them by my bed, 
And I will have them buried in my grave. 

Sir, in that flight of ages which are God's 
Own voice to justify the dead — perchance 
Spain once the most chivalric race on earth, 
Spain then the mightiest, wealthiest realm on earth. 
So made by me, may seek to unbury me. 
To lay me in some shrine of this old Spain, 
Or in that vaster Spain I leave to Spain. 
Then some one standing by my grave will say, 

* Behold the bones of Christopher Colon * — 

* Ay, but the chains, what do the^j mean — the 

chains 1 ' — 
I sorrow for that kindly child of Spain 



138 COLUMBUS. . 

AYho then will have to answer, ^ These same chains 
Bound these same bones back thro' the Atlantic sea, 
Which he unchained for all the world to come/ 

Queen of Heaven who seest the souls in Hell 
And purgatory, I suffer all as much 
As they do — for the moment. Stay, my son 
Is here anon : my son will speak for me 
Ablier than I can in these spasms that grind 
Bone against bone. You will not. One last word. 

You move about the Court, I pray you tell 
King Ferdinand who plays with me, that one, 
Whose life has been no play with him and his 
Hidalgos — shipwrecks, famines, fevers, fights. 
Mutinies, treacheries — winked at, and condoned — 
That I am loyal to him till the death. 
And ready — tho' our Holy Catholic Queen, 



COLUMBUS. 139 

Who fain had pledged her jewels on my first voyage, 
Whose hope ^yas mine to spread the Catholic faith, 
Who wept with me when I returned in chains, 
Who sits beside the blessed Yirgin now. 
To whom I send my prayer by night and day — 
She is gone — but you will tell the King, that I, 
Hacked as I am with gout, and wrenched with pains 
Gain'd in the service of His Highness, yet 
Am ready to sail forth on one last voyage. 
And readier, if the King would hear, to lead 
One last crusade against the Saracen, 
And save the Holy Sepulchre from thrall. 

Going 1 I am old and slighted : you have dared 
Somewhat perhaps in coming 1 my poor thanks ! 
I am but an alien and a Genovese. 



HO 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDJJNE. 
(Founded on an Irish Legend, a.d. 700.) 

I. 

I WAS the chief of the race — he had stricken my father 

dead — 
But I gathered my fellows together, I swore I would 

strike off his head. 
Each of them look'd like a king, and was noble in 

birth as in w^orth, 
And each of them boasted he sprang from the oldest 

race upon earth. 
Each was as brave in the fight as the bravest hero 

of song, 
And each of them liefer had died than have done one 



another a wrong. 



# 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUXE. 14:1 

lie lived on an isle in the ocean — we -saird on a 

Friday morn — 
He that had slain my father the day before I was 

born. 

II. 

And we came to the isle in the ocean, and there on 

the shore was he. 
But a sudden blast blew us out and away thro* a 

boundless sea. 

III. 
And we came to the Silent Isle that we never had 

touch'd at before, 
Where a silent ocean always broke on a silent shore, 
And the brooks glittered on in the light without 

sound, and the long waterfalls 
Poui'^d in a thunderless plunge to the base of the 

mountain walls, 



142 THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 

And the poplar and cypress unshaken by storm 

flourished up beyond sight, 
And the pine shot aloft from the crag to an un- 
believable height, 
And high in the heaven above it there flickered a 

songless lark. 
And the cock couldn't crow, and the bull couldn't 

low, and the dog couldn't bark. 
And round it we went, and thro' it, but never a 

murmur, a breath — 
It was all of it fair as life, it was all of it quiet as deatL, 
And we hated the beautiful Isle, for whenever we 

strove to speak 
Our voices were thinner and fainter than any flitter- 

mouse-shriek ; 
And the men that were mighty of tongue and could 

raise such a battle-cry 
That a hundred who heard it would rush on a 

thousand lances and die — 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUXE. 143 

O they to be durnb'd by the charm ! — so fluster'd 

with anger were they 
They almost fell on each other ; but after we saiFd 

away. 

IV. 

And we came to the Isle of Shouting, we landed, a 

score of wild bu-ds 
Cried from the topmost summit with human voices 

and words ; 
Once in an hour they cried, and whenever their 

voices peaFd 
The steer fell down at the plow and the harvest 

died from the field, 
And the men dropt dead in the valleys and half of 

the cattle went lame, 
And the roof sank in on the hearth, and the dwelling 

broke into flame ; 



lii THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUXE. 

And the shouting of these wild birds ran into the 

hearts of my crew, 
Till they shouted along with the shouting and seized 

one another and slew ; 
But I drew them the one from the other ; I saw that 

we could not stay, 
And we left the dead to the birds and we sail'd with 

our wounded away. 

V. 

And we came to the Isle of Flowers : their breath met 
us out on the seas. 

For the Spring and the middle Summer sat each on 
the lap of the breeze ; 

And the red passion-flower to the cliffs, and the dark 
blue clematis, clung, 

And starred with a myriad blossom the long con- 
volvulus hung ; 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUXE. 145 

And the topmost spire of the moiintaiii was lilies in 

lieu of snow, 
And the lilies like glaciers winded down, running out 

below 
Thro' the fire of the tulip and poppy, the blaze of 

gorse, and the blush 
Of millions of roses that sprang without leaf or a 

thorn from the bush ; 
And the whole isle-side flashing down from the peak 

without ever a tree 
Swept like a torrent of gems from the sky to the 

blue of the sea ; 
And we roll'd upon capes of crocus and vaunted our 

kith and our kin. 
And we wallowed in beds of lilies, and chanted the^ 

triumph of Finn, 
Till each like a golden image was pollen'd from head 

to feet 



146 THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 

And each was as dry as a cricket, with thirst in the 

middle-day heat. 
Blossom and blossom, and promise of blossom, but 

never a fruit 1 
And we hated the Flowering Isle, as we liated the isle 

that was mute, 
And we tore up the flowers by the million and flung 

them in bight and bay, 
And we left but a naked rock, and in anger we saird 

away. 



VI. 

And we came to the Isle of Fruits : all round from 

the cliJBfs and the capes, 
Purple or amber, dangled a hundred fathom of 

grapes, 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 1^7 

And the warm melon lay like a little sun on the 

tawny sand, 
And the ^g ran up from the beach and rioted over 

the land, 
And the mountain arose like a jewell'd throne thro' 

the fragrant air, 
Glowing with all-colour'd plums and with golden 

masses of pear, 
And the crimson and scarlet of berries that flamed 

upon bine and vine. 
But in every berry and fruit was the poisonous 

pleasure of wine ; 
And the peak of the mountain was apples, the hugest 

that ever were seen. 
And they prest, as they grew, on each other, with 

hardly a leaflet between. 
And all of them redder than rosiest health or than 

utterest shame, 

l2 



148 THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUXE. 

And setting, when Even descended, the very sunset 

aflame ; 
And we stay'd three days, and we gorged and we 

madden'd, till every one drew 
His sword on his fellow to slay him, and ever they 

struck and they slew ; 
And myself, I had eaten but sj^arely, and fought till I 

sundered the fiTiy, 
Then I bad them remember my father's death, and we 

sail'd away. 



VII. 

And we came to the Isle of Fire : we were lured hy 

the light from afar, 
For the peak sent up one league of fire to the 

ITorthem Star; 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 149 

Lured by the glai'e and the blare, but scarcely could 

stand upiight, 
For the whole isle shudder'd and shook like a man in 

a mortal affright ; 
We were giddy besides with the fruits we had 

gorged, and so crazed that at last 
There were some leiip'd into the fire ; and away we 

sail'd, and we past 
Over that undersea isle, where the water is clearer 

than air : 
Down we look'd : what a garden ! bliss, what a 

Paradise there ! 
Towers of a happier time, low down in a rainbow deep 
Silent palaces, quiet fields of eternal sleep ! 
And tliree of the gentlest and best of my people, 

whatever I iould say, 
Hunged head down in the sea, and the Paradise 

trembled away. 



150 THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 



VIII. 

And we came to the Bounteous Isle, where the 

heavens lean low on the land, 
And ever at dawn from the cloud glitter'd o'er us a 

sunbright hand, 
Then it open'd and dropt at the side of each man, as 

he rose from his rest. 
Bread enough for his need till the labourless day dipt 

under the West ; 
And we wander'd about it and thro* it. O never was 

time so good ! 
And we sang of the triumphs of Finn, and the boast 

of our ancient blood, 
And we gazed at the wandering wave as we sat by the 

gurgle of springs. 
And we chanted the songs of the Bards and the 

glories of fairy kings ; 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 151 

But at length we began to be weary, to sigh, and to 

* 

stretch and yawn, 

Till we hated the Bounteous Isle and the sunbright 

hand of the dawn, 
For there was not an enemy near, but the whole 

green Isle was our own. 
And we took to playing at ball, and we took to 

throwing the stone. 
And we took to playing at battle, but that was a 

perilous play. 
For the passion of battle was in us, we slew and wo 

saiFd away. 

IX. 

And we came to the Isle of Witohes and heard their 

musical cr}^ — 
' Come to us, O come, come ' in the stormy red of a 

sky 



152 THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 

Dashing the fires and the shadows of dawn on the 

beautiful shapes, , 

For a ^vild witch naked as heaven stood on each of the 

loftiest capes, 
And a hundred ransred on the rock like white sea- 

o 

birds in a row, • 

And a hundred gamboll'd and pranced on the wrecks 

in the sand below, 
And a hundred splash'd from the ledges, and bosom'd 

the burst of the spray, 
But I knew we should ftxll on each other, and hastily 

saird away. 

X. . 

And we came in an evil time to the Isle of the 

Double Towers - 

One was of smooth-cut stone, one carved all over with 

flowers 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 153 

But an earthquake always moved in the hollows under 

the dells. 
And they shocked on each other and butted each other 

with clashing of bells, 
And the daws flew out of the Towers and jangled and 

wrangled in vain, 
And the clash and boom of the bells rang into the 

heart and the brain, - 

Till the passion of battle was on us, and all took sides 

with the Towers, 
There were some for the clean-cut stone, there were 

more for the carven flowers, 
And the wrathful thunder of God peal'd over us all 

the day, 
For the one half slew the other, and after we sail'd 

away. 



154 THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 



XI. 

And we came to the Isle of a Saint who had sail'd 

with St. Brendan of yore, 
He had lived ever since on the Isle and his winters 

were fifteen score, 
And his voice was low as from other worlds, and his 

eyes were sweet. 
And his white hair sank to his heels and his white 

beard fell to his feet, 
And he spake to me, ' Maeldune, let be this purpose 

of thine ! 
Kemember the words of the Lord when he told us 

" Vengeance is mine ! " 
His fathers have slain thy fathers in war or in single 

strife. 
Thy fathers have slain his fathers, each taken a hfe 

for a life, 



THE VOYAGE OF MAELDUNE. 155 

Thy father had slain his father, how long shall the 

murder last 1 
Go back to the Isle of Finn and suffer the Past to be 

Past.' 
And we kissed the fringe of his beard and we pi^y'd 

as we heard him pray, 
And the Holy man he assoil'd us, and sadly we sail'd 

away. 



XII. 

And we came to the Isle we were blown from, and 

there on the shore was he, 

The man that had slain my father. I saw him and 
let him be. 

weary was I of the travel, the trouble, the strife 
and the sin. 

When I landed again, with a tithe of my men, on the 

Isle of Finn. 



156 



DE PEOFUXDIS. 



THE TWO GTwEETINGS. 



I. 

Out of tli8 deep, my cliil J, out of the deep, 
"Where all that was to be, in all that was, 
Whirl'd for a million seons thro* the vast 
Waste dawn of multitudinous-eddying light — 
Out of the deej), my child, out of the deep, 
Thro' all this changing world of changeless law. 
And every phase of ever-heightening life, 
And nine long months of antenatal gloom, . 
With this last moon, this crescent — her dark orb 
Touch'd with earth's light — thou comest, darling 
bov; 



DE PROFUNDIS. 

Our own ; a babe in lineament and limb 
Perfect, and prophet of tbe perfect man ; 
Whose face and form are hers and mine in one, 
Indissolubly married like our love ; 
Live, and be happy in thyself, and serve 
This mortal race thy kin so well, that men 
May bless thee as we bless thee, O young life 
Breaking with laughter from the dark ; and may 
The fated channel where thy motion lives 
Be prosperously shaped, and sway thy course 
Along the years of haste and random youth 
Unshatter'd ; then full-current thro* full man ; 
And last in kindly curves, with gentlest fall, 
By quiet fields, a slowly-dying power, 
To that last deep where we and thou are still. 



157 



158 DE PROFUNDIS. 



II. 



I. 



Out of tlie deep, my child, out of the deep, 
From that great deep, before our world begins, 
Whereon the Spirit of God moves as he will — 
Out of the deep, my child, out of the deep, 
From that true world within the world we see, 
Whereof our world is but the bounding shore — 
Out of the deep, Spirit, out of the deep. 
With this ninth moon, that sends the hidden sun 
Down yon dark sea, thou comest, darling boy. 



DE PROFUNDIS. 159 



II. 

For in the world, which is not ours, They said 

* Let us make man * and that which should be man, 

From that one light no man can look upon, 

Drew to this shore lit by the suns and moons 

And all the shadows. dear Spirit half-lost 

In thine own shadow and this fleshly sign 

That thou art thou — who wailest being born 

And banished into mystery, and the pain 

Of this divisible-indivisible world, 

Among the numerable-innumerable 

Sun, sun, and sun, thro* finite-infinite space 

In finite-infinite Time — our mortal veil 

And shatter'd phantom of that infinite One, 

Who made thee unconceivably Thyself 

Out of His whole World-self and all in aU — 

Liv^e thou ! and of the grain and husk, the grape 



160 DE PKOFUNDIS. 

And ivyberiy, choose ; and still depart 

From death to death thro' life and life, and find 

Nearer and ever nearer Him, who wrought 

Not Matter^ nor the finite-infinite, 

But this main-miracle, that thou art thon, 

With power on thine own act and on the world. 



DE PROFUNDIS. IGl 



THE HUMAN CRY. 

I. 

Hallowed be Thy name — Halleluiah !- 

Infinite Ideality ! 

Immeasurable Keality ! 

Infinite Personality ! 
Hallowed be Thy name — Halleluiah ! 



II. 

We feel we are nothing — ^for all is Thou and in Thee ; 
We feel we are something — that also has come from 

Thee ; 
We know we are nothing — ^but Thou wilt help us 

to be. 
Hallowed be Thy name — Halleluiah ! 

M 



162 



PEEFATORY SONNET 
To THE 'Nineteenth Century.' 

Those that of late had fleeted far and fast 

To touch all shores, now leaving to the skill 

Of others their old craft seaworthy still, 

Have charter'd this ; where, mindful of the post; 

Our true co-mates regather round the mast ; 

Of diverse tongue, but with a common will 

Here, in this roaring moon of daffodil 

And crocus, to put forth and brave the bla^t ; 

For some, descending from the sacred peak 

Of hoar high-templed Faith, have leagued again 

Their lot with ours to rove the world about ; 

And some are wilder comrades, sworn to seek 

If any golden harbour be for men 

In seas of Death and sunless gulfs of Doubt. 



163 



TO THE REV. W, II, BROOKFIELD. 

Brooks, for they call'd you so that knew you best, 
Old Brooks, who loved so well to mouth my rhymes, 
How oft we two have heard St. Mary's chimes ! 
How oft the Cantab supper, host and guest, 
"Would echo helpless laughter to your jest ! 
How oft with him we paced that walk of lim^s, 
Him, the lost light of those dawn-golden times, 
Who loved you well ! Now both are gone to rest. 
Yon man of humourous melancholy mark. 
Dead of some inward agony — is it so ? 
Our kindlier, trustier Jaques, past away ! 
I cannot laud this life, it looks so dark : 
S/ctas ovap — dream of a shadow, go — 
God bless you. I shall join you in a day. 

M 2 



164 



MONTENEGRO. 

They rose to where their sovran eagle sails, 
They kept their faith, their freedom, on the height. 
Chaste, frugal, savage, arm'd by day and night 
Against the Turk; whose inroad nowhere scales 
Their headlong passes, but his footstep fails, 
And red with blood the Crescent reels from fight 
Before their dauntless hundreds, in prone fight 
Ey thousands down the crags and thro* the vales, 
smallest among peoples ! rough rock-throne 
Of Freedom ! warriors beating back the swarm 
Of Turkish Islam for five hundred years, 
Great Tsernogora ! never since thine own 
Black ridges drew the cloud and brake the storm 
Has breathed a race of mightier mountaineers. 



165 



TO VICTOR HUGO. 

Victor in Drama, Victor in E/Omance, 
Cloud- weaver of phantasmal hopes and fears, 
French of the French, and Lord of human tears ; 
Child-lover j Bard whose fame-lit laurels glance 
Darkening the wreaths of all that would advance^ 
Beyond our strait, their claim to be thy peers ; 
Weird Titan by thy winter weight of years 
As yet unbroken, Stormy voice of France ! 

Who dost not love our England — so they say ; 
I know not — England, France, all man to be 
Will make one people ere man's race be run : 
And I, desiring that diviner day, 
Yield thee full thanks for thy full courtesy 
To younger England in the boy my son. 



TEANSLATIONS, ETC. 



BATTLE OF BRUFANBURH. 

Constantinus, Xing' of the Scots, after having sworn alle- 
giance to Athelstan, allied himself with the Danes of Ireland 
under Anlaf, and invading England, was defeated by Athel- 
stan and his brother Edmund with great slaughter at 
Brunanburh in the year 937. 

I. 

^ Athelstan King, 
Lord among Earls, 
Bracelet-bestower and 
Baron of Barons, 
He with his brother, 
Edmund Atheling, 



' I have more or less availed myself of my son's prose 
translation of this poem in the Contemporary Review (No- 
vember 1876). 



1<'0 BATTLE OF BRUNANBURH. 



Gaining a lifelong 



Glory in battle, 
Slew with the sword-eclge 
There by Brunanburh, 
Brake the shield- wall, 
Hew'd the lindenwood,^ 
Hack'd the battleshield, 
Sons of Edward with hammered brands. 



II. 

Theirs was a greatness 
Got from their Grandsires — 
Theirs that so often in 
Strife with their enemies 
Struck for their hoards and their hearths and their 
homes. 



Shields of lindenwood. 



CATTLE OF BRU^^'AXBURH. 171 



III. 

Bow'd tlie spoiler, 
Bent the ScotsmaD, 
Fell the shipcrews 
Doomed to the death. 



All the field with blood of the fighters 



Flowed, from when first the great 
Sun-star of morningtide, 
Lamp of the Lord God 
Lord everlasting, 



Glode over earth till the glorious creature 



Sunk to his setting. 



IV. 



There lay many a man 
Marr'd by the javehn, 



172 BATTLE OF ERUNANBURH. 

"Men of tlie Nortliland 
Shot over shield. 
There was the Scotsman 
Weary of war. 



V. 

We the West-Saxons, 
Long as the daylight 
Lasted, in companies 
Troubled the track of the host that we hated, 
Grimly with swords that were sharp from the grind- 
stone, 
Fiercely we hack'd at the flyers before us. 



VI. 



Mighty the Mercian, 
Hard was his hand-play, 



BATTLE OP BRUNANBURH. 173 

Sparing not any of 
Those that with Anlaf, 

Warriors over the 
Weltering waters 
Borne in the bark*s-bosom, 
Drew to this island, 
Doomed to the death. 



VII. 

rive young kings put asleep by the sword-stroke, 
Seven strong Earls of the army of Anlaf 

Fell on the war-field, numberless numbers, 
Shipmen and Scotsmen. 



VIII. 

Then the Norse leader, 
Dire was his need of it, 



174 BATTLE OF BRUNANBURH. 

Few were his following, 
Med to Hs warship : 



Fleeted his vessel to sea with the king in it, 



Saving his life on the fallow flood. 



IX. 

Also the crafty one, 

Constantinus, 

Crept to his North again, 

Hoar-headed hero ! 



X. 

Slender reason had 

He to be proud of 

The welcome of war-knives — 

He that was reft of his 

Folk and his friends that had 



BATTLE OF BRUXANBURH. 175 



Fallen in conflict, 



Leaving his son too 



Lost in the carnage, 
Mangled to morsels, 
A youngster in war ! 

XI. 

Slender reason had 

He to be glad of 

The clash of the war-glaive- 

Traitor and trickster 

And spurner of treaties — 

He nor had Anlaf 

With armies so broken 

A reason for bragging 

That they had the better 

In perils of battle 

On places of slaughter — 



176 BATTLE OF BRUNANBURH. 

The struggle of standards, 
The rush of the javelins, 
The crash of the charges,^ 
The wielding of weapons — 
The play that they play'd with 
The children of Edward. 



XII. 

Then with their nail'd prows 

Parted the Norsemen, a 

Blood-redden'd relic of 

Javelins over 

The jarring breaker, the deepsea billow, 

Shaping their way toward Dyflen ^ again. 

Shamed in their souls. 



Lit. *the gathering of men.' * Dublin. 



BATTLE OF BRUXAXBURH. 177 



XIII. 

Also the brethren, 
King and Atheling, 
Each in his glory, 
Went to his own in his own West-Saxonland, 
Glad of the war. 



XIV. 

Many a carcase they left to be carrion, 
Many a livid one, many a sallow-skin — 
Left for the white-tail'd eagle to tear it, and 
Left for the horny-nibb*d raven to rend it, and 
Gave to the garbaging war-hawk to gorge it, and 
That gray beast, the wolf of the wealdr 

N 



178 BATTLE OF EKUXAKBUKH. 



XV. 



Kever had linger 



Slaughter of heroes 

Slain by the sword-edge — 

Such as old wiiters 

Have writ of in histories — . 

Hapt in this isle, since 

Up from the East hither 

Saxon and Angle from 

Over the broad billow 

Broke into Britain with 

Haughty war- workers who 

Harried the "Welshman, when 

Earls that were lured by the 

Hunger of glory gat 

Hold of the land. 



179 



ACHILLES OYER THE TEENCIL 
Iliad, xviii. 202. 

So saying, light-foot Iris pass'd away. 
Then rose Achilles dear to Zeus ; and round 
The warrior's puissant shoulders Pallas ilung 
Her fringed aegis, and around his head 
The glorious goddess wreath'd a golden cloud, 
And from it lighted an all-shining flame. 
As when a smoke from a city goes to heaven 
Far off from out an island girt by foes, 
All day the men contend in grievous war 
From their own city, but with set of sun 
Their fires flame thickly, and aloft the glare 

k2 



180 ACHILLES OVER THE TRENCH. 

Flies streaming, if perchance the neighbours round 

May see, and sail to help them in the war ; 

So from his head the splendour went to heaven. 

From wall to dyke he stept, he stood, nor join'd 

The AchaBans — honouring his wise mother's word — 

There standing, shouted, and Pallas far away 

Caird ; and a boundless panic shook the foe. 

For like the clear voice when a trumpet shrills, 

Blown by the fierce beleaguerers of a town, 

So rang the clear voice of ^akides ; 

And when the brazen cry of ^akides 

Was heard among the Trojans, all their hearts 

Were troubled, and the full-maned horses whirl'd 

The chariots backward, knowing griefs at hand ; 

And sheer-astounded were the charioteers 

To see the dread, unweariable fire 

That always o'er the great Peleion's head 

Burn'd, for the bright-eyed goddess made it burn. 



ACHILLES OVER THE TRENCH. 181 

Thrice from the dyke he sent his mighty shout, 
Thrice backward reel'd the Trojans and allies; 
And there and then twelve of their noblest died 
Among their spears and chariots. 



182 



TO THE miNCUSS FREDERIC A 
ON TIER MARRIAGE. 

YOU that were eyes and light to the King till he past 
away 
From the darkness of life — 
Ho saw not his daughter — he blest her : the blind King 
sees you to-day, ^ 

He blesses the wife. 



18: 



JSIE JOIIX FRAXKLIN. 
On the Cexotaph in Westminster Abbey. 

Not here ! the white North has thy bones ; and thou, 

Heroic sailor-soul, 
Art passing on thine happier voyage now 

Toward no earthly pole. 



184 



TO DANTE. 
(WpwItten at request of the Florentines.) 

King, that hast reigii'd six hundred years, and grown 

In power, and ever growest, since thine own 

Fair Florence honouring thy nativity. 

Thy Florence now the crown of Italy, 

Hath sought the tribute of a verse from me, 

I, wearing but the garland of a day. 

Cast at thy feet one flower that fades away. 



JSpottisKOodt and Co.t rrinttrs, New-itreti Squat e^ London, 



A LIST OF 

THE VARIOUS FORMS IN WHICH 

IE. TEMYSOI'S WOEKS 

ARE PUBLISHED. 



—o^ 



THE IMPERIAL LIBRARY EDITION OF THE 
COMPLETE WORKS, 

In seven handsome demy octavo Volumes, printed in large clear old-faced 

type on toned paper, with a Steel Engraved Portrait of the Author, from a 

Photograph. Price £3. 13*. M. cloth ; or £4. Is. 6d. Roxburgh. 

Each volume sold separately, price 10s. Gd. ; Roxburgh, half-morocco, 

12^. Gd. each. 

THE AUTHOR'S EDITION. 

This Edition is in crown octavo, printed on superfine paper, with handsome 

margins, in clear old face type — each volume containing a Frontispiece. 

2'his Edition can also be had bound in Roxburgh, half-morocco, 

price Is. 6d. per vol. exlra. 

THE MINIATURE EDITION, 

In thirteen Volumes. Pocket size, bound in white or blue cloth extra, gilt 

leaves, in case, price 425. 
This Edition can also be had in plain binding and case, price ZGs. 

THE GUINEA EDITION, 

In Twelve volumes, neatly bound in cloth, and enclosed in box, price 2\s. ; 
French morocco, price 31*. Gd. 

THE ROYAL EDITION, 

With Portrait and 25 Illustrations. In One Volume, cloth extra, bevelled 
boards, gilt leaves, price 21s. 

THE CROWN EDITION, 

In One Volume, cloth, price 6s. ; cloth extra, gilt leaves, price Is, Gd. ; 
Roxburgh, half -morocco, price 8s. Gd. 

THE SHILLING EDITION, 

In Twelve Volumes (pocket size) sewed, price One Shilling each. 



CONTENTS. 



I. — Poems. 

II. — Poems, 

III. — Poems. 

IV.— The Coming of Arthur ; 
Geraint and Enid; Mer- 
lin and Vivian, 
v.— Lancelot and Elaine ; The 
Holy Grail ; PcUeas and 
Ettarre. 



VI.— Guinevere ; Passing of 
Arthur ; Gareth and 
Lynette ; The Last 
Tournament. 
VII. — In Memoriam. 
VIII.— The Princess. 
IX.— Maud, and other Poems. 
X. — Enoch Arden. 
XI. — Queen Mary. 
XII.— Harold. 



London : C. KEGAN PAUL & CO., 1 Paternoster Square. 



THE CABINET EDITION. 

This convenient and compact Edition is now complete. It consists of 
Twelve Volumes fcp. 8vo. printed in clear type, and bouud in limp scarlet 
cloth. The first volume is illustrated with a beautiful Photographic 
Portrait of the Author, and each succeeding volume has a handsome 
Engraved Frontispiece. Price 2s. 6d. each volume. 

CONTENTS OF THE VOLUMES. 

Vol. I.— Early Poems. Illustrated with a Photographic Portrait of 
Mr. Alfred Tennyson. 

II. — English Idylls, and other Poems. Containin-g an Engraving 
of Mr. Alfred Tennyson's Residence at Aldworth. 

III. — Locksley Hall, and other Poems. With an Engraved 
Picture of Farringford. 

IV. — Lucretius, and other Poems. Containing an Engraving of 
a Scene in the Garden at Swainston. 

v.— Idylls of the King. With an Autotj^pe of the Bust of 
Mr. Alfred Tennyson by T. Woolner, R.A. 

VI.— Idylls of the King. Illustrated with an Engraved Portrait 
of ' Elaine,' from a Photographic Study of Julia M. 
Cameron. 

VII.— Idylls of the King. Containing an Engraving of * Arthur,' 
from a Photographic Study of Julia M. Cameron. 

VIII.— The Princess. With an Engraved Frontispiece of 'The 
Princess.' 

IX.— Maud, and Enoch Arden. With a Portrait of 'Maud,' 
taken from a Photographic Study of Julia M. Cameron. 

X. — In Memoriam. With a Steel Engraving of Arthur H. Hallam, 
engiaved from a Picture in possession of the Author by 
J. C. Armytage. 

XI.— Queen Mary : a Drama. With Engraved Frontispiece after 
Drawing by Walter Crane. 

XII.— Harold : a Drama. With Engraved Frontispiece after 
Drawing by Walter Crane. 



THE CABINET EDITION IN CASE. 

This Edition is also issued in a handsome green case ; forming 
an elegant ornament for the Drawing Boom or Library Table. 

PRICE, COMPLETE, THIRTY-TWO SHILLINGS. 

London: C. KEGrAN PAUL & CO., 1 Paternoster Square. 



THE ORIGINAL EDITIONS. 

In small 8vo. green cloth, lettered. 

Poems. Small 8vo. .... 

Maud, and other Poems. Small 8vo. 

The Princess. Small Svo. 

Idylls of the King. Small Svo. 

The Holy Grail, and other Poems. Small Svo. 

Gareth and Lynette. Small Svo. 

Idylls of the King. Collected. Small Svo. 

Enoch Arden, &c. Small Svo. 

In Memoriam. Small Svo. 

Queen Mary : a Drama. Crown Svo. 

Harold : a Drama. Crown Svo. 






s. d. 



. 6 





. 3 


6 


. 3 


6 


. 5 





. 4 


6 


. 3 





. 6 





. 3 


6 


. 4 





. 6 





. 6 






TENNYSON'S SONGS SET TO MUSIC. 

By Various Composers. Edited by W. G. Cusins. 
Dedicated by express permission to Her Majesty the Queen. 
Cloth extra, gilt leaves, price 21s, ; half -morocco, price 25s, 

SELECTIONS FROM 
THE WORKS OF MR. TENNYSON. 

Square Svo. cloth. With a Portrait of the Author, engraved by Vincent 
Brooks from a Photograph by the London Stereoscopic Company. 

Price Zs. 6d. In cloth, gilt extra, price 4*. 

SONGS FROM 
THE WRITINGS OF MR. TENNYSON. 

New and Cheaper Edition. 
16mo. cloth, price 2^. 6d. 

TENNYSON FOR THE YOUNG AND FOR 

RECITATION. 

Specially arranged. Fcp. Svo. price Is. Qd. 

THE TENNYSON BIRTHDAY BOOK. 

Edited by Emily Shakkspear. 32mo. cloth limp, 2*. ; cloth extra, Ss. 

*^,t* .4^50, a Superior Edition, printed in red and black, on antique paper 
specially prepared^ small crown %vo. cloth extra, gilt leaves, price 5s. 

STUDIES IN TENNYSON'S IDYLLS. 

By Henry Elsdale. Crown Svo. cloth, price 5^. 
London: C. KEGAN PAUL & CO., 1 Paternoster Square. 



16ENDER 



J. 



it 



t 









THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CALIFORNIA 



BEQUEST 

OF 

ANITA D. S. BLAKE 




University of California • Berkeley 



THE HOLY GRAIL 



These four * Idylls of the King ' are printed in 
their present form for the convenience of those 
who possess the former volume. 

The whole aeries should be read, and is to-day- 
published, in the following order : — 

^ THE COMING OP ARTHUR, 



GERAINT AND ENID. 
MERLIN AND VIVIEN. 
LANCELOT AND ELAINE. 
THE HOLY GRAIL. 
PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 
GUINEVERE. 



^ THE PASSING OF ARTHUR.* 

* This last, the earliest written of the poems, 
is here connected with the rest in accordance 
with an early project of the author's. 



THE HOLY GRAIL 



^n!> Bt^tt ipoims 



By ALFRED TENNYSON, d.c.l. 



POET LAUREATE 



** F/os Reg7iin Art hunts'* 

Joseph of Exeter 




STRAHAN AND CO., PUBLISHERS 

56 LUDGATE HILL, LONDON 
1870 



LONDON : 
BRADBURY, EVANS, AND CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS. 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

THE COMING OF ARTHUR 1 

THE HOLY GRAIL 31 

PELLEAS AND ETTARRE 89 

THE PASSING OF ARTHUR 129 

NORTHERN FARMER. NEW STYLE 161 

THE GOLDEN SUPPER 169 

THE VICTIM . . . . . . . . . 193 

WAGES 199 

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM 201 

** FLOWER IN THE CRANNIED WALL," . . . . 204 

LUCRETIUS 205 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 



THE COMING OF ARTHUE. 

Leodogran, the King of Cameliard, 
Had one fair daughter, and none other child ; 
And she was fairest of all flesh on earth, 
Guinevere, and in her his one delight. 

For many a petty king ere Arthur came 
Ruled in this isle, and ever waging war 
Each upon other, wasted all the land ; 
And still from time to time the heathen host 
Swarm'd overseas, and harried what was left. 
And so there grew great tracts of wilderness, 

B 2 



[ THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Wherein the beast was ever more and more, 
But man was less and less, till Arthur came. 
For first Aurelius lived and fought and died, 
And after him King Uther fought and died, 
But either fail'd to make the kingdom one. 
And after these King Arthur for a space. 
And thro' the puissance of his Table Round, 
Drew all their petty princedoms under him. 
Their king and head, and made a realm, and 
reign'd. 

And thus the land of Cameliard was waste. 
Thick with wet woods, and many a beast therein, 
And none or few to scare or chase the beast ; 
So that wild dog, and wolf and boar and bear 
Came night and day, and rooted in the fields. 
And wallow'd in the gardens of the king. 
And ever and anon the wolf would steal 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

The children and devour, but now and then, 
Her own brood lost or dead, lent her fierce teat 
To human sucklings ; and the children, housed 
In her foul den, there at their meat would growl, 
And mock their foster-mother on four feet, 
Till, straightened, they grew up to wolf-like men. 
Worse than the wolves. And King Leodogran 
Groan' d for the Koman legions here again. 
And Caesar's eagle : then his brother king, 
Rience, assail'd him : last a heathen horde, 
Reddening the sun with smoke and earth with 

blood, 
And on the spike that split the mother's heart 
Spitting the child, brake on him, till, amazed, 
He knew not whither he should turn for aid. 

But — for he heard of Arthur newly crown'd, 
Tho' not without an uproar made by those 



6 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Who cried, ' He is not Uther's son ' — the king 
Sent to him, saying, ' Arise, and help us thou ! 
For here between the man and beast we die.' 

And Arthur yet had done no deed of arms. 
But heard the call, and came : and Guinevere 
Stood by the castle walls to watch him pass ; 
But since he neither wore on helm or shield 
The golden symbol of his kinglihood, 
But rode a simple knight among his knights, 
And many of these in richer arms than he, 
She saw him not, or mark'd not, if she saw, 
One among many, tho' his face was bare. 
But Arthur, looking downward as he past. 
Felt the light of her eyes into his life 
Smite on the sudden, yet rode on, and pitch' d 
His tents beside the forest. And he drave 
The heathen, and he slew the beast, and fell'd 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

The forest, and let in the sun, and made 
Broad pathways for the hunter and the knight ; 
And so returned. 

For while he lingered there, 
A doubt that ever smoulder'd in the hearts 
Of those great Lords and Barons of his realm 
Flash'd forth and into war : for most of these 
Made head against him, crying, * Who is he 
That he should rule us 1 who hath proven him 
King Uther s son 1 for lo ! we look at him, 
And find nor face nor bearing, limbs nor voice, 
Are like to those of Uther whom we knew. 
This is the son of Gorlois, not the king; 
This is the son of Anton, not the king.' 

And Arthur, passing thence to battle, felt 
Travail, and throes and agonies of the life, 



8 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Desiring to be join'd with Guinevere ; 
And thinking as he rode, ^ Her father said 
That there between the man and beast they die. 
Shall I not lift her from this land of beasts 
Up to my throne, and side by side with me 1 
What happiness to reign a lonely king, 
Yext — ye stars that shudder over me, 

earth that soundest hollow under me, 

Vext with waste dreams ? for saving I be join'd 
To her that is the fairest under heaven, 

1 seem as nothing in the mighty world, 
And cannot will my will, nor work my work 
Wholly, nor make myself in mine own realm 
Victor and lord. But were I join'd with her. 
Then might we live together as one life. 
And reigning with one will in everything 
Have power on this dark land to lighten it. 
And power on this dead world to make it live. 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 9 

And Arthur from the field of battle sent 
Ulfius, and Brastias, and Bedivere, 
His new-made knights, to King Leodogran, 
Saying, * If I in ought have served thee well, 
Give me thy daughter Guinevere to wife.' 

Whom when he heard, Leodogran in heart 
Debating — * How should I that am a king, 
However much he holp me at my need, 
Give my one daughter saving to a king. 
And a king's son ' — lifted his voice, and call'd 
A hoary man, his chamberlain, to whom 
He trusted all things, and of him required 
.His counsel : * Knowest thou aught of Arthur's birth ' ] 

Then spake the hoary chamberlain and said, 
' Sir king, there be but two old men that know : 
And each is twice as old as I ; and one 



10 THE COMING OP ARTHUE. 

Is Merlin, the wise man that ever served 
King Uther thro' his magic art ; and one 
Is Merlin's master (so they call him) Bleys, 
Who taught him magic ; but the scholar ran 
Before the master, and so far, that Bleys 
Laid magic by, and sat him down, and wrote 
All things and whatsoever Merlin did 
In one great annal-book, where after-years 
Will learn the secret of our Arthur's birth/ 

To whom the King Leodogran replied, 
* friend, had I been holpen half as well 
By this King Arthur as by thee to-day. 
Then beast and man had had their share of me : 
But summon here before us yet once more 
Ulfius, and Brastias, and Bedivere.' 

Then, when they came before him, the king said. 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 11 

* I have seen the cuckoo chased by lesser fowl, 
And reason in the chase : but wherefore now 
Do these your lords stir up the heat of war, 
Some calling Arthur born of Gorlois, 
Others of Anton ? Tell me, ye youi-selves, 
Hold ye this Arthur for King Uther's son ? ' 

And Ulfius and Brastias answer' d, ' Ay.' 
Then Bedivere, the first of all his knights 
Knighted by Arthur at his crowning, spake — 
For bold in heart and act and word was he, 
Whenever slander breathed against the king — 

• * Sir, there be many rumours on this head : 
For there be those who hate him in their hearts, 
Call him baseborn, and since his ways are sweet, 
And theirs are bestial, hold him less than man : 
And there be those who deem him more than man. 



12 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

And dream he dropt from heaven : but my belief 

In all this matter — so ye care to learn — 

Sir, for ye know that in King Uther's time 

The prince and warrior Gorlois, he that held 

Tintagil castle by the Cornish sea, 

Was wedded with a winsome wife, Ygerne : 

And daughters had she borne him, — one whereof 

Lot's wife, the Queen of Orkney, Bellicent, 

Hath ever like a loyal sister cleaved 

To Arthur, — but a son she had not borne. 

And Uther cast upon her eyes of love : 

But she, a stainless wife to Gorlois, 

So loathed the bright dishonour of his love. 

That Gorlois and King Uther went to war : 

And overthrown was Gorlois and slain. 

Then Uther in his wrath and heat besieged 

Ygerne within Tintagil, where her men. 

Seeing the mighty swarm about their walls, 



THE COMING OP ARTHUR. 13 

Left her and fled, and Uther enter' d in, 

And there was none to call to but himself. 

So, compass' d by the power of the king, 

Enforced she was to wed him in her tears. 

And with a shameful swiftness : afterward. 

Not many moons, King Uther died himself, 

Moaning and wailing for an heir to rule 

After him, lest the realm should go to wrack. 

And that same night, the night of the new year. 

By reason of the bitterness and grief 

That vext his mother, all before his time 

Was Arthur bom, and all as soon as born 

Deliver' d at a secret postern-gate 

To Merlin, to be holden fax apart 

Until his hour should come ; because the lords 

Of that fierce day were as the lords of this. 

Wild beasts, and surely would have torn the child 

Piecemeal among them, had they known j for each 



14 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

But sought to rule for his own self and hand, 

And many hated Uther for the sake 

Of Gorlois. Wherefore Merlin took the child, 

And gave him to Sir Anton, an old knight 

And ancient friend of Uther ; and his wife 

Nursed the young prince, and rear'd him with her 

own; 
And no man knew. And ever since the lords 
Have foughten like wild beasts among themselves, 
So that the realm has gone to wrack : but now. 
This year, when Merlin (for his hour had come) 
Brought Arthur forth, and set him in the hall, 
Proclaiming, " Here is Uther's heir, your king," 
A hundred voices cried, " Away with him ! 
No king of ours ! a son of Gorlois he. 
Or else the child of Anton, and no king, 
Or else basebom.'' Yet Merlin thro' his craft. 
And while the people clamour'd for a king, 



r 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 15 

Had Arthur crown' d ; but after, the great lords 
Banded, and so brake out in open war.' 

Then while the king debated with himself 
If Arthur were the child of shamefulness, 
Or bom the son of Gorlois, after death, 
Or Uther's son, and born before his time, 
Or whether there were truth in anything 
Said by these three, there came to Cameliard, 
With Gawain and young Modred, her two sons, 
Lot's wife, the Queen of Orkney, Bellicent ; 
Whom as he could, not as he would, the king 
Made feast for, saying, as they sat at meat, 

' A doubtful throne is ice on summer seas — 
Ye come from Arthur's court : think ye this king — 
So few his knights, however brave they be — 
Hath body enow to beat his foemen down V 



16 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

' king/ she cried, ' and I will tell thee : few, 
Few, but all brave, all of one mind with him ; 
For I was near him when the savage yells 
Of Uther's peerage died, and Arthur sat 
Crown' d on the dais, and his warriors cried, 
" Be thou the king, and we will work thy will 
Who love thee." Then the king in low deep tones, 
And simple words of great authority, 
Bound them by so strait vows to his own self, 
That when they rose, knighted from kneeling, some 
Were pale as at the passing of a ghost, 
Some flush' d, and others dazed, as one who wakes 
Half-blinded at the coming of a light. 

* But when he spake and cheer d his Table Hound 
With large divine and comfortable words 
Beyond my tongue to tell thee — I beheld 
From eye to eye thro' all their Order flash 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 17 

A momentary likeness of the king : 
And ere it left their faces, thro' the cross 
And those around it and the Crucified, 
Down from the casement over Arthur, smote 
Flame-colour, vert and azure, in three rays, 
One falling upon each of three fair queens, 
Who stood in silence near his throne, the friends 
Of Arthur, gazing on him, tall, with bright 
Sweet faces, who will help him at his need. 

' And there I saw mage Merlin, whose vast wit 
And hundred winters are but as the hands 
Of loyal vassals toiling for their liege. 

* And near him stood the Lady of the Lake, 
Who knows a subtl-er magic than his own — 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful. 
She gave the king his huge cross-hilted sword. 



18 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Whereby to drive the heathen out : a mist 
Of incense curl'd about her, and her face 
Wellnigh was hidden in the minster gloom ; 
But there was heard among the holy hymns 
A voice as of the waters, for she dw^ells 
Down in a deep, calm, whatsoever storms 
May shake the world, and when the surface rolls, 
Hath power to walk the waters like our Lord. 

* There likewise I beheld Excalibur 
Before him at his crowning borne, the sword 
That rose from out the bosom of the lake, 
And Arthur row'd across and took it — rich 
With jewels, elfin Urim, on the hilt, 
Bewildering heart and eye — the blade so bright 
That men are blinded by it — on one side. 
Graven in the oldest tongue of all this world, 
" Take me,*' but turn the blade and you shall see, 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 19 

And written in the speech ye speak yourself, 
" Cast me away ! " And sad was Arthur's face 
Taking it, but old Merlin counsell'd him, 
" Take thou and strike ! the time to cast away 
Is yet far-off." So this great brand the king 
Took, and by this will beat his foemen down.' 

Thereat Leodogran rejoiced, but thought 
To sift his doub tings to the last, and ask'd, 
Fixing full eyes of question on her face, 
* The swallow and the swift are near akin, 
But thou art closer to this noble prince. 
Being his own dear sister ; ' and she said, 
^ Daughter of Gorlois and Ygerne am I ; ' 
' And therefore Arthur's sister,' ask'd the King. 
She answer'd, * These be secret things,' and sign'd 
To those two sons to pass and let them be. 
And Gawain went, and breaking into song 



20 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Sprang out, and follow'd by his flying hair 

Ban like a colt, and leapt at all he saw : 

But Modred laid his ear beside the doors, 

And there half heard ; the same that afterward 

Struck for the throne, and striking found his doom. 

And then the Queen made answer, * What 
know 1 1 
For dark my mother was in eyes and hair, 
And dark in hair and eyes am I ; and dark 
Was Gorlois, yea and dark was Uther too, 
Wellnigh to blackness ; but this king is fair 
Beyond the race of Britons and of men. 
Moreover always in my mind I hear 
A cry from out the dawning of my life, 
A mother weeping, and I hear her say, 
" that ye had some brother, pretty one. 
To guard thee on the rough w^ays of the world." ' 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 21 

' Ay,' said the King, ' and hear ye such a cry 1 
But when did Arthur chance upon thee first?' 

' kino: ! ' she cried, * and I will tell thee true : 
He found me first when yet a little maid : 
Beaten I had been for a little fault 
Whereof I was not guilty ; and out I ran 
And flung myself down on a bank of heath, 
And hated this fair world and all therein. 
And wept, and wish'd that I were dead ; and he — 
I know not whether of himself he came, 
Or brought by Merlin, who, they say, can walk 
Unseen at pleasure — he was at my side. 
And spake sweet words, and comforted my heart. 
And dried my tears, being a child with me. 
And many a time he came, and evermore 
As I grew greater grew with me ; and sad 
At times he seem'd, and sad with him was T, 



22 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Stern too at times, and then I loved him not, 
But sweet again, and then I loved him well. 
And now of late I see him less and less, 
But those first days had golden hours for me, 
For then I surely thought he would be king. 

* But let me tell thee now another tale : 
For Bleys, our Merlin s master, as they say. 
Died but of late, and sent his cry to me, 
To hear him speak before he left his life. 
Shrunk like a fairy changeling lay the mage. 
And when I enter'd told me that himself 
And Merlin ever served about the king, 
XJther, before he died, and on the night 
When Uther in Tintagil past away 
Moaning and wailing for an heir, the two 
Left the still king, and passing forth to breathe, 
Then from the castle gateway by the chasm 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 23 

Descending thro' the dismal night — a night 

In which the bounds of heaven and earth were lost — 

Beheld, so high upon the dreary deeps 

It seem'd in heaven, a ship, the shape thereof 

A dragon wing'd, and all from stem to stern 

Bright with a shining people on the decks, 

And gone as soon as seen. And then the two 

Dropt to the cove, and watch'd the great sea fall, 

Wave after wave, each mightier than the last, 

Till last, a ninth one, gathering half the deep 

And full of voices, slowly rose and plunged 

Roaring, and all the wave was in a flame : 

And down the wave and in the flame was borne 

A naked babe, and rode to Merlin's feet. 

Who stoopt and caught the babe, and cried *'The 

King ! 
Here is an heir for Uther ! " And the fringe 
Of that great breaker, sweeping up the strand. 



24 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Lash'd at the wizard as he spake the word, 

And all at once all round him rose in fire, 

So that the child and he were clothed in fire. 

And presently thereafter followed calm, 

Free sky and stars : " And this same child," he said, 

*^ Is he who reigns ; nor could I part in peace 

Till this were told." And saying this the seer 

Went thro' the strait and dreadful pass of death, 

Not ever to be question'd any more 

Save on the further side ; but when I met 

Merlin, and ask'd him if these things were truth — 

The shining dragon and the naked child 

Descending in the glory of the seas — 

He laugh' d as is his wont, and answer'd me 

In riddling triplets of old time, and said : 

* ^* Rain, rain, and sun ! a rainbow in the sky ! 
A young man will be wiser by and by ; 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 25 

An old man's wit may wander ere he die. 

Rain, rain, and sun ! a rainbow on the lea ! 
And truth is this to me, and that to thee ; 
And truth or clothed or naked let it be. 

Rain, sun, and rain ! and the free blossom blows : 
Sun, rain, and sun ! and where is he who knows 1 
From the great deep to the great deep he goes.** 

* So Merlin riddling anger'd me ; but thou 
Fear not to give this king thine only child, 
Guinevere : so great bards of him will sing 
Hereafter ; and dark sayings from of old 
Ranging and ringing thro' the minds of men, 
And echo'd by old folk beside their fires 
For comfort after their wage-work is done. 
Speak of the king ; and Merlin in our time 
Hath spoken also, not in jest, and sworn 
Tho' men may wound him that he will not die. 



26 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

But pass, again to come ; and then or now 

Utterly smite the heathen underfoot, 

Till these and all men hail him for their king.' 

She spake and King Leodogran rejoiced, 
But musing ^ Shall I answer yea or nay 1 ' 
Doubted, and drowsed, nodded and slept, and saw, 
Dreaming, a slope of land that ever grew. 
Field after field, up to a height, the peak 
Haze-hidden, and thereon a phantom king, 
Now looming, and now lost ; and on the slope 
The sword rose, the hind fell, the herd was 

driven. 
Fire glimpsed ; and all the land from roof and rick, 
In drifts of smoke before a rolling wind. 
Stream' d to the peak, and mingled with the haze 
And made it thicker ; while the phantom king 
Sent out at times a voice ; and here or there 



THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 27 

Stood one who pointed toward the voice, the rest 
. Slew on and burnt, crying, ^ No king of ours, 
No son of Uther, and no king of ours ' ; 
Till with a wink his dream was changed, the haze 
Descended, and the solid earth became 
As nothing, and the king stood out in heaven, 
Crown' d. And Leodogran awoke, and sent 
Ulfius, and Brastias and Bedivere, 
Back to the court of Arthur answering yea. 

Then Arthur charged his warrior whom he loved 
And honoured most. Sir Lancelot, to ride forth 
And bring the Queen ; — and watch'd him from the 

gates : 
And Lancelot past away among the flowers, 
(For then was latter April) and return' d 
Among the flowers, in May, with Guinevere. 
To w^hom arrived, by Dubric the high saint. 



28 THE COMING OF ARTHUR. 

Chief of the church in Britain, and before 
The stateliest of her altar-shrines, the king 
That morn was married, while in stainless white. 
The fair beginners of a nobler time, 
And glorying in their vows and him, his knights 
Stood round him, and rejoicing in his joy. 
And holy Dubric spread his hands and spake, 
' Reign ye, and live and love, and make the world 
Other, and may thy Queen be one with thee. 
And all this Order of thy Table Round 
Fulfil the boundless purpose of their king.' 

Then at the marriage feast came in from Rome, 
The slowly-fading mistress of the world. 
Great lords, who claim'd the tribute as of yore. 
But Arthur spake, ' Behold, for these have sworn 
To fight my wars, and worship me their king ; 
The old order changeth, yielding place to new ; 



THE COMING OP ARTHUR. 29 

And we that fight for our fair father Christ, 
Seeing that ye be grown too weak and old 
To drive the heathen from your Eoman wall, 
No tribute will we pay : ' so those great lords 
Drew back in wrath, and Arthur strove with Rome. 

And Arthur and his knighthood for a space 
Were all one will, and thro' that strength the king 
Drew in the petty princedoms under him, 
Fought, and in twelve great battles overcame 
The heathen hordes, and made a realm and reign'd. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 



From noiseful arms, and acts of prowess done 

In tournament or tilt, Sir Percivale, 

Whom Arthur and his knighthood call'd The Pure, 

Had pass'd into the silent life of prayer, 

Praise, fast, and alms ; and leaving for the cowl 

The helmet in an abbey far away 

From Camelot, there, and not long after, died. 

And one, a fellow-monk among the rest, 
Ambrosius, loved him much beyond the rest, 
And honoured him, and wrought into his heart 



34 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

A way by love that waken'd love within, 
To answer that which came : and as they sat 
Beneath a world-old yew-tree, darkening half 
The cloisters, on a gustful April morn 
That puff'd the swaying branches into smoke 
Above them, ere the summer when he died. 
The monk Ambrosius questioned Percivale : 

' brother, I have seen this yew-tree smoke, 
Spring after spring, for half a hundred years : 
For never have I known the world without, 
Nor ever stray'd beyond the pale : but thee. 
When first thou camest — such a courtesy 
Spake thro' the limbs and in the voice — I knew 
For one of those who eat in Arthur's hall ; 
For good ye are and bad, and like to coins, 
Some true, some light, but every one of you • 
Stamp'd with the image of the King ; and now 



THE HOLT GRAIL. 35 

Tell me/ what drove thee from the Table Bound, 
My brother ? was it earthly passion crost 1 ' 

* Nay,' said the knight ; * for no such passion 
mine. 
But the sweet vision of the Holy Grail 
Drove me from all vainglories, rivalries, 
And earthly heats that spring and sparkle out 
Among us in the jousts, while women watch 
Who wins, who falls ; and waste the spiritual strength 
Within us, better ofFer'd up to Heaven.* 

To whom the monk : * The Holy Grail ! — I trust 
We are green in Heaven's eyes ; but here too 

much 
We moulder — as to things without I mean — 
Yet one of your own knights, a guest of ours, 
Told us of this in our refectory, 



36 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

But spake with such a sadness and so low 

We heard not half of what he said. What is it ? 

The phantom of a cup that comes and goes 1 * 

^ Nay, monk ! what phantom 1 ' answer'd Percivale. 
^ The cup, the cup itself, from which our Lord 
Drank at the last sad supper with his own. 
This, from the blessed land of Aromat — 
After the day of darkness, when the dead 
Went wandering o'er Moriah — the good saint, 
Arimathsean Joseph, journeying brought 
To Glastonbury, where the winter thorn 
Blossoms at Christmas, mindful of our Lord. 
And there awhile it bode ; and if a man 
Could touch or see it, he was heaPd at once, 
By faith, of all his ills. But then the times 
Grew to such evil that the holy cup 
Was caught away to Heaven, and disappeared.' 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 37 

To whom the monk : ' From our old books I know 
That Joseph came of old to Glastonbury, 
And there the heathen Prince, Arviragus, 
Gave him an isle of marsh whereon to build ; 
And there he built with wattles from the marsh 
A little lonely church in days of yore, 
For so they say, these books of ours, but seem 
Mute of this miracle, far as I have read. 
But who first saw the holy thing to-day ? ' 

^ A woman,' answer' d Percivale, * a nun. 
And one no further off in blood from me 
Than sister; and if ever holy maid 
With knees of adoration wore the stone, 
A holy maid ; tho' never maiden glow'd. 
But that was in her earlier maidenhood. 
With such a fervent flame of human love. 
Which being rudely blunted, glanced and shot 



38 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Only to holy things ; to prayer and praise 
She gave herself, to fast and alms. And yet, 
Nun as she was, the scandal of the Court, 
Sin against Arthur and the Table Eound, 
And the strange sound of an adulterous race, 
Across the iron grating of her cell 
Beat, and she pray'd and fasted all the more. 

' And he to whom she told her sins, or what 
Her all but utter whiteness held for sin, 
A man well-nigh a hundred winters old, 
Spake often with her of the Holy Grail, 
A legend handed down thro' five or six. 
And each of these a hundred winters old. 
From our Lord's time. And when King Arthur made 
His Table Eound, and all men's hearts became 
Clean for a season, surely he had thought 
That now the Holy Grail would come again ; 



THE HOLY GRAIL. J 

But sin broke out. Ah, Christ, that it would come, 

And heal the world of all their wickedness ! 

" Father ! " asked the maiden, " might it come 

To me by prayer and fasting ? '* " Nay," said he, 

" I know not, for thy heart is pure as snow." 

And so she pray'd and fasted, till the sun 

Shone, and the wind blew, thro' her, and I thought 

She might have risen and floated when I saw her. 

* For on a day she sent to speak with me. 
And when she came to speak, behold her eyes 
Beyond my knowing of them, beautiful, 
Beyond all knowing of them, wonderful. 
Beautiful in the light of holiness. 
And "0 my brother, Percivale," she said, 
^' Sweet brother, I have seen the Holy Grail : 
For, waked at dead of night, I heard a sound 
As of a silver horn from o'er the hills 



40 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Blown, and I thought, ' It is not Arthur s use 

To hunt by moonlight ' ; and the slender sound 

As from a distance beyond distance grew 

Coming upon me — never harp nor horn, 

Nor aught we blow with breath, or touch with 

hand. 
Was like that music as it came ; and then 
Stream' d thro' my cell a cold and silver beam, 
And down the long beam stole the Holy Grail, 
Rose-red with beatings in it, as if alive, 
Till all the white walls of my cell were dyed 
With rosy colours leaping on the wall ; 
And then the music faded, and the Grail 
Pass'd, and the beam decay' d, and from the w^alls 
The rosy quiverings died into the night. 
So now the Holy Thing is here again 
Among us, brother, fast thou too and pray, 
And tell thy brother knights to fast and pray, 



THE HOLT GRAIL. 41 

That SO perchance the vision may be seen 

By thee and those, and all the world be heal'd." 

* Then leaving the pale nun, I spake of this 
To all men ; and myself fasted and pray'd 
Always, and many among us many a week 
Fasted and pray'd even to the uttermost, 
Expectant of the wonder that would be. 

*And one there was among us, ever moved 
Among us in white armour, Galahad. 
" God make thee good as thou art beautiful," 
Said Arthur, when he dubb'd him knight ; and none. 
In so young youth, was ever made a knight 
Till Galahad ; and this Galahad, when he heard 
My sister's vision, j&ll'd me with amaze ; 
His eyes became so like her own, they seem'd 
Hers, and himself her brother more than I. 



42 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

' Sister or brother none had he ; but some 
Call'd him a son of Lancelot, and some said 
Begotten by enchantment — chatterers they, 
Like birds of passage piping up and down, 
That gape for flies — we know not whence they come ; 
For when was Lancelot wanderingly lewd ? 

' But she, the wan sweet maiden shore away 
Clean from her forehead all that wealth of hair 
Which made a silken mat- work for her feet ; 
And out of this she plaited broad and long 
A strong sword-belt, and wove with silver thread 
And crimson in the belt a strange device, 
A crimson grail w^ithin a silver beam ; 
And saw the bright boy-knight, and bound it on him. 
Saying, ' My knight, my love, my knight of heaven, 
thou, my love, whose love is one with mine, 
I, maiden, round thee, maiden, bind my belt. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 43 

Go forth, for thou shalt see what I have seen, 
And break thro' all, till one will crown thee king 
Far in the spiritual city :' and as she spake 
She sent the deathless passion in her eyes 
Thro' him, and made him hers, and laid her mind 
On him, and he believed in her belief. 

* Then came a year of miracle : brother. 
In our great hall there stood a vacant chair, 
Fashion'd by Merlin ere he past away. 
And cilrven wdth strange figures ; and in and out 
The figures, like a serpent, ran a scroll 
Of letters in a tongue no man could read. 
And Merlin call'd it " The Siege perilous," 
Perilous for good and ill ; ** for there," he said, 
" No man could sit but he should lose himself : " 
And once by misadvertence Merlin sat 
In his own chair, and so was lost ; but he, 



44 THE HOLY GEAIL. 

Galahad, when he heard of Merlin's doom, 
Cried, " If I lose myself I save myself ! " 

' Then on a summer night it came to pass. 
While the great banquet lay along the hall, 
That Galahad would sit down in Merlin's chair. 

^ And all at once, as there we sat, we heard 
A cracking and a riving of the roofs. 
And rending, and a blast, and overhead 
Thunder, and in the thunder was a cry. 
And in the blast there smote along the hall 
A beam of light seven times more clear than day : 
And down the long beam stole the Holy Grail 
All over cover' d with a luminous cloud, 
And none might see who bare it, and it past. 
But every knight beheld his fellow's face 
As in a glory, and all the knights arose, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 4 

And staring each at other like dumb men 
Stood, till I found a voice and sware a vow. 

I sware a vow before them all, that I, 
Because I had not seen the Grail, would ride 
A twelvemonth and a day in quest of it, 
Until I found and saw it, as the nun 
My sister saw it ; and Galahad sware the vow, 
And good Sir Bors, our Lancelot's cousin, sware. 
And Lancelot sware, and many among the knights. 
And Gawain sware, and louder than the rest.' 

Then spake the monk Ambrosius, asking him, 
^ ^ What said the King ? Did Arthur take the vow ? ' 

* Nay, for my lord,' said Percivale, * the King, 
Was not in hall : for early that same day, 
Scaped thro' a cavern from a bandit hold. 



46 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

An outraged maiden sprang into the hall 
Crying on help : for all her shining hair 
Was smear' d with earth, and either milky arm 
Eed-rent with hooks of bramble, and all she 

wore 
Torn as a sail that leaves the rope is torn 
In tempest : so the King arose and went 
To smoke the scandalous hive of those wild bees 
That made such honey in his realm. Howbeit 
Some little of this marvel he too saw. 
Returning o'er the plain that then began 
To darken under Camelot ; whence the King 
Look'd up, calling aloud, " Lo there ! the roofs 
Of our great hall are rolled in thunder-smoke ! 
Pray Heaven, they be not smitten by the bolt." 
For dear to Arthur was that hall of ours, 
As having there so oft with all his knights 
Feasted, and as the stateliest under heaven. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 47 

^ brother, had you known our mighty hall, 
Which Merhn built for Arthur long ago ! 
For all the sacred mount of Camelot, 
And all the dim rich city, roof by roof, 
Tower after tower, spire beyond spire, 
By grove, and garden-lawn, and rushing brook. 
Climbs to the mighty hall that Merlin built. 
And four great zones of sculpture, set betwixt 
With many a mystic symbol, gird the hall : 
And in the lowest beasts are slaying men. 
And in the second men are slaying beasts. 
And on the third are warriors, perfect men, 
And on the fourth are men with growing wings, 
xVnd over all one statue in the mould 
Of Arthur, made by Merlin, with a crown, 
And peak'd wings pointed to the Northern Star. 
And eastward fronts the statue, and the crown 
And both the wings are made of gold, and flame 



48 THE HOLY GRAIIj. 

At sunrise till the people in far fields, 
Wasted so often by the heathen hordes, 
Behold it, crying, " We have still a king.'' 

* And, brother, had you known our hall within. 
Broader and higher than any in all the lands ! 
Where twelve great windows blazon Arthur's wars. 
And all the light that falls upon the board 
Streams thro' the twelve great battles of our 

King. 
Nay, one there is, and at the eastern end, 
Wealthy with wandering lines of mount and mere, 
Where Arthur finds the brand, Excalibur. 
And also one to the west, and counter to it, 
And blank : and who shall blazon it ? when and 

how? — 
there, perchance, when all our wars are done. 
The brand Excalibur will be cast away. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 49 

' So to this hall full quickly rode the King, 
In horror lest the work by Merlin wrought, 
Dreamlike, should on the sudden vanish, wrapt 
In unremorseful folds of rolling fire. 
And in he rode, and up I glanced, and saw 
The golden dragon sparkling over all : 
And many of those who burnt the hold, their arms 
Hack'd, and their foreheads grimed with smoke, and 

sear'd, 
FoUow'd, and in among bright faces, ours. 
Full of the vision, prest : and then the King 
Spake to me, being nearest, " Percivale," 
(Because the hall was all in tumult — some 
. Vowing, and some protesting), " what is this ? " 

^ brother, when I told him what had chanced, 
My sister's vision, and the rest, his face 
Darken' d, as I have seen it more than once, 

£ 



50 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

When some brave deed seem'd to be done in vain, 
Darken ; and " Woe is me, my knights/' he cried, 
" Had I been here, ye had not sworn the vow." 
Bold was mine answer, '^ Had thyself been here, 
My King, thou wouldst have sworn." "Yea, yea," 

said he, 
" Art thou so bold and hast not seen the Grail ? ' 

' " Nay, Lord, I heard the sound, I saw the light, 
But since I did not see the Holy Thing, 
I sware a vow to follow it till I saw." 

^ Then when he asked us, knight by knight, if any 
Had seen it, all their answers were as one : 
"Nay, Lord, and therefore have we sworn our vow^s." 

' " Lo now," said Arthur, "have ye seen a cloud ? 
What go ye into the wilderness to see ? '* 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 51 

* Then Galahad on the sudden, and in a voice 
Shrilling along the hall to Arthur, call'd, 

" But I, Sir Arthur, saw the Holy Grail, 
I saw the Holy Grail and heard a cry — 
* Galahad, and Galahad, follow me.' " 

* " Ah, Galahad, Galahad,'' said the King, " for such 
As thou art is the vision, not for these. 

Thy holy nun and thou have seen a sign — 
Holier is none, my Percivale, than she — 
A sign to maim this Order which I made. 
But you, that follow but the leader s bell " 
(Brother, the King was hard upon his knights) 
'" Taliessin is our fullest throat of song, 
And one hath sung and all the dumb will sing. 
Lancelot is Lancelot, and hath overborne 
Five knights at once, and every younger knight, 
Unproven, holds himself as Lancelot, 

E 2 



52 THE HOLT GRAIL. 

Till overborne by one, he learns — and ye, 

What are ye ? Galahads 1 — no, nor Percivales '' 

(For thus it pleased the King to range me close 

After Sir Galahad) ; " nay," said he, " but men 

With strength and will to right the wrong' d, of powder 

To lay the sudden heads of violence flat, 

Knights that in twelve great battles splash'd and dyed 

The strong White Horse in his own heathen blood — 

But one hath seen, and all the blind will see. 

Go, since your vows are sacred, being made : 

Yet — for ye know the cries of all my realm 

Pass thro' this hall — how often, my knights. 

Your places being vacant at my side, 

This chance of noble deeds will come and go 

Unchallenged, while you follow wandering fires 

Lost in the quagmire ? Many of you, yea most, 

Return no more : ye think I show myself 

Too dark a prophet : come now, let us meet 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 53 

The morrow morn once more in one full field 
Of gracious pastime, that once more the King, 
Before you leave him for this Quest, may count 
The yet-unbroken strength of all his knights, 
Rejoicing in that Order which he made." 

' So when the sun broke next from under ground, 
All the great table of our Arthur closed 
And clash'd in such a tourney and so full. 
So many lances broken — never yet 
Had Camelot seen the like, since Arthur came ; 
And I myself and Galahad, for a strength 
Was in us from the vision, overthrew 
So many knights that all the people cried. 
And almost burst the barriers in their heat. 
Shouting " Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale ! " 

' But when the next day brake from under ground — 



54 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

brother, had you known our Camelot, 

Built by old kings, age after age, so old 

The King himself had fears that it would fall, 

So strange, and rich, and dim ; for where the roofs 

Totter' d toward each other in the sky, 

Met foreheads all along the street of those 

Who watch' d us pass ; and lower, and where the long 

Rich galleries, lady-laden, weigh'd the necks 

Of dragons clinging to the crazy walls, 

Thicker than drops from thunder, showers of flowers 

Fell as we past ; and men and boys astride 

On wyvern, lion, dragon, griffin, swan, 

At all the corners, named us each by name. 

Calling " God speed ! " but in the street below 

The knights and ladies wept, and rich and poor 

Wept, and the King himself could hardly speak 

For grief, and in the middle street the Queen, 

Who rode by Lancelot, wail'd and shriek'd aloud, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 55 

"This madness has come on us for our sins." 
And then we reach'd the weirdly-sculptured gate, 
Where Arthur's wars were rendered mystically, 
And thence departed every one his way. 

' And I was lifted up in heart, and thought 
Of all my late-shown prowess in the lists, 
How my strong lance had beaten down the knights. 
So many and famous names ; and never yet 
Had heaven appear'd so blue, nor earth so green. 
For all my blood danced in me, and I knew 
That I should light upon the Holy Grail. 

. ^ Thereafter, the dark warning of our King, 
That most of us would follow wandering fires. 
Came like a driving gloom across my mind. 
Then every evil word I had spoken once. 
And every evil thought I had thought of old. 



56 THE HOLY GEAIL. 

And every evil deed I ever did, 

Awoke and cried, " This Quest is not for thee." 

And lifting up mine eyes, I found myself 

Alone, and in a land of sand and thorns. 

And I was thirsty even unto death ; 

And I, too, cried, " This Quest is not for thee.'' 

* And on I rode, and when I thought my thirst 
Would slay me, saw deep lawns, and then a brook, 
With one sharp rapid, where the crisping white 
Play'd ever back upon the sloping wave. 
And took both ear and eye ; and o'er the brook 
Were apple-trees, and apples by the brook 
Fallen, and on the lawns. " I will rest here," 
I said, " I am not worthy of the Quest ; " 
But even while I drank the brook, and ate 
The goodly apples, all these things at once 
Fell into dust, and I was left alone, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 57 

And thirsting, in a land of sand and thorns. 

* And then behold a woman at a door 
Spinning ; and fair the house whereby she sat, 
And kind the woman's eyes and innocent, 
And all her bearing gracious ; and she rose 
Opening her arms to meet me, as who should say, 
" Rest here ; " but when I touched her, lo ! she, too, 
Fell into dust and nothing, and the house 
Became no better than a broken shed. 
And in it a dead babe ; and also this 
Fell into dust, and I was left alone. 

' ^ And on I rode, and greater was my thirst. 
Then flash'd a yellow gleam across the world, 
And where it smote the plowshare in the field, 
The plowman left his plowing, and fell down 
Before it ; where it glitter' d on her pail. 



58 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

The milkmaid left her milking, and fell down 
Before it, and I knew not why, but thought 
" The sun is rising," tho' the sun had risen. 
Then was I ware of one that on me moved 
In golden armour with a crown of gold 
About a casque all jewels ; and his horse 
In golden armour jewell'd everywhere : 
And on the splendour came, flashing me blind ; 
And seem'd to me the Lord of all the world, 
Being so huge. But when I thought he meant 
To crush me, moving on me, lo ! he, too. 
Opened his arms to embrace me as he came. 
And up I went and touch'd him, and he, too, 
Fell into dust, and I was left alone 
And wearying in a land of sand and thorns. 

' And I rode on and found a mighty hill. 
And OIL the top, a city wall'd : the spires 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 59 

Prick'd with incredible pinnacles into heaven. 
And by the gateway stirr'd a crowd ; and these 
Cried to me climbing, " Welcome, Percivale ! 
Thou mightiest and thou purest among men ! " 
And glad was I and clomb, but found at top 
No man, nor any voice. And thence I past 
Far thro' a ruinous city, and I saw 
That man had once dwelt there ; but there I found 
Only one man of an exceeding age. 
" Where is that goodly company/' said I, 
" That so cried out upon meV and he had 
Scarce any voice to answer, and yet gasp'd 
"Whence and what art thouT' and even as he 
W^ spoke 

Fell into dust, and disappear'd, and I 
Was left alone once more, and cried in grief, 
" Lo, if I find the Holy Grail itself 
And touch it, it will crumble into dust." 



60 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

* And thence I dropt into a lowly vale, 
Low as the hill was high, and where the vale 
Was lowest, found a chapel and thereby 

A holy hermit in a hermitage, 

To whom I told my phantoms, and he said : 

* " son, thou hast not true humility, 
The highest virtue, mother of them all ; 

For when the Lord of all things made Himself 
Naked of glory for His mortal change, 
' Take thou my robe,' she said, ' for all is thine,' 
And all her form shone forth with sudden light 
So that the angels were amazed, and she 
Followed him down, and like a flying star 
Led on the gray-hair' d wisdom of the east ; 
But her thou hast not known : for what is this 
Thou thoughtest of thy prowess and thy sins ? 
Thou hast not lost thyself to save thyself 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 61 

As Galahad." When the hermit made an end, 
In silver armour suddenly Galahad shone 
Before us, and against the chapel door 
Laid lance, and enter'd, and we knelt in prayer. 
And there the hermit slaked my burning thirst 
And at the sacring of the mass I saw 
The holy elements alone ; but he : 
" Saw ye no more ? I, Galahad, saw the Grail, 
The Holy Grail, descend upon the shrine : 
I saw the fiery face as of a child 
That smote itself into the bread, and went ; 
And hither am I come ; and never yet 
Hath what thy sister taught me first to see, 
'This Holy Thing, fail'd from my side, nor come 
Cover'd, but moving with me night and day, 
Fainter by day, but always in the night 
Blood-red, and sliding down the blacken'd marsh 
Blood-red, and on the naked mountain top 



62 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Blood-red, and in the sleeping mere below 
Blood-red. And in the strength of this I rode, 
Shattering all evil customs everywhere, 
And past thro' Pagan realms, and made them mine, 
And clash'd with Pagan hordes, and bore them down, 
And broke thro' all, and in the strength of this 
Come victor. But my time is hard at hand. 
And hence I go ; and one will crown me king 
Far in the spiritual city ; and come thou, too, 
For thou shalt see the vision when I go.'^ 

' While thus he spake, his eye, dwelling on mine. 
Drew me, with power upon me, till I grew 
One with him, to believe as he believed. 
Then, when the day began to wane, we went. 

' There rose a hill that none but man could climb, 
Scarr'd with a hundred wintry watercourses — 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Storm at the top, and when we gain'd it, storm 

Kound us and death ; for every moment glanced 

His silver arms and gloomed : so quick and thick 

The lightnings here and there to left and right 

Struck, till the dry old trunks about us, dead. 

Yea, rotten with a hundred years of death. 

Sprang into fire : and at the base we found 

On either hand, as far as eye could see, 

A great black swamp and of an evil smell. 

Part black, part whiten'd with the bones of men, 

Not to be crost, save that some ancient king 

Had built a way, where, link'd with many a bridge, 

A thousand piers ran into the great Sea. 

And Galahad fled along them bridge by bridge. 

And every bridge as quickly as he crost 

Sprang into fire and vanish'd, tho' I yeam'd 

To follow ; and thrice above him all the heavens 

Open'd and blazed with thunder such as seem'd 



6i THE HOLT GRAIL. 

Shoutings of all the sons of God : and first 
At once I saw him far on the great Sea, 
In silver-shining armour starry-clear ; 
And o'er his head the holy vessel hung 
Clothed in white samite or a luminous cloud. 
And with exceeding swiftness ran the boat 
If boat it were — I saw not whence it came. 
And when the heavens open'd and blazed again 
Eoaring, I saw 'him like a silver star — 
And had he set the sail, or had the boat 
Become a living creature clad with wings 1 
And o'er his head the holy vessel hung 
Eedder than any rose, a joy to me. 
For now I knew the veil had been withdrawn. 
Then in a moment when they blazed again 
Opening, I saw the least of little stars 
Down on the waste, and straight beyond the star 
I saw the spiritual city and all her spires 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 65 

And gateways in a glory like one pearl — 
No larger, tho' the goal of all the saints — 
Strike from the sea ; and from the star there shot 
A rose-red sparkle to the city, and there 
Dwelt, and I knew it was the Holy Grail, 
Which never eyes on earth again shall see. 
Then fell the floods of heaven drowning the deep. 
And how my feet recross'd the deathful ridge 
No memory in me lives ; but that I touch'd 
The chapel-doors at dawn I know ; and thence 
Taking my war-horse from the holy man, 
Glad that no phantom vext me more, return d 
To whence I came, the gate of xirthur' s wars.' 

* brother,' ask'd Ambrosius, — * for in sooth 
These ancient books — and they would win thee — teem, 
Only I find not there this Holy Grail, 
With miracles and marvels like to these, 

p 



66 THE HOLY GRAIU 

Not all unlike ; which often time I read, 
Who read but on my breviary with ease, 
Till my head swims ; and then go forth and pass 
Down to the little thorpe that lies so close, 
And almost plaster'd like a martin's nest 
To these old walls — and mingle with our folk ; 
And knowing every honest face of theirs, 
As well as ever shepherd knew his sheep. 
And every homely secret in their hearts. 
Delight myself with gossip and old wives, 
• And ills and aches, and teethings, lyings-in, 
And mirthful sayings, children of the place. 
That have no meaning half a league away : 
Or lulling random squabbles when they rise, 
ChafFerings and chatterings at the market-cross, 
Eejoice, small man, in this small world of mine. 
Yea, even in their hens and in their eggs — 
brother, saving this Sir Galahad 



THE HOLT GRATL. 67 

Came je on none but phantoms in your quest, 
No man, no woman 1 ' 

Then, Sir Percivale : 
' All men, to one so bound by such a vow, 
And women were as phantoms. 0, my brother. 
Why wilt thou shame me to confess to thee 
How far I falter d from my quest and vow 1 
For after I had lain so many nights 
A bedmate of the snail and eft and snake, 
In grass and burdock, I was changed to wan 
And meagre, and the vision had not come. 
And then I chanced upon a goodly town 
• With one great dwelling in the middle of it ; 
Thither I made, and there was I disarmed 
By maidens each as fair as any flower : 
But when they led me into hall, behold 
The Princess of that castle was the one, 

F 2 



6S THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Brother, and that one only, who had ever 
Made my heart leap ; for when I moved of old 
A slender page about her father s hall, 
And she a slender maiden, all my heart 
Went after her with longing : yet we twain 
Had never kiss'd a kiss, or vow'd a vow. 
And now I came upon her once again, 
And one had wedded her, and he was dead, 
And all his land and wealth and state were hers. 
And while I tarried, every day she set 
A banquet richer than the day before 
By me ; for all her longing and her will 
Was toward me as of old ; till one fair morn, 
I walking to and fro beside a stream 
That flash'd across her orchard underneath 
Her castle-walls, she stole upon my walk. 
And calling me the greatest of all knights, 
Embraced me, and so kiss'd me the first time. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 69 

And gave herself and all her wealth to me. 
Then I remember'd Arthur's warning word, 
That most of us would follow wandering fires, 
And the Quest faded in my heart. Anon, 
The heads of all her people drew to me, 
AVith supplication both of knees and tongue : 
^'We have heard of thee : thou art our gi-eatest knight, 
Our Lady says it, and we w^ell believe : 
AYed thou our Lady, and rule over us. 
And thou shalt be as Arthur in our land." 
me, my brother ! but one night my vow 
Burnt me within, so that I rose and fled. 
But wail'd and wept, and hated mine own self, 
'And ev'n the Holy Quest, and all but her; 
Then after I was join'd with Galahad 
Cared not for her, nor anything upon earth.' 

Then said the monk, * Poor men, when yule is cold. 



70 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Must be content to sit by little fires. 

And this am I, so tbat ye care for me 

Ever so little ; yea, and blest be Heaven 

That brought thee here to this poor house of ours, 

Where all the brethren are so hard, to warm 

My cold heart with a friend : but the pity 

To find thine own first love once more — to hold, 

Hold her a wealthy bride within thine arms, 

Or all but hold, and then — cast her aside, 

Foregoing all her sweetness, like a weed. 

For we that want the warmth of double life, 

We that are plagued with dreams of something 

sweet 
Beyond all sweetness in a life so rich, — 
Ah, blessed Lord, I speak too earthlywise, 
Seeing I never stray'd beyond the cell, 
But live like an old badger in his earth, 
With earth about him eveiywhere, despite 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 71 

All fast and penance. Saw ye none beside, 
None of your knights 1 ' 

*Yea so,' said Percivale : 
^ One night my pathway swerving east, I saw 
The pelican on the casque of our Sir Bors 
All in the middle of the rising moon : 
And toward him spurr d and haiPd him, and he me, 
And each made joy of either ; then he ask'd, 
*^ Where is he? hast thou seen him — Lancelot?" 

" Once," 
Said good Sir Bors, " he dash'd across me — mad, 
And maddening what he rode : and when I cried, 
* Ridest thou then so hotly on a quest 
So holy ? ' Lancelot shouted, ^ Stay me not ! 
I have been the sluggard, and I ride apace. 
For now there is a lion in the way.' 
So vanish'd." 



72 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

' Then Sir Bors had ridden on 
Softly, and soiTOwing for our Lancelot, 
Because his former madness, once the talk 
And scandal of our table, had return'd ; 
For Lancelot's kith and kin so worship him 
That ill to him is ill to them ; to Bors 
Beyond the rest : he well had been content 
Not to have seen, so Lancelot might have seen, 
The Holy Cup of healing ; and, indeed. 
Being so clouded with his grief and love. 
Small heart was his after the Holy Quest : 
If God w^ould send the vision, w^ell : if not, 
The Quest and he were in the hands of heaven. 

' And then, with small adventure met. Sir Bors 
Rode to the lonest tract of all the realm. 
And found a people there among their crags, 
Our race and blood, a remnant that were left 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 73 

Paynim amid their circles, and the stones 

They pitch up straight to heaven : and their wise 

men 
Were strong in that old magic which can trace 
The wandering of the stars, and scoff' d at him 
And this high Quest as at a simple thing : 
Told him he follow' d — almost Arthur's words — 
A mocking fire : *'what other fire than he. 
Whereby the blood beats, and the blossom blows, 
And the sea rolls, and all the world is warm'd 1 " 
And when his answer chafed them, the rough crowd, 
Hearing he had a difference with their priests, 
Seized him, and bound and plunged him into a cell 
Of great piled stones j and lying bounden there 
In darkness thro' innumerable hours 
He heard the hollow-ringing heavens sweep 
Over him, till by miracle — what else ? — 
Heavy as it was, a great stone slipt and fell, 



74 THE HOLY GR2VIL. 

Such as no wind could move : and thro' the gap 
Glimmer d the streaming scud : then came a night 
Still as the day was loud ; and thro' the gap 
The seven clear stars of Arthur's Table Round — 
For, brother, so one night, because they roll 
Thro' such a round in heaven, we named the stars. 
Rejoicing in ourselves and in our king — 
And these, like bright eyes of familiar friends, 
In on him shone, " And then to me, to me," 
Said good Sir Bors, " beyond all hopes of mine. 
Who scarce had pray'd or ask'd it for myself — 
Across the seven clear stars — grace to me — 
In colour like the fingers of a hand 
Before a burning taper, the sweet Grail 
Glided and past, and close upon it peal'd 
A sharp quick thunder.'' Afterwards a maid. 
Who kept our holy faith among her kin 
In secret, entering, loosed and let him go.' 



THE HOLT GRAIL. 

To whom the monk : ' And I remember now 
That pelican on the casque : Sir Bors it was 
Who spake so low and sadly at our board ; 
And mighty reverent at our grace was he : 
A square-set man and honest ; and his eyes, 
An out-door sign of all the warmth within, 
Smiled with his lips — a smile beneath a cloud, 
But heaven had meant it for a sunny one : 
Ay, ay. Sir Bors, who else ? But when ye reach'd 
The city, found ye all your knights retum'd, 
Or was there sooth in Arthur's prophecy, 
Tell me, and what said each, and what the King 1 ' 

Then answer d Percivale : * And that can I, 
Brother, and truly ; since the living words 
Of so great men as Lancelot and our King 
Pass not from door to door and out again. 
But sit within the house. 0, when we reach'd 



76 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

The city, our horses stumbling as they trode 
On heaps of ruin, hornless unicorns, 
Crack'd basilisks, and splinter'd cockatrices, 
And shatter'd talbots, which had left the stones 
Eaw, that they fell from, brought us to the hall. 

' And there sat Arthur on the dais-throne, 
And those that had gone out upon the Quest, 
Wasted and worn, and but a tithe of them, 
And those that had not, stood before the King. 
Who, when he saw me, rose, and bade me hail, 
Saying, " A w^elfare in thine eye reproves 
Our fear of some disastrous chance for thee 
On hill, or plain, at sea, or flooding ford. 
So fierce a gale made havock here of late 
Among the strange devices of our kings ; 
Yea, shook this newer, stronger hall of ours. 
And from the statue Merlin moulded for us 



THE HOLT GRAIL. 77 

Half- wrench' d a golden wing ; but now — the quest, 
This vision — hast thou seen the Holy Cup, 
That Joseph brought of old to Glastonbury ] " 

' So when I told him all thyself hast heard, 
Ambrosius, and my fresh but fixt resolve 
To pass away into the quiet life, 
He answer d not, but, sharply turning, ask*d 
Of Gawain, " Gawain, was this Quest for thee 1 " 

' " Nay, lord," said Gawain, " not for such as I. 
Therefore I communed with a saintly man. 
Who made me sure the Quest was not for me ; 
'For I was much awearied of the Quest : 
But found a silk pavilion in a field. 
And merry maidens in it ; and then this gale 
Tore my pavilion from the tenting-pin, 
And blew my merry maidens all about 



78 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

With all discomfort ; yea, and but for this, 

My twelvemonth and a day were pleasant to me." 

' He ceased ; and Arthur turn'd to whom at first 
He saw not, for Sir Bors, on entering, push'd 
Athwart the throng to Lancelot, caught his hand. 
Held it, and there, half-hidden by him, stood. 
Until the King espied him, saying to him, 
" Hail, Bors ! if ever loyal man and true 
Could see it, thou hast seen the Grail;" and 

Bors, 
" Ask me not, for I may not speak of it, 
I saw it : " and the tears were in his eyes. 

* Then there remain'd but Lancelot, for the rest 
Spake but of sundry perils in the storm ; 
Perhaps, like him of Cana in Holy Writ, 
Our Arthur kept his best until the last ; 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 79 

"Thou, too, my Lancelot," ask'd the King, "my 

friend, 
Our mightiest, hath this Quest avail'd for thee 1 '* 

^"Our mightiest!" ajiswcr'd Lancelot, with a gi'oan; 
" King ! " — and when he paused, methought I spied 
A dying fire of madness in his eyes — 
** King, my friend, if friend of thine I be. 
Happier are those that welter in their sin, 
Swine in the mud, that cannot see for slime. 
Slime of the ditch : but in me lived a sin 
So strange, of such a kind, that all of pure, 
Noble, and knightly in me twined and clung 
Round that one sin, until the wholesome flower 
And poisonous grew together, each as each, 
Not to be pluck'd asunder ; and when thy knights 
Sware, I sware with them only in the hope 
That could I touch or see the Holy Grail 



so THE HOLY GRAIL. 

They might be pluck' d asunder. Then I spake 

To one most holy saint, who wept and said, 

That save they could be pluck'd asunder, all 

My quest were but in vain ; to whom I vow'd 

That I w^ould work according as he will'd. 

And forth I went, and while I yearn' d and strove 

To tear the twain asunder in my heart, 

My madness came upon me as of old, 

And w^.hipt me into waste fields fiir away ; 

There was I beaten down by little men, 

]\Iean knights, to whom the moving of my sword 

And shadow of my spear had been enow 

To scare them from me once ; and then I came 

All in my folly to the naked shore, 

Wide flats, where nothing but coarse grasses grew ; 

But such a blast, my King, began to blow. 

So loud a blast along the shore and sea. 

Ye could not hear the waters for the blast, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 81 

Tho' heapt in mounds and ridges all the sea 
Drove like a cataract, and all the sand 
Swept like a river, and the clouded heavens 
Were shaken with the motion and the sound. 
And blackening in the sea-foam sway'd a boat, 
Half-swallow'd in it, anchor'd with a chain ; 
And in my madness to myself I said, 
^ I will embark and I will lose myself, 
And in the great sea wash away my sin.' 
I burst the chain, I sprang into the boat. 
Seven days I drove along the dreary deep. 
And with me drove the moon and all the stars ; 
And the wind fell, and on the seventh night 
I heard the shingle grinding in the surge. 
And felt the boat shock earth, and looking up. 
Behold, the enchanted towers of Carbonek, 
A castle like a rock upon a rock. 
With chasm-like portals open to the sea. 



82 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

And steps that met the breaker ! there was none 

Stood near it but a Hon on each side 

That kept the entry, and the moon was full. 

Then from the boat I leapt, and up the stairs. 

There drew mj sword. With sudden-flaring manes 

Those two great beasts rose upright like a man, 

Each gript a shoulder, and I stood between ; 

And, when I would have smitten them, heard a 

voice, 
* Doubt not, go forward ; if thou doubt, the beasts 
Will tear thee piecemeal.' Then with violence 
The sword was dash'd from out my hand, and fell. 
And up into the sounding hall I past ; 
But nothing in the sounding hall I saw 
No bench nor table, painting on the wall 
Or shield of knight ; only the rounded moon 
Thro' the tall oriel on the rolling sea. 
But always in the quiet house I heard, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 83 

Clear as a lark, high o'er me as a lark, 

A sweet voice singing in the topmost tower 

To the eastward : up I climb'd a thousand steps 

With pain : as in a dream I seem'd to chmb 

For ever : at the last I reached a door, 

A light was in the crannies, and I heard, 

' Glory and joy and honour to our Lord 

And to the Holy Vessel of the Grail' 

Then in my madness I essay' d the door ; 

It gave ; and thro' a stormy glare, a heat 

As from a seventimes-heated furnace, I, 

Blasted and burnt, and blinded as I w^as, 

With such a fierceness that I swoon'd away — 

0, yet methought I saw the Holy Grail, 

All paird in crimson samite, and around 

Great angels, awful shapes, and wings and eyes. 

And but for all my madness and my sin. 

And then my swooning, I had sworn I saw 

o 2 



84 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

That which I saw ; but what I saw was veil'd 
And cover'd ; and this quest was not for me." 

* So speaking, and here ceasing, Lancelot left 
The hall long silent, till Sir Gav/ain — nav, 
Brother, I need not tell thee foolish words, — 
A reckless and irreverent knight was he, 
Now bolden'd by the silence of his King, — 
Well, I will tell thee : " king, my liege," he 

said, 
" Hath Gawain fail'd in any quest of thine 1 
When have I stinted stroke in foughten field ? 
But as for thine, my good friend, Percivale, 
Thy holy nun and thou have driven men mad. 
Yea, made our mightiest madder than our least. 
But by mine eyes and b}^ mine ears I swear, 
I will be deafer than the blue-eyed cat. 
And thrice as blind as any noonday owl, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 85 

To holy virgins in their ecstacies, 
Henceforward." 

* " Deafer," said the blameless King, 
^^ Gawain, and blinder unto holy things 
Hope not to make thyself by idle vows, 
Being too blind to have desire to see. 
But if indeed there came a sign from heaven, 
Blessed are Bors, Lancelot and Percivale, 
For these have seen according to their sight 
For every fiery prophet in old times, 
x\nd all the sacred madness of the bard, 
When God made music thro' tliem, could but speak 
His music by the framework and the chord ; 
And as ye saw it ye have spoken truth. 

' " Nay — but thou errest, Lancelot : never yet 
Could all of true and noble in knioht and man 



S6 THE HOLY GRAIL. 

Twine round one sin, whatever it might be, 
With such a closeness, but apart there grew, 
Save that he were the swine thou spakest of. 
Some root of knighthood and pure nobleness ; 
Whereto see thou, that it may bear its flower. 

■* " And spake I not too truly, my knights ? 
Was I too dark a prophet when I said 
To those who went upon the Holy Quest, 
That most of them would follow wandering fires, 
Lost in the quagmire ? — lost to me and gone. 
And left me gazing at a barren board, 
And a lean Order — scarce returned a tithe — 
And out of those to w^hom the vision came 
My gi'eatest hardly will believe he saw ; 
Another hath beheld it afar off, 
And leaving human wrongs to right themselves, 
Cares but to pass into the silent life. 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 87 

And one hath had the vision face to face, 
And now his chair desires him here in vain, 
However thcj may crown him otherwhere. 

^ " And some among you held, that if the King 
Had seen the sight he would have sworn the vow : 
Xot easily, seeing that the King must guard 
That which he rules, and is but as the hind 
To whom a space of land is given to plough, 
"Who may not wander from the allotted field, 
Before his work be done ; but, being done, 
Let visions of the night or of the day 
Come, as they will ; and many a time they come. 
Until this earth he walks on seems not earth, 
This light that strikes his eyeball is not light, 
This air that smites his forehead is not air 
But vision — yea, his very hand and foot — 
In moments when he feels he cannot die, 



THE HOLY GRAIL. 



And knows Limself no vision to himself, 
Nor the high God a vision, nor that One 
Who rose again : ye have seen what ye have seen." 

* So spake the king : I knew^ not all he meant.' 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 



PELLEAS AND ETTAERE. 



King Arthur made new knights to fill the gap 
Left by the Holy Quest ; and as he sat 
In hall at old Caerleon, the high doors 
Were softly sunder'd, and thro' these a youth, 
Pelleas, and the sweet smell of the fields 
Past, and the sunshine came along with him. 

* Make me thy knight, because I know, Sir King, 
All that belongs to knighthood, and I love,' 
Such was his cry ; for having heard the King 
Had let proclaim a tournament — the prize 



92 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

A golden circlet and a knightly sword, 

Full fain had Pelleas for his lady won 

The golden circlet, for himself the sword : 

And there were those who knew him near the King 

And promised for him : and Arthur made him knight. 

And this new knight, Sir Pelleas of the isles — 
But lately come to his inheritance, 
And lord of many a barren isle was he — 
Riding at noon, a day or twain before. 
Across the forest call'd of Dean, to find 
Caerleon and the King, had felt the sun 
Beat like a strong knight on his helm, and reel'd 
Almost to falling from his horse ; but saw 
Near him a mound of even-sloping side. 
Whereon a hundred stately beeches grew. 
And here and there great hollies under them. 
But for a mile all round was open space. 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 93 

And fern and heath : and slowly Pelleas drew 
To that dim day, then binding his good horse 
To a tree, cast himself down ; and as he lay 
At random looking over the brown earth 
Thro' that green-glooming twilight of the grove, 
It seem'd to Pelleas that the fern without 
Burnt as a living fire of emeralds, 
So that his eyes were dazzled looking at it. 
Then o'er it crost the dimness of a cloud 
Floating, and once the shadow of a bird 
Flying, and then a fawn ; and his eyes closed. 
And since he loved all maidens, but no maid 
In special, half-awake he whisper' d, 'Where? 
where 1 I love thee, tho' I know thee not. 
For fair thou art and pure as Guinevere, 
And I will make thee with my spear and svrord 
As famous — my queen, my Guinevere, 
For I will be thine Arthur when we meet.' 



94 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

Suddenly waken'd with a sound of talk 
And laughter at the limit of the wood, 
And glancing thro' the hoarj boles, he saw, 
Strange as to some old prophet might have seem'd 
A vision hovering on a sea of fire. 
Damsels in divers colours like the cloud 
Of sunset and sunrise, and all of them 
On horses, and the horses richly trapt 
Breast-high in that bright line of bracken stood : 
And all the damsels talk'd confusedly, 
And one was pointing this way, and one that. 
Because the way was lost. 

And Pelleas rose, 
And loosed his horse, and led him to the light 
There she that seem'd the chief among them said, 
* In happy time behold our pilot-star ! 
Youth, we are damsels-ermnt, and we ride, 



PEL LEAS AND ETTARRE. 95 

Arm'd as ye see, to tilt against the knights 
There at Caerleon, but have lost our way : 
To right ] to left 1 straight forward ? back again 1 
Which 1 tell us quickly/ 

; And Pelleas gazing thought, 

I * Is Guinevere herself so beautiful 1 ' 
; For large her violet eyes look'd, and her bloom 

A rosy dawn kindled in stainless heavens, 
; And round her limbs, mature in womanhood, 
\ And slender was her hand and small her shape, 
\ And but for those large eyes, the haunts of scorn, 

I She might have seem'd a toy to trifle with, 

^^ 

^And pass and care no more. But while he gazed 
The beauty of her flesh abash' d the boy. 
As tho' it were the beauty of her soul : 
•For as the base man, judging of the good, 
Puts his own baseness in him by default 



96 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

Of will and nature, so did Pelleas lend 

All the young beauty of his own soul to hers, 

Believing her ; and when she spake to him. 

Stammer d, and could not make her a reply. 

For out of the waste islands had he come. 

Where saving his own sisters he had known 

Scarce any but the women of his isles, 

Eough waives, that laugh' d and scream'd against the 

gulls. 
Makers of nets, and living from the sea. 

Then with a slow smile turn'd the lady round 
And look'd upon her people ; and as w'hen 
A stone is flung into some sleeping tarn. 
The circle widens till it lip the marge. 
Spread the slow smile thro' all her company. 
Three knights were thereamong ; and they too smiled, I 
Scorning him ; for the lady was Ettarre, 






PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 97 

And she was a great lady in her land. 

Again she said, ' wild and of the woods, 
Knowest thou not the fashion of our speech 1 
Or have the Heavens but given thee a fair face. 
Lacking a tongue V 

* damsel,' answer d he, 
^ I woke from dreams ; and coming out of gloom 
Was dazzled by the sudden light, and crave 
Pardon : but will ye to Caerleon 1 I 
Go likewise : shall I lead you to the King 1 " 

' Lead then,' she said ; and thro' the woods they 
went. 
And while they rode, the meaning in his eyes, 
His tenderness of manner, and chaste awe, 
His broken utterances and bashfulness, 

H 



98 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

^YeYe all a burthen to her, and in her heart 
She miitter'd, ' I have lighted on a fool, 
Kaw, yet so stale ! ' But since her mind was bent 
On hearing, after trumpet blown, her name 
And title, * Queen of Beauty,' in the lists 
Cried — and beholding him so strong, she thought 
That peradventure he will fight for me, 
And w^in the circlet : therefore flatter'd him, 
Being so gracious, that he well-nigh deem'd 
His wish by hers was echo'd ; and her knights 
And all her damsels too were gracious to him, 
For she was a great lady. 

And when they reach'd 
Caerleon, ere they past to lodging, she, 
Taking his hand, ' the strong hand,' she said, 
* See ! look at mine ! but wilt thou fight for me. 
And mn me this fine circlet, Pelleas, 



PELLEAS AND ETTAERE. 99 

That I may love thee ? ' 

Then his helpless heart 
Leapt, and he cried * Ay ! wilt thou if I win V 
* Ay, that will I,' she answer' d, and she laugh'd. 
And straitly nipt the hand, and flung it from her ; 
Then glanced askew at those three knights of hers, 
Till all her ladies laugh'd along with her. 

' happy world,' thought Pelleas, * all, meseems, 
Are happy ; I the happiest of them all.' 
Nor slept that night for pleasure in his blood. 
And green wood-ways, and eyes among the leaves j 
Then being on the morrow knighted, sware 
To love one only. And as he came away, 
The men who met him rounded on their heels 
And wonder' d after him, because his face 
Shone like the countenance of a priest of old 

H 2 



100 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

Against the flame about a sacrifice 

Kindled by fire from heaven : so glad was he. 

Then Arthur made vast banquets, and strange 

knights 
From the four winds came in : and each one sat, 
Tho' served with choice from air, land, stream, 

and sea. 
Oft in mid-banquet measuring with his eyes 
His neighbour's make and might : and Pelleas look'd 
Noble among the noble, for he dream'd 
His lady loved him, and he knew himself 
Loved of the King : and him his new-made knight 
Worshipt, whose lightest whisper moved him more 
Than all the ranged reasons of the world. 

Then blush'd and brake the morning of the jousts, 
And this was call'd ' The Tournament of Youth : ' 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 101 

For Arthur, loving his young knight, withheld 
His older and his mightier from the lists. 
That Pelleas might obtain his lady's love. 
According to her promise, and remain 
Lord of the tourney. And Arthur had the jousts 
Down in the flat field by the shore of Usk 
Holden : the gilded parapets were crown'd 
With faces, and the great tower fiU'd with eyes 
Up to the summit, and the trumpets blew. 
There all day long Sir Pelleas kept the field 
With honour : so by that strong hand of his 
The sword and golden circlet were achieved. 

Then rang the shout his lady loved : the heat 
Of pride and glory fired her face ; her eye 
Sparkled ; she caught the circlet from his lance, 
And there before the people crown'd herself : 
So for the last time she was gracious to him. 



102 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

Then at Caerleon for a space — lier look 
Bright for all others, cloudier on her knight — 
Linger d EttaiTe : and seeing Pelleas droop, 
Said Guineyere, * We marvel at thee much, 

damsel, wearing this unsunny face 

To him who won thee glory ! ' And she said, 
^ Had ye not held your Lancelot in your bower, 
]\ry Queen, he had not won.' Whereat the Queen, 
As one whose foot is bitten by an ant. 
Glanced down upon her, turn'd and went her way. 

But after, when her damsels, and herself, 
And those three knights all set their faces home, 
Sir Pelleas follow'd. She that saw him cried, 
' Damsels — and yet I should be shamed to say it — 

1 cannot bide Sir Baby. Keep him back 
Among yourselves. Would rather that we had 
Some rough old knight who knew the worldly way, 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 103 

Albeit grizzlier than a bear, to ride 

And jest with : take him to you, keep him off, 

And pamper him with papmeat, if ye will, 

Old milky fables of the wolf and sheep, 

Such as the wholesome mothers tell their boys. 

Nay, should ye try him with a meny one • 

To find his mettle, good : and if he fly us, 

Small matter ! let him.' This her damsels heard, 

And mindful of her small and cruel hand. 

They, closing round him thro' the journey home, 

Acted her best, and always from her side 

Restrain' d him with all manner of device. 

So that he could not come to speech with her. 

And when she gain'd her castle, upsprang the bridge, 

Down rang the grate of iron thro' the groove. 

And he was left alone in open field. 

* These be the ways of ladies,' Pelleas thought. 



104 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

' To those who love them, trials of our faith. 
Yea, let her prove me to the uttermost, 
For loyal to the uttermost am I.' 
So made his moan ; and, darkness falling, sought 
A priory not far off, there lodged, but rose 
With morning every day, and, moist or dry, 
Full-arm'd upon his charger all day long 
Sat by the walls, and no one open'd to him. 

And this persistance turn'd her scorn to wrath. 
Then calling her three knights, she charged them, 

' Out ! 
And drive him from the walls.' And out they came. 
But Pelleas overthrew them as they dash'd 
Against him one by one ; and these return' d, 
But still he kept his watch beneath the wall. 

Thereon her wrath became a hate ; and once, 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 105 

A week beyond, while walking on the walls 
With her three knights, she pointed downward, ' Look, 
He haunts me — I cannot breathe — besieges me ; 
Down ! strike him ! put my hate into your strokes, 
And drive him from my walls.' And down they went, 
And Pelleas overthrew them one by one ; 
And from the tower above him cried Ettarre, 
* Bind him, and bring him in.' 

i 

He heard her voice ; 
Then let the strong hand, which had overthrown 
Her minion-knights, by those he overthrew 
3e bounden straight, and so they brought him in. 

Then when he came before Ettarre, the sight 
Of her rich beauty made him at one glance 
More bondsman in his heart than in his bonds. 
Yet with good cheer he spake, * Behold me, Lady, 



106 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

A prisoner, and the vassal of thy will ; 

And if thou keep me in thy donjon here, 

Content am I so that I see thy face 

But once a day : for I have sworn my vows, 

And thou hast given thy promise, and I know 

That all these pains are trials of my faith, 

And that thyself when thou hast seen me straind 

And sifted to the utmost, wilt at length 

Yield me thy love and know me for thy knight,' 

Then she began to rail so bitterly, 
With all her damsels, he was stricken mute ; 
But when she mock'd his vows and the great 

King, 
Lighted on w^ords : * For pity of thine own self, 
Peace, Lady, peace : is he not thine and mine V 
' Thou fool,' she said, * I never heard his voice 
But long'd to break away. Unbind him now, 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 107 

And thrust him out of doors ; for save he be 
Fool to the midmost marrow of his bones, 
He will return no more.' And those, her three, 
Laugh'd, and unbound, and thrust him from the 
gate. 

And after this, a week beyond, again 
She call'd them, saying, * There he watches yet, 
There like a dog before his master's door ! 
Kick'd, he returns : do ye not hate him, ye 1 
Ye know yourselves : how can ye bide at peace, 
Affronted with his fulsome innocence? 
' Are ye but creatures of the board and bed, 
No men to strike ? Fall on him all at once, 
And if ye slay him I reck not : if ye fail, 
Grive ye the slave mine order to be bound. 
Bind him as heretofore, and bring him in : 
It may be ye shall slay him in his bonds. 



108 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

She spake; and at her will they couch'd their 



Three against one : and Gawain passing by, 

Bound upon solitary adventure, saw 

Low down beneath the shadow of those towers 

A villainy, three to one : and thro' his heart 

The fire of honour and all noble deeds 

Flash' d, and he call'd, ' I strike upon thy side — 

The caitiffs 1 ' * Nay,' said Pelleas, * but forbear ; 

He needs no aid who doth his lady's will.' 

So Gawain, looking at the villainy done, 
Forbore, but in his heat and eagerness 
Trembled and quiver'd, as the dog, withheld 
A moment from the vermin that he sees 
Before him, shivers, ere he springs and kills. 

And Pelleas overthrew them, one to three j 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 109 

And tliey rose up, and bound, and brought him in. 
Then first her anger, leaving Pelleas, burn'd 
Full on her knights in many an evil name 
Of craven, weakling, and thrice-beaten hound : 
* Yet, take him, ye that scarce are fit to touch, 
Far less to bind, your victor, and thrust him out, 
And let who will release him from his bonds. 
And if he comes again ' — there she brake short ; 
And Pelleas answered, * Lady, for indeed 
I loved you and I deem'd you beautiful, 
I cannot brook to see your beauty marr'd 
Thro' evil spite : and if ye love me not, 
I cannot bear to dream you so forsworn : 
I had liefer ye were worthy of my love, 
Than to be loved again of you — farewell ; 
And tho' ye kill my hope, not yet my love. 
Vex not yourself : ye will not see me more.' 



110 PELLEAS AND ETTARRB. 

While thus he spake, she gazed upon the man 
Of princely bearing, tho' in bonds, and thought, 

* Why have I push'd him from me 1 this man loves, 
If love there be : yet him I loved not. Why 1 

I deem'd him fool ? yea, so ? or that in him 
A something — was it nobler than myself 1 — 
Seem'd my reproach ? He is not of my kind. 
He could not love me, did he know me well. 
Nay, let him go — and quickly.'' And her knights 
Laugh'd not, but thrust him bounden out of door. 

Forth sprang Gawain, and loosed him from his bonds. 
And flung them o'er the walls ; and afterward, 
Shaking his hands, as from a lazar's rag, 

* Faith of my body,' he said, ^ and art thou not— 
Yea thou art he, whom late our Arthur made 
Knight of his table j yea and he that won 

The circlet? wherefore hast thou so defamed 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. Ill 

Thy brotherhood in me and all the rest, 

As let these caitiiFs on thee work their will ? ' 

And Pelleas answer'd, * 0, their wills are hers 
For whom I won the circlet ; and mhie, hers, 
Thus to be bounden, so to see her face, 
Marr d tho' it be with spite and mockery now, 
Other than when I found her in the woods ; 
And tho' she hath me bounden but in spite, 
And all to flout me, when they bring me in, 
Let me be bounden, I shall see her face ; 
Else must I die thro' mine unhappiness.' 

And Gawain answer'd kindly tho' in scorn, 
^ Wh}^, let my lady bind me if she will, 
And let my lady beat me if she will : 
But an she send her delegate to thrall 
These fighting hands of mine —Christ kill me then 



112 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

But I will slice him handless by the wrist, 
And let my lady sear the stump for him, 
Howl as he may. But hold me for your friend : 
Come, ye know nothing : here I pledge my troth. 
Yea, by the honour of the Table Kound, 
I will be leal to thee and work thy work, 
And tame thy jailing princess to thine hand. 
Lend me thine horse and arms, and I will say 
That I have slain thee. She will let me in 
To hear the manner of thy fight and fall ; 
Then, when I come within her counsels, then 
From prime to vespers will I chant thy praise 
As prowest knight and truest lover, more 
Than any have sung thee living, till she long 
To have thee back in lusty life again. 
Not to be bound, save by white bonds and warm, 
Dearer than freedom. Wherefore now thy horse 
And armour : let me go : be comforted ; 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE, 113 

Give me three dajs to melt her fancy, and hope 
The third night hence will bring thee news of 
gold,' 

Then Pelleas lent his horse and all his arms, 
Saving the goodly sword, his prize, and took 
Gawain's, and said * Betray me not, but help — 
Art thou not he whom men call light-of-love ? ' 

* Ay,' said Gawain, ' for women be so light/ 
Then bounded forward to the castle walls. 
And raised a bugle hanging from his neck, 
And winded it, and that so musically 
That all the old echoes hidden in the wall 
Rang out like hollow woods at huntingtide. 



I 



Up ran a score of damsels to the tower ; 
.vaunt,' they cried, ' our lady loves thee not.' 



114 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

But Gawain lifting up his visor said, 
^ Gawain am I, Gawain of Arthur's court, 
And I have slain this Pelleas whom ye hate : 
Behold his horse and armour. Open gate, 
And I will make you merry.' 

And down they ran, 
Her damsels, crying to their lady, ^ Lo ! 
Pelleas is dead — he told us — he that hath 
His horse and armour : will ye let him in ? 
He slew him ! Gaw^ain, Gawain of the court. 
Sir Gawain — there he waits below the wall, 
Blowing his bugle as who should say him nay,' 

And so, leave given, straight on thro' open door 
Kode Gawain, whom she greeted courteously. 
* Dead, is it so ? ' she ask'd. * Ay, ay,' said he, 
' And oft in dying cried upon your name.' 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 115 

• Pity on liiin/ she answer'd, ' a good knight, 
But never let me bide one hour at peace.' 

* Ay,' thought Gawain, * and ye be fair enow : 
But I to your dead man have given my troth, 
That whom ye loathe him will I make you love.' 

So those three days, aimless about the land, 
Lost in a doubt, Pel leas wandering 
Waited, until the third night brought a moon 
With promise of large light on woods and ways. 

The night was hot : he could not rest, but rode 
' Ere midnight to her walls, and bound his horse 
Hard by the gates. Wide open were the gates. 
And no watch kept ; and in thro' these he past. 
And heard but his own steps, and his own heart 
Beating, for nothing moved but his own self, 
And his own shadow. Then he crost the court, 



116 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

And saw the postern portal also wide 
Yawning ; and up a slope of garden, all 
Of roses white and red, and wild ones mixt 
And overgrowing them, went on, and found, 
Here too, all hush'd below the mellow moon, 
Save that one rivulet from a tiny cave 
Came lightening downward, and so spilt itself 
Among the roses, and was lost again. 

Then was he ware that white pavilions rose, 
Three from the bushes, gilden-peakt : in one. 
Red after revel, droned her lurdane knights 
Slumbering, and their three squires across their 
feet : 

In one, their malice on the placid lip 
Froz'n by sweet sleep, four of her damsels lay : 
And in the third, the circlet of the jousts 
Bound on her brow, were Gawain and Ettarre. 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRB. 117 

Back, as a hand that pushes thro' the leaf 
To find a nest and feels a snake, he drew : 
Back, as a coward slinks from what he fears 
To cope with, or a traitor proven, or hound 
Beaten, did Pelleas in an utter shame 
Creep with his shadow thro' the court again, 
Fingering at his sword-handle until he stood 
There on the castle-bridge once more, and thought, 

* I will go back, and slay them where they lie.' 

And so went back and seeing them yet in sleep 
Said, ' Ye, that so dishallow the holy sleep, 
' Your sleep is death,' and drew the sword, and thought, 

* What ! slay a sleeping knight 1 the King hath bound 
And sworn me to this brotherhood ; ' again, 

* Alas that ever a knight should be so false.' 
Then turn'd, and so return'd, and groaning laid 
The naked sword athwart their naked throats. 



118 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

There left it, and them sleeping ; and she lay, 
The circlet of the tourney round her brows, 
And the sword of the tourney across her throat. 

And forth he past, and mounting on his horse 
Stared at her towers that, larger than themselves 
In their own darkness, throng' d into the moon. 
Then crush'd the saddle with his thighs, and 

clench' d 
His hands, and madden'd with himself and moan'd : 

* Would they have risen against me in their blood 
At the last day? I might have answer'd them 
Even before high God. towers so strong, 
Huge, solid, would that even while I gaze 
The crack of earthquake shivering to your base 
Split you, and Hell burst up your harlot roofs 
Bellowing, and charr'd you thro' and thro' within. 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 119 

Black as the harlot's heart — hollow as a skull ! 
Let the fierce east scream thro' your eyelet-holes, 
And whirl the dust of harlots round and round 
In dung and nettles ! hiss, snake — I saw him there- 
Let the fox bark, let the wolf yell. Who yells 
Here in the still sweet summer night, but I — 
I, the poor Pelleas whom she calPd her fool ? 
Fool, beast — he, she, or 1 1 myself most fool ; 
Beast too, as lacking human wit — disgraced, 
Dishonour d all for trial of true love — 
Love ? — we be all alike : only the king 
Hath made us fools and liars. noble vows ! 
' great and sane and simple race of brutes 
That own no lust because they have no law ! 
For why should I have loved her to my shame ] 
I loathe her, as I loved her to my shame. 
I never loved her, I but lusted for her — 
Away — ' 



120 PELLBAS AND ETTARRE. 

He dash'd the rowel into his horse, 
And bounded forth and vanish'd thro' the night. 

Then she, that felt the cold touch on her throat, 
Awaking knew the sword, and turn'd herself 
To Gawain : ' Liar, for thou hast not slain 
This Pelleas ! here he stood and might have slain 
Me and thyself.' And he that tells the tale 
Says that her ever-veering fancy turn'd 
To Pelleas, as the one true knight on earth, 
And only lover ; and thro' her love her life 
Wasted and pined, desiring him in vain. 

But he by wild and way, for half the night. 
And over hard and soft, striking the sod 
From out the soft, the spark from off the hard, 
Rode till the star above the wakening sun. 
Beside that tower where Percivale was cowl'd. 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 121 

Glanced from the rosy forehead of the dawn. 

For so the words were flashed into his heart 

He knew not whence or wherefore : * sweet star. 

Pure on the virgin forehead of the dawn.' 

And there he would have wept, but felt his eyes 

Harder and drier than a fountain bed 

In summer : thither came the village girls 

And linger' d talking, and they come no more 

Till the sweet heavens have fiU'd it from the heights 

Again with living waters in the change 

Of seasons : hard his eyes ; harder his heart 

Seem'd ; but so w^eary were his limbs, that he, 

<}asping, ' Of Arthur's hall am I, but here. 

Here let me rest and die,' cast himself down, 

And gulph'd his griefs in inmost sleep ; so lay, 

Till shalven by a dream, that Gawain fired 

The hall of Merlin, and the morning star 

Eeel'd in the smoke, brake into flame, and fell. 



122 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

He woke, and being ware of some one nigli, 
Sent hands upon him, as to tear him, crying 

* False ! and I held thee pm-e as Guinevere.* 

But Percivale stood near him and replied, 
'Ami but false as Guinevere is pure ? 
Or art thou mazed with dreams ? or being one 
Of our free-spoken Table hast not heard 
That Lancelot' — there he check'd himself and paused. 

Then fared it with Sir Pelleas as with one 
Who gets a wound in battle, and the sword 
That made it plunges thro' the wound again. 
And pricks it deeper : and he shrank and wail'd, 
' Is the Queen false 1 ' and Percivale was mute. 

* Have any of our Kound Table held their vows V 
And Percivale made answer not a word. 

* Is the king true 1 ' * The king ! ' said Percivale, 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 123 

* Why then let men couple at once with wolves. 
What ! art thou mad 1 ' 

But Pelleas, leaping uj), 
llan thro' the doors and vaulted on his horse 
And fled : small pity upon his horse had he, 
Or on himself, or any, and when he met 
A cripple, one that held a hand for alms — 
Hunch'd as he was, and like an old dwarf-elm 
That turns its back on the salt blast, the boy 
Paused not but overrode him, shouting ^ False, 
And false with Gawain !' and so left him bruised 
And battcr'd, and fled on, and hill and wood 
Went ever streaming by him till the gloom, 
That fullows on the turning of the world. 
Darken d the common path : he twitch'd the reins, 
And made his beast that better knew it, swerve 
Now off it and now on ; but when he saw 



124 PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 

High up in heaven the hall that Merlin built, 
Blackening against the dead-green stripes of even, 

* Black nest of rats,' he groan'd, * ye build too high.' 

Not long thereafter from the city gates 
Issued Sir Lancelot riding airily. 
Warm with a gracious parting from the Queen, 
Peace at his heart, and gazing at a star 
And marvelling what it was : on whom the boy. 
Across the silent seeded meadow-grass 
Borne, clash'd : and Lancelot, saying, * What name 

hast thou 
That ridest here so blindly and so hard ? ' 

* I have no name,' he shouted, ' a scourge am I, 
To lash the treasons of the Table Round.' 

' Yea, but thy name V 'I have many names ' he cried : 
^ I am wrath and shame and hate and evil fame. 
And like a poisonous wind I pass to blast 



PELLEAS AND ETTARRE. 125 

And blaze the crime of Lancelot and the Queen.' 
' First over me,' said Lancelot, ' shalt thou pass.' 
^ Fight therefore,' yell'd the other, and either knight 
Drew back a space, and when they closed, at once 
The weary steed of Pelleas floundering flung 
His rider, who called out from the dark field, 
' Thou art false as Hell : slay me : I have no sword. ' 
Then Lancelot, * Yea, between thy lips — and sharp ; 
But here will I disedge it by thy death.' 
* Slay then,' he shriek'd, * my will is to be slain.* 
And Lancelot, with his heel upon the fall'n. 
Rolling his eyes, a moment stood, then spake : 
^ Rise, weakling ; I am Lancelot ; say thy say.* 

And Lancelot slowly rode his war-horse back 
To Camelot, and Sir Pelleas in brief while 
Caught his unbroken limbs from the dark field. 
And follow' d to the city. It chanced that both 



126 PELLEAS AXD ETTARRE. 

Brake into hall together, worn and pale. 

There with her knights and dames was Gainevere. 

Full wonderingly she gazed on Lancelot 

So soon return d, and then on Pelleas, him 

Who had not greeted her, but cast himself 

Down on a bench, hard-breathing. * Have ye fought ? ' 

She ask'd of Lancelot. ^ Ay, my Queen,' he said. 

* And thou hast overthrown him ] ' ^ Ay, my Queen.' 

Then she, turning to Pelleas, ' young knight, 

Hath the great heart of knighthood in thee fail'd 

So far thou canst not bide, unfrowardly, 

A fall from him ? ' Then, for he answer'd not, 

' Or hast thou other griefs ? If I, the Queen, 

May help them, loose thy tongue, and let me know.' 

But Pelleas lifted up an eye so fierce 

She qnail'd ; and he, hissing ^ I have no sword,' 

Sprang from the door into the dark. The Queeii 

Look'd hard upon her lover, he on her ; 



PELLEAS AND ETTARHE. 127 

And each foresaw the dolorous day to be : 
Aud all talk died, as in a grove all song 
Beneath the shadow of some bird of prey, 
Then a long silence came upon the hall, 
And Modred thought, ' The time is hard at hand. 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR 

That story which the bold Sir Bedivere, 
First made and latest left of all the knights, 
Told, when the man was no more than a voice 
In the white winter of his age, to those 
With whom he dwelt, new faces, other minds, 

Before that last weird battle in the west 
There came on Arthur sleeping, Gawain kill'd 
In Lancelot's war, the ghost of Gawain blown 
Along a wandering wind, and past his ear 
Went shrilling ' Hollow, hollow all delight ! 

K 2 



132 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

Hail, king ! to-morrow thou shalt pass away. 

Farewell ! there is an isle of rest for thee. 

And I am blown along a wandering wind, 

And hollow, hollow, hollow all delight.' 

And fainter onward, like wild birds that change 

Their season in the night and wail their way 

From cloud to cloud, down the long wind the 

dream 
Shrill' d j but in going mingled with dim cries 
Far in the moonlit haze among the hills, 
As of some lonely city sack'd by night, 
When all is lost, and wife and child with wail 
Pass to new lords ; and Arthur woke and call'd, 
' Who spake 1 A dream. light upon the wind. 
Thine, Gawain, was the voice — are these dim cries 
Thine ? or doth all that haunts the waste and 

wild 
Mourn, knowing it will go along with me ? ' 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 133 

This heard the bold Sir Bedivere and spake : 
' me, my king, let pass whatever will, 
Elves, and the harmless glamour of the field ; 
But in their stead thy name and glory cliug 
To all high places like a golden cloud 
For ever : but as yet thou shall not pass. 
Light was Gawain in life, and light in death 
Is Gawain, for the ghost is as the man ; 
And care not thou for dreams from him, but 

rise — 
I hear the steps of Modred in the west, 
And with him many of thy people, and knights 
' Once thine, whom thou hast loved, but grosser grown 
Than heathen, spitting at their vows and thee. 
Right well in heart they know thee for the King. 
Arise, go forth and conquer as of old.' 

Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere : 



134 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

' Far other is this battle ia the west 

"Whereto we move, than when we strove in youth, 

And thrust the heathen from the Eoman wall. 

And shook him thro' the north. Ill doom is mine 

To war against my people and my knights. 

The king who fights his people fights himself. 

And they my knights, who loved me once, the 

stroke 
That strikes them dead is as my de ath to me. 
Yet let us hence, and find or feel a way 
Thro' this blind haze, which ever since I saw 
One lying in the dust at Almesbury, 
Hath folded in the passes of the world.' 

Then rose the King and moved his host by night, 
And ever pushed Sir Mod red, league by league, 
Back to the sunset bound of Lyonnesse — 
A land of old upheaven from the abyss 



* THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 135 

By fire, to sink into the abyss again ; 

Where fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt, 

And the long mountains ended in a coast 

Of ever-shifting sand, and far away 

The phantom circle of a moaning sea. 

There the pursuer could pursue no more, 

And he that fled no further fly the King ; 

And there, that day when the great light of heaven 

Burn'd at his lowest in the rolling year. 

On the waste sand by the waste sea they closed. 

Nor ever yet had Arthur fought a fight 

Like this last, dim, weird battle of the west. 

A deathwhite mist slept over sand and sea : 

Whereof the chill, to him who breathed it, drew 

Down with his blood, till all his heart was cold 

With formless fear ; and ev'n on Arthur fell 

Confusion, since he saw not whom he fought, 

For friend and foe were shadows in the mist. 



136 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

And friend slew friend not knowing whom he slew ; 
And some had visions out of golden youth, 
And some beheld the faces of old ghosts 
Look in upon the battle ; and in the mist 
Was many a noble deed, many a base, 
And chance and craft and strength in single fights, 
And ever and anon with host to host 
Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail 
hewn. 

Shield-breakings, and the clash of brands, the crash 
Of battleaxes on shatter' d helms, and shrieks 
After the Christ, of those who falling down 
Looked up for heaven, and only saw the mist ; 
And shouts of heathen and the traitor knights, 
Oaths, insult, filth, and monstrous blasphemies. 
Sweat, writhings, anguish, labouring of the lungs 
In that close mist, and cryings for the light. 
Moans of the dying, and voices of the dead. 



I THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 137 

Last, as by some one deathbed after wail 
Of suffering, silence follows, or thro' death 
Or deathlike swoon, thus over all that shore, 
Save for some whisper of the seething seas, 
A dead hush fell ; but when the dolorous day 
Grew drearier toward twilight falling, came 
A bitter wind, clear from the North, and blew 
The mist aside, and with that wind the tide 
Rose, and the pale king glanced across the field 
Of battle : but no man was moving there ; 
Nor any cry of Christian heard thereon, 
Nor yet of heathen ; only the wan wave . 
Brake in among dead faces, to and fro 
Swaying the helpless hands, and up and down 
Tumbling the hollow helmets, of the fallen. 
And shiver' d brands that once had fought with Rome, 
And rolling far along the gloomy shores 
The voice of days of old and days to be. 



138 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere, 
And whiter than the mist that all day long 
Had held the field of battle was the King : 

' Hearest thou this great voice that shakes the world, 
And wastes the narrow realm whereon we move, 
And beats upon the faces of the dead, 
My dead, as tho' they had not died for me ?— 
Bedivere, for on my heart hath fall'n 
Confusion, till I know not what I am, 
Nor whence I am, nor whether I be king. 
Behold, I seem but king among the dead.' 

Then spake the bold Sir Bedivere : ' My King, 
King everywhere ! and so the dead have kings, 
There also will I worship thee as king. 
Yet still thy life is whole, and still I live 
Who love thee ; but who hates thee, he that brought 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 139 

The heathen back among us, yonder stands, 
Modred, unharm'd, the traitor of thine house.' 

Then spake the King : ^ My house hath been my 
doom. 
But call not thou this traitor of my house 
Who hath but dwelt beneath one roof with me. 
My house are rather they who sware my vows, 
Yea, even while they brake them, owm'd me king. 
And well for thee, saying in my dark hour, 
When all the purport of my throne hath failed. 
That quick or dead thou boldest me for king. 
'King am I, whatsoever be their cry 
And one last act of kinghood shalt thou see 
Yet, ere I pass.' And uttering this the king 
Made at the man : then Modred smote his liege 
Hard on that helm which many a heathen sword 
Had beaten thin ; while Arthur at one blow, 



140 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

Striking the last stroke with Excalibur, 
Slew him, and all but slain himself, he fell. 

So all day long the noise of battle roU'd 
Among the mountains by the winter sea ; 
Until King Arthur's Table, man by man. 
Had fall'n in Lyonnesse about their lord. 
King Arthur. Then, because his wound was 

deep. 
The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him. 
And bore him to a chapel nigh the field, 
A broken chancel with a broken cross, 
That stood on a dark strait of barren land : 
On one side lay the Ocean, and on one 
Lay a great water, and the moon was full. 

Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere : 
' The sequel of to-day unsolders all 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 141 

. The goodliest fellowship of famous knights 
Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep 
They sleep — the men I loved. I think that we 
Shall never more, at any future time, 
Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds. 
Walking about the gardens and the halls 
Of Camelot, as in the days that were. 
I perish by this people which I made, — 
Tho' Merlin sware that I should come again 
To rule once more ; but let what will be, be. 
I am so deeply smitten thro' the helm 
That without help I cannot last till morn. 
.Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur, 
Which was my pride : for thou rememberest how 
In those old days, one summer noon, an arm 
Rose up from out the bosom of the lake, 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
Holding the sword — and how I row'd across 



142 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

And took it, and liave worn it, like a king j 
And, wheresoever I am sung or told 
In aftertime, this also shall be known : 
But now delay not : take Excalibur, 
And fling him far into the middle mere : 
Watch what thou seest, and lightly bring me 
word.' 

To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere : 
^ It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus, 
Aidless, alone, and smitten thro' the helm — 
A little thing may harm a wounded man j 
Yet I thy hest will all perform at full, 
Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word.' 

So saying, from the ruin'd shrine he stept, 
And in the moon athwart the place of tombs, 
Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men, 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 143 

Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang 
Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down 
By zig-zag paths, and juts of pointed rock. 
Came on the shining levels of the lake. 

There drew he forth the brand Excalibur, 
And o'er him, drawing it, the winter moon. 
Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth 
And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt ; 
For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks, 
Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work 
Of subtlest jewelry. He gazed so long 
. That both his eyes were dazzled as he stood. 
This way and that dividing the swift mind, 
In act to throw : but at the last it seem'd 
Better to leave Excalibur conceal'd 
There in the many-knotted waterflags. 
That whistled stiff and dry about the marge. 



144 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

So strode he back slow to the wounded King. 

Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere : 
' Hast thou perform' d my mission which I gave ? 
What is it thou hast seen ? or what hast heard ? ' 

And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere : 
^ I heard the ripple washing in the reeds, 
And the wild water lapping on the crag.' 

To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale : 
' Thou hast betray'd thy nature and thy name, 
Not rendering true answer, as beseem'd 
Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight : 
For surer sign had followed, either hand, 
Or voice, or else a motion of the mere. 
This is a shameful thing for men to lie. 
Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again, 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 145 

As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing 

I bade thee, watch, and lightly bring me word.' 

Then went Sir Bedivere the second time 
Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere, 
Counting the dewy pebbles, fix'd in thought ; 
But when he saw the wonder of the hilt. 
How curiously and strangely chased, he smote 
His palms together, and he cried aloud : 

* And if indeed I cast the brand away, 
Surely a precious thing, one worthy note, 
Should thus be lost for ever from the earth, 
Which might have pleased the eyes of many men. 
What good should follow this, if this were done ? 
What harm, undone ? Deep harm to disobey, 
Seeing obedience is the bond of rule. 
Were it well to obey then, if a king demand 

L 



146 THE PASSING OF ARTHUK. 

An act unprofitable, against himself 1 

The King is sick, and knows not what he does. 

What record, or what relic of my lord 

Should be to aftertime, but empty breath 

And rumours of a doubt ? But w^ere this kept, 

Stored in some treasui'e-house of mighty kings, 

Some one might show it at a joust of arms^ 

Saying, " King Arthm-'s sword, Excalibur, 

Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake. 

Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deef s 

Upon the hidden bases of the hills." 

So might some old man speak in the aftertime 

To all the people, winning reverence. 

But now" much honour and much fame were lost.' 

So spake he, clouded with his own conceit, 
And hid Excalibur the second time, 
And so strode back slow to the wounded King. 



THE PASSING OF AKTHUR. H7 

Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily : 
' What is it thou hast seen ? or what hast heard I ' 

And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere : 
* I heard the water lapping on the crag, 
And the long ripple washing in the reeds.' 

To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath : 
^ Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue, 
Unknightlj, traitor-hearted ! Woe is me ! 
Authority forgets a dying king, 
Laid widow' d of the power in his eye 
That bow'd the will. I see thee what thou artj 
For thou, the latest-left of all my knights 
In whom should meet the offices of all, 
Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt j 
Either from lust of gojd, or like a girl 
Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes. 

L 2 



148 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice, 

And the third time may prosper, get thee hence : 

But, if thou spare to fling ExcaUbur, 

I will arise and slay thee with my hands.' 

Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran, 
And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged 
Among the bulrush-beds, and clutch' d the sword. 
And strongly wheel'd and threw it. The great brand 
Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon. 
And flashing round and round, and whirl' d in an arch. 
Shot like a streamer of the northern morn. 
Seen where the moving isles of winter shock 
By night, with noises of the northern sea. 
So flash' d and fell the brand Excalibur : 
But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
And caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR 149 

Three times, and drew him under in the mere. 
And lightly went the other to the King. 

Then spoke King Arthur, drawing thicker breath : 
* Now see I by thine eyes that this is done. 
Speak out : what is it thou hast heard, or seen ? ' 

And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere : 
' Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems 
Should blind my purpose, for I never saw. 
Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die, 
Not tho' I live three lives of mortal men, 
So great a miracle as yonder hilt. 
Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him ; 
But when I look'd again, behold an arm. 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
That caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him 
Three times, and drew him under in the mere.' 



150 THE rASSTXG OF ARTHUR. 

And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard 
' My end draws nigh ; 'tis time that I were gone. 
Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight. 
And bear me to the margin ; yet I fear 
My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die/ 

So saying, from the pavement he half rose, 
Slowl}'', with pain, reclining on his arm, 
And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes 
As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere 
Remorsefully regarded thro' his tears. 
And would have spoken, but he found not words ; 
Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee. 
O'er both his shoulders drew the languid hands, 
And rising bore him thro' the place of tombs. 

But, as he walk'd, King Arthur panted hard, 
Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed 



THE PASSIXG OF ARTHUR. 151 

Wlien all the house is mute. So sigh'd the King, 

Muttering and murmuring at his ear ^ Quick, quick 1 

I fear it is too late, and I shall die."' 

But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge, 

Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walk'd, 

Larger than human on the frozen hills. 

He heard the deep behind him, and a cry 

Before. His owni thought drove him like a goad, 

Dry clash'd his harness in the icy caves 

And barren chasms, and all to left and right 

The bare black cliff clang'd round him, as he based 

His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang 

Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels — 

And on a sudden, lo ! the level lake. 

And the long glories of the winter moon. 

Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge, 
Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern, 



152 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

Beneath them ; and descending they were ware 

That all the decks were dense with stately forms, 

Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream — by these 

Three Queens with crowns of gold : and from them rose 

A cry that shiver'd to the tingling stars, 

And, as it were one voice, an agony 

Of lamentation, like a wind that shrills 

All night in a waste land, where no one comes. 

Or hath come, since the making of the world. 

Then murmur' d Arthur, ' Place me in the barge ; ' 
So to the barge they came. There those three Queens 
Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept. 
But she, that rose the tallest of them all 
And fairest, laid his head upon her lap. 
And loosed the shatter' d casque, and chafed his hands. 
And caird him by his name, complaining loud, 
And dropping bitter tears against his brow 



THE PASSING OP ARTHUR. l53 

Striped with dark blood : for all his face was white 
And colourless, and like the wither'd moon 
Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east ; 
And all his greaves and cuisses dash'd with drops 
Of onset ; and the light and lustrous curls — 
That made his forehead like a rising sun 
High from the dais- throne — were parched with dust ; 
Or, clotted into points and hanging loose, 
Mix'd with the knightly growth that fringed his lips. 
So like a shatter' d column lay the King ; 
Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest, 
From spur to plume a star of tournament, 
, Shot thro' the lists at Camelot, and charged 
Before the eyes of ladies and of kings. 

Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere : 
* Ah ! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go ? 
Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes ? 



151 THE PASSING OF ATITHUR. 

For now I see the true old times are dead, 
When every morning brought a nohle chance, 
And every chance brought out a noble kniglit. 
Such times have been not since the light that led 
The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh. 
But now the whole Round Table is dissolved 
Which was an image of the mighty world ; 
And T, the last, go forth companionless, 
And the days darken round me, and the years, 
Among new men, strange faces, other minds.' 

And slowly answered Arthur from the barge : 
^ The old order changeth, yielding place to new, 
And God fulfils himself in many ways, 
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world, 
Comfort thyself : what comfort is in me ? 
I have lived my life, and that which I have done 
May He within himself make pure ! but thou, 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 155 

If thou shoulclst never see my f^xce again, 

Pray for my soul. More things are wrought hy 

prayer 
Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let tliy 

voice 
Rise like a fountain for me night and day. 
For what are men better than sheep or goats 
That nourish a blind life within the brain, 
If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer 
Both for themselves and those who call them friend ? 
For so the whole round earth is every way 
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God. 
. But now farewell. I am going a long way 
With these thou seest — if indeed I go 
(For all my mind is clouded with a doubt) — 
To the island-valley of Avilion ; 
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow. 
Nor ever wind blows loudly ; but it lies 



156 THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 

Deep-meadow' d, happy, fair with orchard-lawns 
And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea, 
Where I will heal me of my grievous wound.' 

So said he, and the barge with oar and sail 
Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan 
That, fluting a wild carol ere her death, 
Euffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood 
With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere 
Eevolving many memories, till the hull 
Look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn. 
And on the mere the wailing died away. 

At length he groan d, and turning slowly clomb 
The last hard footstep of that iron crag; 
Thence mark'd the black hull moving yet, and cried, 
* He passes to be king among the dead, 
And after healing of his grievous wound 



THE PASSING OF ARTHUR. 157 

He comes again ; but — if he come no more — 
me, be yon dark Queens in yon black boat, 
Who shriek'd and wail'd, the three whereat we gazed 
On that high day, when, clothed with living light, 
They stood before his throne in silence, friends 
Of Arthur, who should help him at his need ? ' 

Then from the dawn it seem'd there came, but faint 
As from beyond the limit of the world. 
Like the last echo bom of a great cry. 
Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice 
Around a king returning from his wars. 

Thereat once more he moved about, and clomb 
E'en to the highest he could climb, and saw. 
Straining his eyes beneath an arch of hand, 
Or thought he saw, the speck that bare the king, 
Down that long water opening on the deep 



158 THE PASSIXG OF ARTHUR. 

Somewhere far off, pass on and on, and go 
From less to less and vanish into li^ht. 



And the new sun rose bringing the new year. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 



NORTHERN FARMER. 



NEW STYLE 



Dosn't thou 'ear my 'erse's legs, as they canters 

awaay] * ' 

Proputty, proputty, proputty — that's what I 'ears 'em 

saay. 
Proputty, proputty, proputty — Sam, thou's an ass for 

thy paains : 
Theer's moor sense i' one o' 'is legs nor in all thy 

braains. 



162 NOKTHERN FARMER — NEW STYLE. 

II. 

Woii— tlieer s a craw to pluck wi' tha, Sam : yon's 

parson's 'ouse — 
Dosn't thou knaw that a man mun be eather a man 

or a mouse ? 
Time to think on it then ; for thou'll be twenty to 

weeak.* 
Proputtj, proputty — woa then woa — let ma 'ear 

mysen speak. 

III. 

Me an' thy muther, Sammy, 'as bean a-talkin' o' thee ; 
Thou's been talkin' to muther, an' she bean a tellin' 

it me. 
Thou'll not marry for munny — thou's sweet upo' 

parson's lass — 
Noa — thou'll marry fur luvv — an' we boath on us 

thinks tha an ass. 

* This week. 



NORTHERN FARMER — NEW STYLE. 163 

IV. 

Seea'd her todaay goa by — Saaint's-daay — they was 

ringing the bells. 
She's a beauty thou thinks — an' soa is scoors o' gells, 
Them as 'as munny an' all — wot's a beauty? — the 

flower as blaws. 
But proputty, proputty sticks, an' proputty, proputty 

graws. 

V. 

Do'ant be stunt* : taake time : I knaws what maakes 

tha sa mad. 
Warn't I craazed fur the lasses niys6n when I wur 

a lad? 
But I knaw'd a Quaaker feller as often 'as towd ma 

this : 
^ Doant thou marry for munny, but goa wheer munny 

is!' 

* Obstinate. 

M 2 



164 NORTHERN FARMER NEW STYLE. 

VI. 

An' I went wheer munny war : an' thy mother coom 

to 'and, 
Wi' lots o' munny laaid by, an' a nicetish bit o' land. 
Maaybe she wani't a beauty : — I niver giv it a 

thowt — 
But warn't she as good to cuddle an' kiss as a lass 

as 'ant nowt? 

vn. 
Parson's lass 'ant nowt, an' she weant 'a nowt when 

'e's dead, 
Mun be a guvness, lad, or summut, and addle'"' her 

bread : 
Why? fur 'e's nobbut a curate, an' weant nivir git 

naw 'igher ; 
An' 'e maade the bed as 'e ligs on afoor 'e coom'd to 

the shire. 

* Earn. 



NORTHERN FARMER— NEW STYLE. 165 

VIII. 

And thin 'e coom'd to the parish wi' lots o' 'Varsity 

debt, 
Stook to his taail they did, an' 'e 'ant got shut on 

'em yet. 
An' 'e hgs on 'is back i' the grip, wi' noan to lend 'iin 

a shove, 
Woorse nor a far-weltei-'d '"* yowe : fur, Sammy, 'e 

married fur luvv. 

IX. 

Luvv ? what's luvv 1 thou can luvv thy lass an' 'er 

munny too, 
Maakin' 'em goli togither as they've good right to do. 
Could'n I luvv thy muther by cause o' 'er munny 

laaid by? 
Naay — fur I luvv'd 'er a vast sight moor fur it : 

reason why. 
* Or fow-welter'd — said of a sheep lying on its back in tlie furrow. 



IQ6 NORTHERN FARMER — NEW STYLE. 

X. 

Ay an' thy muther says thou wants to marry the lass, 
Cooms of a gentleman burn : an we boath on us 

thhiks tha an ass. 
Woa then, proputty, wiltha? — an ass as near as 

mays nowt — *"' 
Woa then, wiltha ? dangtha ! — the bees is as fell as 

owt. t 

XI. 

Break me a bit o' the esh for his 'ead, lad, out o* 

the fence ! 
Gentleman burn ! what's gentleman burn ^ isitshillins 

an' pence 1 
Proputty, proputty' s ivry thing 'ere, an', Sammy, I'm 

blest 
If it isn't the saame oop yonder, fur them as 'as it's 

the best. 
* Makes notMng. f The flies are as fierce as anything. 



NORTHERN FARMER — NEW STYLE. 1G7 

xn. 
Tis'n them as 'as munny as breaks iuto 'oiises an' 

steals, 
Them as 'as coats to their backs an' taiikes their 

regular meals. 
Noii, but it's them as niver knaws wheer a meal's 

to be 'ad. 
Taake my word for it, Sammy, the poor iu a loomp 

is bad. 

XIII. 

Them or thir feythers, tha sees, mun 'a beiin a 

laazy lot. 
Fur work mun 'a gone to the gittin' whiniver munny 

was got. 
Feyther 'ad ammost nowt ; leastwaays 'is munny was 

'id. 
But 'e tued an' moil'd 'issen dead, an 'e died a good 

un, 'e did. 



168 NORTHERN FARMER — NEW STYLE. 

XIV. 

Loook thou theer wheer Wrigglesby beck comes out 

by the 'ill ! 
Feyther run up to the farm, an' I runs up to the 

mill j 
An' I'll run up to the brig, an' that thou'll live 

to see ; 
And if thou marries a good un I'll leave the land 

to thee. 

XV, 

Thim's my noations, Sammy, wheerby I means to 

stick ; 
But if thou marries a bad un, I'll leave the land to 

Dick.— 
Coom oop, proputty, proputty — that's what I 'ears 

'im saay — 
Proputty, proputty, proputty — canter an' canter 

awaay. 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 



[This poem is founded upon a story in Boccaccio. 

A young lover, Julian, whose cousin and foster-sister, Camilla, has 
"been wedded to his friend and rival, Lionel, endeavours to narrate the 
story of his own love for her, and the strange sequel of it. He speaks 
of having been haunted in delirium by visions and tha sound of bells, 
sometimes tolling for a funenil, and at last ringing for a marriage ; but 
he breaks away, overcome, as he approaches the Event, and a witness to 
it completes the tale.] 

* -X- -:> -X- -;5- 

He flies the event : he leaves the event to me : 
Poor Julian — how he rush'd away ; the bells, 
Those marriage bells, echoing in ear and heart — 
But cast a parting glance at me, you saw, 
As who should say ' continue.' Well, he had 
One golden hour — of triumph shall I say ? 
Solace at least — before he left his home. 



Would you had seen him in that hour of his ! 



170 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

He moved thro' all of it majestically — 
Restrain'd himself quite to the close — but now: — 

Whether they wey^e his lady's marriage-bells, 
Or prophets of them in his fantasy, 
I never ask'd : but Lionel and the girl 
Were wedded, and our Julian came again 
Back to his mother's house among the pines. 
But there, their gloom, the mountains and the Bay, 
The whole land weigh'd him down as iEtna does 
The Giant of Mythology : he would go. 
Would leave the land for ever, and had gone 
Surely, but for a whisper ^ Go not yet,' 
Some warning, and divinely as it seem'd 
By that which follow'd — but of this I deem 
As of the visions that he told — the event 
Glanced back upon them in his after life, 
And partly made them — tho' he knew it not. 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 171 

And thus he stay d and would not look at her — 
No not for months : but, when the eleventh moon 
After their marriage lit the lover's Bay, 
Heard yet once more the tolling bell, and said, 
Would you could toll me out of life, but found — 
All softly as his mother broke it to him — 
A crueller reason than a crazy ear, 
For that low knell tolling his lady dead — 
Dead — and had lain three days without a pulse : 
All that look'd on her had pronounced her dead. 
4nd so they bore her (for in Julian's land 
They never nail a dumb head up in elm), 
Bore her free-faced to the free airs of heaven. 
And laid her in the vault of her own kin. 

What did he then ? not die : he is here and hale — 
Not plunge headforemost from the mountain there, 
And leave the name of Lover's Leap : not he : 



172 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

He knew the meaning of the whisper now, 
Thought that he knew it. * This, I stay'd for this ; 

love, I have not seen you for so long. 
Now^, now, will I go down into the grave, 

1 will be all alone with all I love, 

And kiss her on the lips. She is his no more : 
The dead returns to me, and I go down 
To kiss the dead.' 

The fancy stirr d him so 
He rose and went, and entering the dim vault, 
And, making there a sudden light, beheld 
All round about him that which all will be. 
The light was but a flash, and went again. 
Then at the far end of the vault he saw 
His lady with the moonlight on her face ; 
Her breast as in a shadow-prison, bars 
Of black and bands of silver, which the moon 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 173 

Struck from an open grating overhead 
High in the wall, and all the rest of her 
Drown'd in the gloom and horror of the vault. 

* It was my wish,' he said, ' to pass, to sleep, 
To rest, to be with her — till the great day- 
Pear d on us with that music which rights all, ^ 
And raised us hand in hand.' And kneeling there 
Down in the dreadful dust that once was man, 
Dust, as lie said, that once was loving hearts, 
Hearts that had beat with such a love as mine — 
Not such as mine, no, nor for such as her — 
He softly put his arm about her neck 
And kiss'd her more than once, till helpless death 
And silence made him bold — nay, but I wrong him, 
He reverenced his dear lady even in death ; 
But, placing his true hand upon her heart, 
^ 0, you warm heart,' he moan'd, * not even death 



174 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

Can chill you all at once :' then starting, thought 

His dreams had come again. * Do I wake or sleep ? 

Or am I made immortal, or my love 

Mortal once more V It beat — ^the heart — it beat : 

Faint — but it beat : at which his own began 

To pulse with such a vehemence that it drown'd 

The feei)ler motion underneath his hand. 

But when at last his doubts were satisfied, 

He raised her softly from the sepulchre, 

And, wrapping her all over with the cloak 

He came in, and now striding fast, and now 

Sitting awhile to rest, but evermore 

Holding his golden burthen in his arms. 

So bore her thro' the solitary land 

Back to the mother's house where she w^as born. 

There the good mother's kindly ministering, 
With half a night's appliances, recall' d 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER, 175 

Her fluttering life : she raised an eye that ask'd 

* Where ? ' till the things familiar to her youth 
Had made a silent answer : then she spoke, 

* Here ! and how came I here ? ' and learning it 
(They told her somewhat rashly as I think) 

At once began to wander and to wail, 
^ Ay, but you know that you must give me back : 
Send ! bid him come ; ' but Lionel was away 
Stung by his loss had vanish'd, none knew where. 
' He casts me out,' she wept, ' and goes ' — a wail 
That seeming something, yet was nothing, born 
Not from believing mind, but shatter'd nerve, 
Yet haunting Julian, as her own reproof 
At some precipitance in her burial. 
Then, w^hen her own true spirit had retum'd, 
^ yes, and you,' she said, ' and none but you. 
For you have given me life and love again. 
And none but you yourself shall tell him of it, 



176 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

And you shall give me back when he returns.' 
* Stay then a little,' answer d Julian, * here, 
And keep yourself, none knowing, to yourself; 
And I will do your will. I may not stay, 
No, not an hour ; but send me notice of him 
When he returns, and then will I return, 
And I will make a solemn offering of you 
To him you love.' And faintly she replied, 
^ And I will do your will, and none shall know.' 

Not know ? with such a secret to be known. 
But all their house was old and loved them 

both, 
And all the house had known the loves of both ; 
Had died almost to serve them any way. 
And all the land was waste and solitary : 
And then he rode away ; but after this, 
An hour or two, Camilla's travail came 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 177 

Upon her, and that day a boy was born, 
Heir of his face and land, to Lionel. 

And thus our lonely lover rode away. 
And pausing at a hostel in a marsh. 
There fever seized upon him : myself was then 
Travelling that land, and meant to rest an hour; 
And sitting down to such a base repast. 
It makes me angry yet to speak of it — 
I heard a groaning overhead, and climb' d 
The moulder d stairs (for everything was vile) 
And in a loft, with none to wait on him, 
Found, as it seem'd, a skeleton alone, 
Raving of dead men's dust and beating hearts. 

A dismal hostel in a dismal land, 
A flat malarian world of reed and rush ! 
But there from fever and my care of him 



178 THE GOLDEN SUPFER. 

Sprang up a friendsliip that may help us yet. 
For while we roam'd along the dreary coast, 
And waited for her message, piece by piece 
I learnt the drearier story of his life ; 
And, tho' he loved and honour'd Lionel, 
Found that the sudden wail his lady made 
Dwelt in his fancy : did he know her worth, 
Her beauty even 1 should he not be taught, 
Ev'n by the price that others set upon it. 
The value of that jewel he had to guard 1 

Suddenly came her notice and we past, 
I with our lover to his native Bay, 

This love is of the brain, the mind, the soul : 
That makes the sequel pure; tho' some of us 
Beginning at the sequel know no more. 
Not such am I : and yet I say, the bird 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 179 

That will not hear my call, however sweet, 
But if my neighbour whistle answers him — 
What matter ? there are others in the wood. 
Yet when I saw her (and I thought him crazed, 
Tho' not with such a craziness as needs 
A cell and keeper), those dark eyes of hers — 
Oh ! such dark eyes ! and not her eyes alone, 
But all from these to where she touch'd on earth, 
For such a craziness as Julian's seem'd 
No less than one divine apology. 

So sweetly and so modestly she came 
To greet us, her young hero in her arms ! 
* Kiss him,' she said. * You gave me life again. 
He, but for you, had never seen it once. 
His other father you ! Kiss him, and then 
Forgive him, if his name be Julian too.' 



180 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

Talk of lost hopes and broken heart 1 his own 
Sent such a flame into his face, I knew 
Some sudden vivid pleasure hit him there. 

But he was all the more resolved to go, 
And sent at once to Lionel, praying him 
By that great love they both had borne the dead. 
To come and revel for one hour wdth him 
Before he left the land for evermore; 
And then to friends — they were not many — who lived 
Scatteringly about that lonely land of his. 
And bade them to a banquet of farewells. 

And Julian made a solemn feast : I never 
Sat at a costlier; for all round his hall 
From column on to column, as in a wood, 
Not such as here — an equatorial one. 
Great garlands swung and blossom'd; and beneath. 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. l81 

Heirlooms, and ancient miracles of Art, 

Chalice and salver, wines that. Heaven knows when, 

Had suck'd the fire of some forgotten sun, 

And kept it thro' a hundred years of gloom. 

Yet glowing in a heart of ruby — cups 

Where nymph and god ran ever round in gold — 

Others of glass as costly — some with gems 

Moveable and resettable at will. 

And trebling all the rest in value — Ah heavens ! 

Why need I tell you all ? — suffice to say 

That whatsoever such a house as his, 

And his was old, has in it rare or fair 

Was brought before the guest : and they, the guests, 

Wonder' d at some strange light in Julian's eyes 

(I told you that he had his golden hour), 

And such a feast, ill-suited as it seem'd 

To such a time, to Lionel's loss and his, 

And that resolved self-exile from a land 



182 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

He never would revisit, such a feast 

So rich, so strange, and stranger ev'n than rich, 

But rich as for the nuptials of a king. 

And stranger yet, at one end of the hall 
Two great funereal curtains, looping down, 
Parted a little ere they met the floor, 
About a picture of his lady, taken 
Some years before, and falling hid the frame. 
And just above the parting was a lamp : 
So the sweet figure folded round with night 
Seem'd stepping out of darkness with a smile. 

Well then — our solemn feast — we ate and drank, 
And might — the wines being of such nobleness — 
Have jested also, but for Julian's eyes, 
And something weird and wild about it all : 
What was it ? for our lover seldom spoke, 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 183 

Scarce touch' d the meats ; but ever and anon 
A priceless goblet with a priceless wine 
Arising, show'd he drank beyond his use ; 
And when the feast was near an end, he said : 

* There is a custom in the Orient, friends — 
I read of it in Persia — when a man 
Will honour those who feast with him, he brings 
And shows them whatsoever he accounts 
Of all his treasures the most beautiful, 
Gold, jewels, arms, whatever it may be. 
This custom — ' 

Pausing here a moment, all 
The guests broke in upon him with meeting hands 
And cries about the banquet — ^ Beautiful ! 
Who could desire more beauty at a feast ? ' 



184 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

The lover answer'd, ' There is more than one 
Here sitting who desires it. Laud me not 
Before mj time, but hear me to the close. 
This custom steps yet further when the guest 
Is loved and honour' d to the uttermost. 
For after he has shown him gems or gold^ 
He brings and sets before him in rich guise 
That which is thrice as beautiful as these^ 
The beauty that is dearest to his heart — 
" my heart's lord, would I could show you," he says, 
" Ev'n my heart too." And I propose to-night 
To show 3"ou what is dearest to my heart, 
And my heart too. 

' But solve me first a doubt. 
I knew a man, nor many years ago ; 
He had a faithful servant, one who loved 
His master more than all on earth beside. 
He falling sick, and seeming close on death, 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 185 

His master would not wait until he died, 

But bade his menials bear him from the door, 

And leave him in the public way to die. 

I knew another, not so long ago. 

Who found the dying servant, took him home, 

And fed, and cherish'd him, and saved his life. 

I ask you now, should this first master claim 

His service, whom does it belong to ? him 

Who thrust him out, or him who saved his life 1 ' 

This question, so flung down before the guests, 
And balanced either way by each, at length 
When some were doubtful how the law would hold. 
Was handed over by consent of all 
To one who had not spoken, Lionel. 

Fair speech was his, and delicate of phrase. 
And he beginning languidly — his loss 



186 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

Weigh' d on him yet — but warming as he went, 
Glanced at the point of law, to pass it bj, 
Affirming that as long as either lived, 
By all the laws of love and gratefulness, 
The service of the one so saved was due 
All to the saver — adding, with a smile, 
The first for many weeks — a semi-smile 
As at a strong conclusion—' body and soul 
And life and limbs, all his to work his will.' 

Then Julian made a secret sign to me 
To bring Camilla down before them all. 
And crossing her own picture as she came, 
And looking as much lovelier as herself 
Is lovelier than all others — on her head 
A diamond circlet, and from under this 
A veil, that seem'd no more than gilded air, 
Flying by each fine ear, an Eastern gauze 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER; 187 

With seeds of gold— so, with that grace of hers, 

Slow-moving as a wave against the wind, 

That flings a mist behind it in the sun — 

And bearing high in arms the mighty babe. 

The younger Julian, who himself was crown d 

With roses, none so rosy as himself — 

And over all her babe and her the jewels 

Of many generations of his house 

Sparkled and flash'd, for he had decked them out 

As for a solemn sacrifice of love — 

So she came in : — I am long in teUing it, 

I never yet beheld a thing so strange, 

Sad, sweet, and strange together — floated in, — 

While all the guests in mute amazement rose, — 

And slowly pacing to the middle hall. 

Before the board, there paused and stood, her breast 

Hard-heaving, and her eyes upon her feet, 

Not daring yet to glance at Lionel. 



188 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

But him she carried, him nor lights nor feast 
Dazed or amazed, nor eyes of men ; who cared 
Only to use his own, and staring wide 
And hungering for the gilt and jew ell' d world 
About him, look'd, as he is like to prove, 
When Julian goes, the lord of all he saw. 

' My guests,' said Julian : ^ you are honour'd now 
Ev'n to the uttermost : in her behold 
Of all my treasures the most beautiful, 
Of all things upon earth the dearest to me.' 
Then waving us a sign to seat ourselves, 
Led his dear lady to a chair of state. 
And I, by Lionel sitting, saw his face 
Fire, and dead ashes and all fire again 
Thrice in a second, felt him tremble too. 
And heard him muttering, ' So like, so like ; 
She never had a sister. I knew none. 



THE GOLDEN" SUFFER. 189 

Some cousin of his and hers — God, so like !' 

And then he suddenly ask'd her if she were. 

She shook, and cast her eyes down, and was dumb. 

And then some other question'd if she came 

From foreign lands, and still she did not speak. 

Another, if the boy were hers : but she 

To all their queries answer d not a word. 

Which made the amazement more, till one of them 

Said, shuddering, * Her spectre !' But his friend 

Eeplied, in half a whisper, ^ Not at least 

The spectre that will speak if spoken to. 

Terrible pity, if one so beautiful 

Prove, as I almost dread to find her, dumb ! ' 

But Julian, sitting by her, answer'd all : 
' She is but dumb, because in her you see 
That faithful servant whom we spoke about, 
Obedient to her second master now : 



190 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

Which will not last. I have here to-night a guest 
So bound to me by common love and loss — 
What ! shall I bind him more ? in his behalf, 
Shall I exceed the Persian, giving him 
That which of all things is the dearest to me, 
Not only showing ? and he himself pronounced 
That my rich gift is wholly mine to give. 

' Now all be dumb, and promise all of you 
Not to break in on what I say by word 
Or whisper, while I show you all my heart.' 
And then began the story of his love 
As here to-day, but not so wordily — 
The passionate moment would not suffer that — 
Past thro' his visions to the burial ; thence 
Down to this last strange hour in his own hall ; 
And then rose up, and with him all his guests 
Once more as by enchantment ; all but he, 



THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 191 

Lionel, who fain had risen, but fell again. 
And sat as if in chains —to whom he said : 

* Take my free gift, my cousin, for your wife ; 
And were it only for the giver s sake. 
And tho' she seem so like the one you lost, 
Yet cast her not away so suddenly, 
Lest there be none left here to bring her back : 
I leave this land for ever.' Here he ceased. 

Then taking his dear lady by one hand, 
And bearing on one arm the noble babe. 
He slowly brought them both to Lionel. 
And there the widower husband and dead wife 
Rush'd each at each with a cry, that rather seem'd 
For some new death than for a life renew'd ; 
At this the very babe began to wail ; 
At once they turn'd, and caught and brought him in 



192 THE GOLDEN SUPPER. 

To their charm'd circle, and, half-killing him 
With kisses, round him closed and claspt again. 
But Lionel, when at last he freed himself 
From wife and child, and lifted up a face 
All over glowing with the sun of life. 
And love, and boundless thanks — the sight of this 
So frighted our good friend, that turning to me 
And saying, ^ It is over : let us go' — 
There were our horses ready at the doors — 
We bade them no farewell, but mounting these 
He past for ever from his native land ; 
And I with him, my Julian, back to mine. 



193 



THE VICTIM. 



I. 

A PLAGUE upon the people fell, 

A famine after laid them low, 
Then thorpe and byre arose in fire, 

For on them brake the sudden foe ; 
So thick they died the people cried 

* The Gods are moved against the land.' 
The Priest in horror about his altar 

To Thor and Odin lifted a hand : 



194 THE VICTIM. 

' Help us from famine 
And plague and strife ! 
What would you have of us ? 
Human life 1 
Were it our nearest, 
Were it our dearest, 
(Answer, answer) 
We give you his life.' 



But still the foeman spoil'd and burn'd, 

And cattle died, and deer in wood, 
And bird in air, and fishes turn'd 

And whiten'd all the rolling flood ; 
And dead men lay all over the way. 

Or down in a furrow scathed with flame : 
And ever and aye the Priesthood moan'd 

Till at last it seem'd that an answer came : 



THE VICTIM. 195 

* The King is happy 
In child and wife ; 
Take you his dearest, 
Give us a life.' 

III. 

The Priest went out by heath and hill ; 

The King was hunting in the wild ; 
They found the mother sitting still ; 

She cast her arms about the child. 
The child was only eight summers old, 

His beauty still with his years increased, 
His face was ruddy, his hair was gold. 

He seem'd a victim due to the priest. 
The Priest beheld him, 
And cried with joy, 

* The Gods have answer'd : 
We give them the boy.' 

o 2 



196 THE VICTIM. 

IV. 

The King return'd from out the wild, 

He bore but little game in hand ; 
The mother said * They have taken the child 

To spill his blood and heal the land : 
The land is sick, the people diseased, 

And blight and famine on all the lea : 
The holy Gods, they must be appeased, 
So I pray you tell the truth to me. 
They have taken our son, 
They will have his life. 
Is he your dearest ? 
Or I, the wife r 

V. 

The King bent low, with hand on brow, 
He stay'd his arms upon his knee : 

* wife, what use to answer now ? 

For now the Priest has judged for me.' 



THE VICTIM. W7 

The King was shaken with holy fear ; 

* The Gods,' he said, ' would have chosen well ; 
Yet both are near, and both are dear, 
And which the dearest I cannot tell ! ' 
But the Priest was happy, 
His victim won : 
* We have his dearest, 
His only son ! ' 

VI. 

The rites prepared, the victim bared, 

The knife uprising toward the blow. 
To the altar-stone she sprang alone, 

* Me, not my darling, no ! ' 
He caught her away with a sudden cry ; 

Suddenly from him brake his wife. 
And shrieking ^ / am his dearest, I — 

/ am his dearest ! ' rush'd on the knife. 



198 THE VICTIM. 

And the Priest was happy, 
' 0, Father Odin, 
We give you a life. 
Which was his nearest 1 
Who was his dearest ? 
The Gods have answer'd; 
We give them the wife ! ' 



199 



WAGES. 



Glory of warrior, glory of orator, gloiy of song, 

Paid with a voice flying by to be lost on an endless 
sea — 
Glory of Yirtue, to fight, to struggle, to right the 
wrong — 
Nay, but she aim'd not at glory, no lover of glory- 
she : 
Give her the glory of going on, and still to be. 



200 



WAGES. 



The wages of sin is death : if the wages of Virtue be 
dust, 
Would she have heart to endure for the life of 
the worm and the fly 1 
She desires no isles of the blest, no quiet seats of the 
just, 
To rest in a golden grove, or to bask in a summer 
sky : 
Give her the wages of going on, and not to die. 



201 



THE HIGHER PANTHEISM. 



The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills and 

the plains — 
Are not these, Soul, the Vision of Him who reigns ^ 

Is not the Vision He ? tho' He be not that which He 

seems ? 
Dreams are true while they last, and do we not live in 

dreams 1 



202 THE HIGHER PANTHEISM. 

Earth, these solid stars, this weight of body and limb, 
Are they not sign and symbol of thy division from 
Him? 

Dark is the world to thee : thyself art the reason 

why; 
For is He not all but thou, that hast power to feel 
*I am I r 

Glory about thee, without thee ; and thou fulfiUest 

thy doom, 
Making Him broken gleams, and a stifled splendour 

and gloom. 

Speak to Him thou for He hears, and Spirit with 

Spirit can meet — 
Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands 

and feet. 



THE HIGHER PANTHEISM. 203 

God is law, say the wise ; Soul, and let us rejoice, 
For if He thunder by law the thunder is yet His 
voice. 

Law is God, say some : no God at all, says the fool ; 
For all we have power to see is a straight staff bent in 
a pool ; 

And the ear of man cannot hear, and the eye of man 

cannot see ; 
But if we could see and hear, this Vision — were it not 

He? 



204 



Flower in ,the crannied wall, 
I pluck you out of the crannies ; — 
Hold you here, root and all, in my hand. 
Little flower — ^but if I could understand 
What you are, root and all, and all in all, 
I should know what God and man is. 



205 



LUCRETIUS. 



LuciLiA, wedded to Lucretius, found 
Her master cold ; for when the morning flush 
Of passion and the first embrace had died 
Between them, tho' he loved her none the less, 
Yet often when the woman heard his foot 
Eeturn from pacings in the field, and ran 
To greet him with a kiss, the master took 
Small notice, or austerely, for — his mind 
Half buried in some weightier argument, 
Or fancy-borne perhaps upon the rise 
And long roll of the Hexameter — he past 



206 LUCRETIUS. 

To turn and ponder those three hundred scrolls 

Left by the Teacher whom he held divine. 

She brook' d it not ; but wrathful, petulant, 

Dreaming some rival, sought and found a witch 

Who brew'd the philtre which had power, they said. 

To lead an errant passion home again. 

And this, at times, she mingled with his drink. 

And this destroy'd him ; for the wicked broth 

Confused the chemic labour of the blood, 

And tickling the brute brain within the man's 

Made havock among those tender cells, and check'd 

His power to shape : he loath'd himself ; and once 

After a tempest woke upon a morn 

That mock'd him with returning calra, and cried ; 

* Storm in the night ! for thrice I heard the rain 
Eushing ; and once the flash of a thunderbolt— 
Methought I never saw so fierce a fork — 



LUCRETIUS. 207 

Struck out the streaming mountain-side, and show'd 
A riotous confluence of watercourses 
Blanching and billowing in a hollow of it, 
Where all but yester-eve was dusty-dry. 

'Storm, and what dreams, ye holy Gods, what 
dreams ! 
For thrice I waken d after dreams. Perchance 
We do but recollect the dreams that come 
Just ere the waking : terrible 1 for it seem'd 
A void was made in Nature ; all her bonds 
Crack'd ; and I saw the flaring atom-streams 
And torrents of her myriad universe, 
Euining along the illimitable inane, 
Fly on to clash together again, and make 
Another and another frame of things 
For ever : that was mine, my dream, I knew it — 
Of and belonging to me, as the dog 



208 LUCRETIUS. 

With inward yelp and restless forefoot plies 

His function of the woodland : but the next ! 

I thought that all the blood by Sylla shed 

Came driving rainlike down again on earth, 

And where it dash'd the reddening meadow, sprang 

No dragon warriors from Cadmean teeth. 

For these I thought my dream would show to me, 

But girls, Hetairai, curious in their art, 

Hired animalisms, vile as those that made 

The mulberry-faced Dictator's orgies worse 

Than aught they fable of the quiet Gods. 

And hands they mixt, and yell'd and round me drove 

In narrowing circles till I yell'd again 

Half-suffocated, and sprang up, and saw — 

Was it the first beam of my latest day ? 

* Then, then, from utter gloom stood out the 
breasts. 



LUCRETIUS. 209 

The breasts of Helen, and hoveringly a sword 
Now over and now under, now direct, 
Pointed itself to pierce, but sank down shamed 
At all that beauty ; and as I stared, a fire, 
The fire that left a roofless Ilion, 
Shot out of them, and scorch'd me that I w^oke. 

* Is this thy vengeance, holy Venus, thine, 
Because I would not one of thine own doves. 
Not ev'n a rose, were ofier'd to thee ? thine. 
Forgetful how my rich prooemion makes 
Thy glory fly along the Italian field, 

In lays that will outlast thy Deity ] 

* Deity 1 nay, thy worshippers. My tongue 
Trips, or I speak profanely. Which of these 
Angers thee most, or angers thee at all ? 

Not if thou be'st of those who, far aloof 



210 LUCRETIUS. 

From envy, hate and pity, and spite and scorn, 
Live the great hfe which all our greatest fain 
Would follow, center' d in eternal calm. 

^ Nay, if thou can'st, Goddess, like ourselves 
Touch, and be touch' d, then would I cry to thee 
To kiss thy Mavors, roll thy tender arms 
Round him, and keep him from the lust of blood 
That makes a steaming slaughter-house of Rome. 

' Ay, but I meant not thee ; I meant not her, 
Whom all the pines of Ida shook to see 
Slide from that quiet heaven of hers, and tempt 
The Trojan, while his neat-herds were abroad ; 
JSTor her that o'er her wounded hunter wept 
Her Deity false in human-amorous tears ; 
Nor whom her beardless apple-arbiter 
Decided fairest. Rather, ye Gods, 



LUCRETIUS. 211 

Poet-like, as the great Sicilian called 

Calliope to grace his golden verse — 

Ay, and this Kypris also — did I take 

That popular name of thine to shadow forth 

The all-generating powers and genial heat 

Of Nature, when she strikes thro' the thick blood 

Of cattle, and light is large, and lambs are glad 

Nosing the mother's udder, and the bird 

Makes his heart voice amid the blaze of flowers : 

Which things appear the work of mighty Gods. 

* The Gods ! and if I go my work is left 
Unfinished — if I go. The Gods, who haunt 
The lucid interspace of world and world. 
Where never creeps a cloud, or moves a wind, 
Nor ever falls the least white star of snow, 
Nor ever lowest roll of thunder moans, 
Nor sound of human sorrow mounts to mar 



212 LUCRETIUS. 

Their sacred everlasting calm ! and such, 

Not all so fine, nor so divine a calm, 

Not such, nor all unlike it, man may gain 

Letting his own life go. The Gods, the Gods ! 

If all be atoms, how then should the Gods 

Being atomic not be dissoluble, 

Not follow the great law 1 My master held 

That Gods there are, for all men so believe. 

I prest my footsteps into his, and meant 

Surely to lead my Memmius in a train 

Of flowery clauses onward to the proof 

That Gods there are, and deathless. Meant? I meant? 

I have forgotten what I meant : my mind 

Stumbles, and all my faculties are lamed. 

^ Look where another of our Gods, the Sun, 
Apollo, Delius, or of older use 
All-seeing Hyperion — what you will — 



LUCRETIUS. 213 

Has mounted yonder ; since he never sware, 
Except his wrath were wreak' d on wretched man, 
That he would only shine among the dead 
Hereafter ; tales ! for never yet on earth 
Could dead flesh creep, or bits of roasting ox 
Moan round the spit — nor knows he what he sees ; 
King of the East altho' he seem, and girt 
With song and flame and fragrance, slowly lifts 
His golden feet on those empm-pled stairs 
That climb into the windy halls of heaven : 
And here he glances on an eye new-bom. 
And gets for greeting but a wail of pain ; 
And here he stays upon a freezing orb 
That fain would gaze upon him to the last ; 
And here upon a yellow eyelid fall'n 
And closed by those who mourn a friend in vain, 
Not thankful that his troubles are no more. 
And me, altho' his fire is on my face 



214 LUCRETIUS. 

Blinding, he sees not, nor at all can tell 

Whether I mean this day to end myself, 

Or lend an ear to Plato where he says, 

That men like soldiers may not quit the post 

Allotted by the Gods : but he that holds 

The Gods are careless, wherefore need he care 

Greatly for them, nor rather plunge at once. 

Being troubled, wholly out of sight, and sink 

Past earthquake — ay, and gout and stone, that 

break 
Body toward death, and palsy, death-in-Hfe, 
And wretched age — and worst disease of all. 
These prodigies of myriad nakednesses, 
And twisted shapes of lust, unspeakable, 
Abominable, strangers at my hearth 
Not welcome, harpies miring every dish. 
The phantom husks of something foully done, 
And fleeting thro' the boundless universe, 



LUCRETIUS. 215 

And blasting the long quiet jof my breast 
With animal heat and dire insanity 1 

' How should the mind, except it loved them, 
clasp 
These idols to herself ? or do they fly 
Now thinner, and now thicker, like the flakes 
In a fall of snow, and so press in, perforce 
Of multitude, as crowds that in an hour 
Of civic tumult jam the doors, and bear 
The keepers down, and throng, their rags and they. 
The basest, far into that council-hall 
Where sit the best and statehest of the land 1 

* Can I not fling this horror off" me again, 
Seeing with how great ease Nature can smile, 
Balmier and nobler from her bath of storm. 
At random ravage 1 and how easily 



216 LUCRETIUS. 

The mountain there has cast his cloudy slough, 
Now towering o'er him in serenest air, 
A mountain o'er a mountain, — ay and within 
All hollow as the hopes and fears of men ] 

* But who was he, that in the garden snared 
Picus and Faunus, rustic Gods 1 a tale 
To laugh at — more to laugh at in myself — 
For look ! what is it 1 there 1 yon arbutus 
Totters ; a noiseless riot underneath 
Strikes through the wood, sets all the tops quiver- 
ing— 
The mountain quickens into Nymph and Faun ; 
And here an Oread — how the sun delights 
To glance and shift about her slippery sides, 
And rosy knees and supple roundedness, 
And budded bosom-peaks — who this way runs 
Before the rest — A satyr, a satyr, see, 



LUCRETIUS. 217 

Follows ; but him I proved impossible ; 
Twy-natured is no nature : yet he draws 
Nearer and nearer, and I scan him now 
Beastlier than any phantom of his kind 
That ever butted his rough brother-brute 
For lust or lusty blood or provender : 
I hate, abhor, spit, sicken at him ; and she 
Loathes him as well ; such a precipitate heel, 
Fledged as it were with Mercury's ankle-wing, 
Whirls her to me : but will she fling herself, 
Shameless upon me 1 Catch her, goatfoot : nay. 
Hide, hide them, million-myrtled wilderness, 
And cavern-shadowing laurels, hide ! do I wish — 
What ? — that the bush were leafless ? or to whelm 
All of them in one massacre ? ye Gods, 
I know you careless, yet, behold, to you 
From childly wont and ancient use I call — 
I thought I lived securely as yourselves — 



218 LUCRETIUS. 

No lewdness, narrowing envy, monkey-spite, 
No madness of ambition, avarice, none : 
No larger feast than under plane or pine 
With neighbours laid along the grass, to take 
Only such cups as left us friendly-warm, 
Affirming each his own philosophy — 
Nothing to mar the sober majesties 
Of settled, sweet, Epicurean life. 
But now it seems some unseen monster lays 
His vast and filthy hands upon my will. 
Wrenching it backward into his ; and spoils 
My bliss in being ; and it was not great ; 
For save when shutting reasons up in rhythm. 
Or Heliconian honey in living words, 
To make a truth less harsh, I often grew 
Tired of so much within our little life, 
Or of so little in our little life — 
Poor little life that toddles half an hour 



LUCRETIUS. 219 

Crown' d with a flower or two, and there an end — 
And since the nobler pleasure seems to fade, 
Why should I, beastlike as I find myself, 
Not manlike end myself? — our privilege — 
What beast has heart to do it 1 And what man, 
What Roman would be dragg d in triumph thus ? 
Not I j not he, who bears one name with her 
Whose death-blow struck the dateless doom of 

kings. 
When, brooking not the Tarquin in her veins. 
She made her blood in sight of Collatine 
And all his peers, flushing the guiltless air, 
Spout from the maiden fountain in her heart. 
And from it sprang the Commonwealth, which breaks 
As I am breaking now I 

* And therefore now 
Let her, that is the womb and tomb of all. 



220 LUCRETIUS. 

Great Nature, take, and forcing far apart 
Those blind beginnings that have made me man 
Dash them anew together at her will 
Through all her cycles — into man once more, 
Or beast or bird or fish, or opulent flower : 
But till this cosmic order everywhere 
Shatter' d into one earthquake in one day 
Cracks all to pieces, — and that hour perhaps 
Is not so far when momentary man 
Shall seem no more a something to himself, 
But he, his hopes and hates, his homes and fanes. 
And even his bones long laid within the grave. 
The very sides of the grave itself shall pass, 
Vanishing, atom and void, atom and void. 
Into the unseen for ever, — till that hour, 
My golden work in which I told a truth 
That stays the rolling Ixionian wheel. 
And numbs the Fury's ringlet-snake, and plucks 



LUCRETIUS. 221 

The mortal soul from out immortal hell, 

Shall stand ; ay, surely : then it fails at last 

And perishes as I must ; for Thou, 

Passionless bride, divine Tranquillity, 

Yearn'd after by the wisest of the wise. 

Who fail to find thee, being as thou art 

Without one pleasure and without one pain, 

Howbeit I know thou surely must be mine 

Or soon or late, yet out of season, thus 

I woo thee roughly, for thou carest not 

How roughly men may woo thee so they win — 

Thus — thus : the soul flies out and dies in the air.' 

With that he drove the knife into his side : 
She heard him raging, heard him fall ; ran in. 
Beat breast, tore hair, cried out upon herself 
As having fail'd in duty to him, shriek'd 
That she but meant to win him back, fell on him. 



222 LUCRETIUS. 

Clasp' d, kiss'd him, wail'd : he answer'd, ^ Care not 

thou! 
Thy duty 1 What is duty ? Fare thee well ! ' 



THE END, 



BRADBURY, EVANS, A^'D CO., PRINTERS, WHTTEFRIAES. 



THE WORKS OF 

ALFKED TENNYSON, D.C.L., 

POET LAUREATE. 

POEMS. Small 8vo. 9.5. 

MAUD, AND OTHER PoEMS. Small 8vo. 55. 

THE PRINCESS. Small 8vo. 5s. 

IDYLLS OF THE KING. Small Svo. 75. 

ENOCH ARDEN, etc. Small Svo. 65. 

SELECTIONS FROM THE ABOVE WORKS. 
Square Svo, cloth extra. 55. 



IN MEMORIAM. Small Svo. 6s. 



STEAHAN & CO., 56, LUDGATE HILL. 



I4(.5 



NOW READY, 

POCKET VOLUME E])ITION OF 
MR. TENNYSON'S WORKS. 

10 Vols, in neat case, price £2 hs. 



STRAHAK & CO., 56, LUDQATE HILL. 



